* 2012911
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Lateralization of Tool Making and Language in the Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Lana Ruck, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2022
* USD 0.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the relationship between handedness
and functional brain organization, specifically for language and toolmaking.
Results from recent brain imaging studies on stone tool manufacture show that
similar brain networks are active for toolmaking and language, leading to
hypotheses about the co-evolution of language and technology in the human
lineage. One unexplored behavior that may be relevant to these hypotheses is the
human trait of handedness. Over 85% of living humans are right-handed, and
handedness has been shown to relate to brain organization specifically for
language, toolmaking, and other important behaviors. Some have argued that
tracking the evolution of population-wide right-hand preference may help to
understand population-level changes in other important traits, as handedness
evolution can be used as a proxy for the evolution of hemispheric specialization
in the brain. However, researchers need to be sure that handedness associates
well with functional brain activity in modern humans, specifically for language
and toolmaking, to make sure this proxy relationship is applicable to the
archaeological record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will collect
neuroimaging data from human participants (50% left-handed) who will complete
stone toolmaking, language, and visuospatial tasks while undergoing functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scanning. Before being scanned, participants
will complete several assessments of handedness and also learn to make simple
stone tools. This will be the first study of left-handers within the context of
stone tool making neuroimaging, and it will also be the first comparison of
brain networks underlying stone toolmaking to both language and visuospatial
attention in the same participants. The specific questions to be answered are:
(1) Which methods are best for characterizing participant handedness (behavioral
measures, surveys, or a mix of both)? (2) Are there common brain areas active
for stone toolmaking, language, and spatial skills (and in which hemisphere)?
(3) Does hemispheric specialization for these tasks associate with participant
handedness? This study has clear implications for those who study the evolution
of handedness in hominins, but it is also significant for wider discussions on
the evolution of human cognition and language. Directly showing that handedness
corresponds to functional brain activity for these behaviors will provide
further motivation to examine their evolutionary contexts and histories. If
reliable methods can be established for determining handedness in skeletal
remains and stone tool assemblages researchers can make more informed
interpretations about human ancestors and their behaviors. If handedness does
not correspond to brain networks for toolmaking and language, researchers
interested in the evolution of technology, language, and cognition can focus on
other topics for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.