* 2012934
* Operation of the Telescope Array, TALE, and the TAx4 Expansion by the University of Utah
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2021
* USD 841,026.00

The Telescope Array (TA) is the largest detector of ultra-high-energy cosmic
rays (UHECR) in the northern hemisphere. TAx4 is an expansion currently under
way which will double the number of surface detectors (SD), and since SD
deployment can occur along with operations, by 2025 TA will have tripled the
existing data set. This award supports the cosmic ray physics group at Utah for
one year of running the Telescope Array (TA) complex, including the Low Energy
Extension (TALE) and TAx4. This covers managerial, engineering and technical
staff effort and expenses. This constitutes a somewhat lower level of support
compared to past years, which will reduce the number of nights of collecting
data, and provide for a smaller amount of site and equipment maintenance. The
Japanese and Korean partners will concentrate on construction and deployment of
the remaining SD units, and maintenance of the new SD wings. The Utah staff have
sole responsibility for facility maintenance, staffing observing shifts and
handling data, and maintaining compliance with Bureau of Land Management land
use regulations. TA supports auxiliary and test experiments, recently hosting a
lightning mapping array. The ASPIRE project is the TA’s public education and
outreach arm, receiving millions of online visits each year. Direct outreach
also reaches tens of thousands of teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent exciting results from TA clearly
demonstrate the need for more data from an enlarged experiment. One result is
the apparent existence of a “hotspot” with possibly curious properties, such as
a different, and apparently position-dependent, cosmic ray (CR) spectrum.
Another is the apparent discrepancy between spectra and CR composition at the
highest energies as measured by TA and by the Pierre Auger Observatory, the
largest UHECR detector but in the southern hemisphere. In the longer term,
tripling the amount of TA data will help to clarify these comparisons, and
continuing TA operations is therefore very important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.