* 2012078
* Attosecond and Strong Field Physics in Correlated Multielectron System
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nicolas Douguet, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,092.00

The astonishing advances in the generation of attosecond light pulses, and the
availability of high-intensity lasers in the near-infrared region, have opened
up a field of new possibilities in the study of the real-time electron dynamics
in complex systems. One of the goals of attosecond and strong-field physics is
to access fundamental information on electronic motion in its natural time scale
and be able to control charge migration in molecules, e.g., to select a specific
bond breaking at a molecular site, or to trigger a chemical reaction. The main
objective of the project is to develop a new, efficient, and versatile numerical
method to support the experimental and theoretical study of the interaction of
multi-electron systems with ultra-short and intense laser pulses. This work aims
at contributing to the development of attochemistry and ultimately bridge the
gap between attosecond physics and biology. In addition, as connecting
experimental measurements to real-time meaningful physical observables has shown
to be far from simple, new methods will be investigated to track the rapid
dynamics of photoelectron emitted from different valence shells in molecules, as
well as during tunnel ionization in intense laser fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With attosecond physics becoming among the most thriving
fields of science, new theoretical tools are needed to support the exploration
of attosecond phenomena in complex systems. ATTOMESA, a new numerical method for
ultrafast physics, will be designed to treat various multiphoton processes
investigated with current experimental setups, and to study unexplored aspects
of driven multielectron attosecond and strong field dynamics in atoms and
molecules. The formalism used in ATTOMESA includes electron correlation and
exchange, as well as inter-channel coupling. It is based on a hybrid quadrature
approach, where a quantum-chemistry description using Gaussian-type orbitals is
used in the short-range to mid-range electron-molecule interaction region, while
finite-element discretized variable representation functions complement the
description at larger electronic radius, resulting in a highly efficient
parallel ab initio method able to treat strong field processes in molecules.
Consequently, processes such as high-harmonic generation and frustrated tunnel
ionization can be handled fully ab initio. In this work, the following physical
processes will be treated with ATTOMESA; photoionization time delay near a
Cooper minimum and between different valence shells using a new spectroscopic
method, estimation of electronic coherence in a biomolecule after sudden
photoionization, and finally assessing the role of electron correlation in
streaking/attoclock experiments. Finally, Bohmian mechanics will be employed as
a useful tool to interpret strong-field phenomena in
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.