* 2012112
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Factors Which Underlie Long Term Cultural Change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Daniel Adler, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,142.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Daniel Adler, Jayson Gill will study variability in
stone tool (lithic) technology to test behavioral and geographic hypotheses
related to the appearance of novel technologies and the the evolution of both
Homo sapiens and Neanderthals. This project will test the competing hypotheses
of population expansion (migration) and independent innovation for the
appearance of new technologies as proposed by prior research. The researchers
will apply a quantitative approach to studying the degree to which changes in
technology can be attributed to cultural continuity or cultural replacement.
Lithic artifact morphology reflects both cultural preferences and functional
considerations, thus they represent a ubiquitous, vast, and durable record of
past behaviors that can be utilized to investigate how changes occur. Clarifying
how and why technology changes is essential to addressing the role that behavior
plays in the complex narrative of human evolution. This project will support the
doctoral training of the Co-PI (Jayson Gill) and training in quantitative
techniques for students. Data produced in this study will be made freely
available online as reference material and results will be widely disseminated
through conference presentations, journal articles, and public engagement.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes cultural evolutionary theory,
optimality modeling, and insights from experimental assemblages to address
chronological patterns in past technologies in an attempt to disentangle the
effects of social transmission, functional considerations, and raw material
choice on the shape of lithics. Archaeological assemblages in two regions
document the appearance of novel behaviors and variability both proceeding and
following this appearance. Five lithic assemblages from two regions will be
subjected to three-dimensional scanning and multivariate statistical methods as
a means to identify the morphological relationships between different lithic
technologies through time. The results will be evaluated against the
morphological expectations in competing migration and innovation hypotheses.
Further, results of shape-based statistics will be assessed against expectations
derived from experimental work and will identify the relationship between
changes in technology and changes in the functional proficiency of tool kits
against a backdrop of broad chronological changes in the environment.
Morphological relationships, or the lack thereof, between technologies can serve
as a proxy for the degree of regional continuity in lithic production behaviors.
Establishing continuity or abrupt change, as well as identifying the factors
promoting the adoption of new technologies is vital to expanding the current
understanding of the role that migration, behavioral adaptation, and innovation
have on group variation during this significant period in human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.