* 2012106
* Reactive Sulfur Species: Challenging the Reactive Oxygen Species Paradigm
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Olson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 833,240.00

The proposed research will use biochemical and cellular techniques to examine
metabolism and biochemical pathways of reactive sulfur species (RSS) in cells
under physiologically relevant oxygen levels. Derivatives of oxygen form
reactive oxygen species (ROS), the most biologically relevant oxidant and the
target of most antioxidants, which are thought to improve human health. Natural
and synthetic antioxidants, however, have either had limited therapeutic value
or their activity appears independent of ROS. This research proposes that many
of the assumed actions of reactive oxygen species are better explained by
reactive sulfur species. This hypothesis builds upon recent work by the
principal researcher, and is based on the following observations: sulfur and
oxygen are chemically and biologically similar, cellular antioxidant pathways
efficiently metabolize RSS, ‘antioxidant’ health foods affect RSS, many ROS
assays cannot distinguish between ROS and RSS and thereby overestimate ROS, and
most experiments are performed in room air where oxygen levels are many times
greater than the levels within cells, which artificially increases ROS and
depletes RSS. In this research project, RSS metabolism by canonical antioxidant
pathways will be examined in greater detail and the effects of antioxidant
health food ‘nutraceuticals’ on cellular RSS will be examined in detail. The
results will have broad implications for basic biology as well as for human
health and nutrition. This research will help train one graduate student, one
postdoctoral fellow, and several undergraduate students. A solid postdoctoral
mentoring program guided by senior faculty will ensure future success in any
professional setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidants, antioxidants, and oxidative
stress from reactive oxygen species (ROS) are implicated in endogenous signaling
systems and associated with pathophysiological conditions in virtually all organ
systems. Work, mainly from the principal investigator’s laboratory, has shown
that many of the effects attributed to ROS can be mediated by reactive sulfur
species (RSS) due to their chemical similarity, interchangeability in cysteine-
mediated signaling systems (hydrogen peroxide ~ hydrogen disulfide), inability
to analytically distinguish between the two, and the preponderance of
experiments performed under supra-physiological oxygen tensions (room air). The
proposed research will show that canonical ROS antioxidant pathways affect RSS
metabolism independent of ROS and identify these catalytic mechanisms, will
examine RSS metabolism by nutraceutical and synthetic antioxidants, and will
show that cellular RSS metabolism is greatly enhanced and diversified when
experiments are conducted in ‘physioxic’ environments. Combinations of
antioxidants, antioxidant pathway inhibitors, hydrogen sulfide scavengers, and
genetically altered cells will be used to manipulate and understand RSS
metabolism, measured in buffer and in cells under physiological oxygen
concentrations, using specific fluorophores, amperometric electrodes, and mass
spectrometry. The proposed research will provide the biochemical and
physiological basis for the role of RSS in cell signaling and homeostasis under
physiologically relevant conditions. These results will broaden our
understanding of RSS in health and disease and open novel areas in biological
and biomedical research. It will also provide training for one postdoctoral
fellow, one graduate student, and numerous undergraduate students, preparing
them for professional careers in the biomedical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.