* 2012333
* Bounds and Asymptotic Dynamics for Nonlinear Evolution Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Andrei Tarfulea, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 73,026.00

Many physical, engineering, and biological phenomena are described by
mathematical models with a large number of strongly-interacting particles. The
range of these phenomena includes such diverse examples as complex and
compressible fluids (combustion, aerospace engineering, and meteorology),
nonlocal reaction-diffusion processes (nuclear physics, population biology, and
genetics), and kinetic theory (plasma physics, swarm dynamics, and
astrophysics). This project focuses on novel approaches to determining two
fundamental characteristics of solutions to equations modeling large numbers of
strongly interacting particles: their regularity and asymptotic behavior. The
regularity of such problems establishes that the models are well-behaved, which
often means the equations remain numerically tractable in computer simulations.
The asymptotic theory seeks to find simplified limiting behavior for equations,
in which many complex interactions average out and have a residual effect that
governs the behavior of the system. Information about the limiting behavior is
instrumental for applications such as medical imaging or materials science. For
many important phenomena that demonstrate complex, nonlinear behavior, the
application of known methods for analysis and control is greatly limited and not
always possible. The aim of this project is to investigate three new techniques
that partly overcome the difficulties caused by nonlinearity. The project will
also provide training and research opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
use techniques of nonlinear analysis, viscosity theory, and probability to
establish bounds and asymptotic dynamics for the three major parts of the
project. The first part focuses on exploring thermally enhanced dissipation for
hydrodynamic equations where the viscosity grows with local temperature. From
kinetic considerations and empirical observations, the kinematic viscosity of a
compressible fluid flow increases with the local temperature and the local
temperature is produced by friction. The intuition is that, in such models,
regions of high turbulence self-regularize by producing hot spots which boost
the viscosity exactly where it is needed to prevent the development of
singularities. Prior work has identified this effect in two model problems
(along with corresponding bounds). One of the main goals of the project is to
push these types of estimates to physical models of compressible thermal fluids
such as the Navier-Stokes-Fourier system, the equations of magneto-
hydrodynamics, and the Poisson-Nernst-Planck-Fourier system for electrokinetic
complex fluids. Enhanced thermal dissipation is a truly novel source of
regularization compared to other known energy-based methods and lends itself
naturally to dynamic weighted Sobolev estimates and entropy methods. The second
part focuses on developing methods to extract asymptotic behavior from strongly
nonlocal heterogeneous reaction-diffusion equations. There is a growing interest
in extracting simpler macroscopic dynamics (often taking the form of geometric
equations) from certain scaling limits of more complicated models. The nonlocal
operators in these models present unique challenges in determining their
residual impact on the (sometimes discontinuous) homogenized equation. The
investigator plans to implement the techniques of viscosity theory to pursue
homogenization phenomena for nonlocal periodic Fisher-KPP and bistable (Allen-
Cahn) equations. The third part focuses on the regularity theory for kinetic
equations (i.e., Landau and Boltzmann). Most regularity results for these
equations rely on the assumption of having the lower bound on the density (as
this often yields a minimum dissipation in the velocity variables). The
investigator will explore the emergence of such lower bounds through
probabilistic techniques, writing the kinetic equation as an approximate Fokker-
Planck equation for a certain stochastic process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.