* 2012035
* WoU-MMA: Empowering Multimessenger Science via Improving LIGO Data
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational wave detections drive profound discoveries at nature’s extremes,
opening new doors on previously hidden cosmic phenomena. New physics will arise
from coincident electromagnetic or particle (such as neutrino) signatures of
gravitational wave sources. The ability to discover the unexpected critically
depends on a detailed understanding of LIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
wave Observatory) and its myriads of data channels distinguishing the
serendipitous astrophysics from the chance coincidence of noise. The Columbia
Experimental Gravity group (GECo) aims to expand the reach of LIGO science by
uncovering the seemingly serendipitous - be that a multimessenger discovery or
concurrence of non-terrestrial signature in a network of gravitational-wave
detectors – while also training the next generation of scientists and engineers.
LIGO's high complexity provides a unique training ground in our era when the
complexity of scientific and commercial instruments explodes and the
availability of highly trained STEM minds is needed to keep
pace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational waves provide an unprecedented
opportunity born of new data to expose cosmic puzzles using multiple
astrophysical messengers. At the root of discovery is an in-depth understanding
of the multifaceted interplay between the instruments and innovative data
analysis approaches relying on all accessible data and auxiliary channels, while
also keeping an eye on the comprehensive mesh of cosmic messengers. On the
instrumental frontier, GECo will study noise transients and their connection to
detector anomalies. Using collected gravitational wave trigger events, GECo will
provide statistical inference on possible source populations, among others, in
the context of multimessenger astrophysics. GECo will carry out astrophysics
searches, using multiple cosmic messengers besides GWs with emphasis on high
energy-neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.