* 2012292
* Learning High-Dimensional Non-Linear Maps Arising from Physical Phenomena via Symmetry and Structure-Preserving Deep Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Qin Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

Machine learning, in particular deep learning, has fueled several breakthroughs
in language and image processing in recent years. Following its success in
applications to business and medicine, several efforts have been made to extend
the range of deep learning applications to scientific and engineering tasks.
Progress in this area has been hampered by two main issues: scientific tasks
often have more stringent accuracy requirements, and the required data is
usually either scarce or expensive to obtain. However, some of these tasks have
vast pools of associated knowledge, and by incorporating problem-specific
knowledge, new deep learning architectures can achieve the necessary accuracy
while requiring significantly less data. The objective of this project is
twofold: 1) to design deep learning systems that bypass computationally-
expensive classical simulations of nonlinear systems, with applications in
quantum chemistry and design of new materials such as solar cells and nano-
materials; and 2) to expand the capabilities of classical nonlinear methods, for
example by introducing novel neural networks to produce sharper images for
biomedical, radar, and seismic imaging. This project will provide
interdisciplinary applied mathematics training and research experiences for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design deep neural
networks specifically tailored for two scientific applications: density
functional theory, which is used to simulate materials at the microscopic level,
and inverse problems, which are focused on recovering quantities of interest
from boundary data, such as is done in CT, MRI, and ultrasound imaging. The main
result of the project will be novel networks that leverage the physical and
analytical properties of each application to satisfy the symmetries and
structures of the underlying physics. For the first application, the goal is to
create an efficient representation of the electron density of a given system
from the position of the nuclei, thus bypassing the solution of the Kohn-Sham
equations within the density functional theory framework. In the second
application, inverse scattering problems modeled by the Helmholtz equation are
considered. The project focuses on networks inspired by the butterfly algorithm,
a fast method tailored to handle Fourier integral operators that are used to
describe the linearized inverse scattering problem. A nonlinear generalization
of the butterfly algorithm, dubbed a butterfly-net, will be extended to handle
data at several frequencies following a dyadic partition, to stabilize the
training step. The resulting wide-band butterfly network will be used to study
the super-resolution of details below the Nyquist
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.