* 2012074
* RUI: Glucan Phosphatases and Regulation of Transitory Starch Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Madushi Raththagala, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2024
* USD 448,560.00

The goal of this research project is to understand how starch breakdown in
plants is regulated at the protein level. Starch is the major carbon storage
form of plants, a main source of calories in the human diet, and an important
raw material for various industrial applications. Despite the importance of
starch in biological systems and in human society, our understanding of the
regulation of starch metabolism is surprisingly limited and far from complete.
Transitory starch, a primary product of photosynthesis, accumulates in plant
leaves during the day, and is degraded at night to provide energy for cellular
activities and plant growth. Starch degradation is a complex process that
requires the combined activity of several protein families including glucan
phosphatases, glucan dikinases, and amylases. However, there are many unanswered
questions regarding how these proteins specifically contribute to starch
degradation. This research project will investigate the role that glucan
phosphatases play in initiating and regulating transitory starch degradation. A
complete understanding of the molecular events that control starch degradation
is necessary to define novel strategies to improve starch yields in crops, a raw
material for biofuel and various industrial and agricultural applications.
Undergraduate researchers working on this project, some of whom will be from
underrepresented and minority populations, will be provided the opportunity to
engage in structural biochemistry and metabolomics research, travel to national
conferences to present their work, and collaborate closely with experts in the
field. Thus, this project will provide mentorship and training for the next
generation of scientists and help retain both underserved and underrepresented
students in the sciences. This research will also contribute to biochemistry
undergraduate education through the design of a project-based laboratory course.
Overall, the project represents a robust combination of advancing foundational
research, improving undergraduate education, and positively impacting future
agricultural and industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starch is an
insoluble polymer of glucose. Phosphorylation of the starch outer glucosyl
residues by glucan dikinases makes the starch granule partially water soluble
and accessible to starch degrading enzymes such as -amylases. The subsequent
removal of phosphate groups by glucan phosphatases is necessary for complete
starch breakdown. By employing a variety of structural, biophysical, and
biochemical techniques, the project will investigate the various steps in starch
dephosphorylation and its undefined roles in regulating starch degradation.
Specifically, the project aims to understand 1) the mechanisms by which glucan
phosphatases contribute to the regulation of starch degradation; 2) the
structural basis of glucan dephosphorylation at the starch granule; and 3) the
critical roles of starch dephosphorylation in diurnal starch metabolism. By
employing metabolomics, the project will explore the direct and indirect roles
of starch phosphorylation in starch metabolism under abiotic stress. The results
of this research project will help close the knowledge gap in understanding the
roles and regulatory mechanisms of the glucan phosphatase family of
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.