* 2012936
* SuperCDMS SNOLAB Pre-Operations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Bernard Sadoulet, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2023
* USD 980,527.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data give strong evidence that
nearly a quarter of the Universe consists of dark matter. Weakly interacting
massive particles (WIMPs) and axions have been proposed as theoretically favored
candidates for dark matter. This one-year award supports preliminary activities
for an experiment that could address the nature of dark matter in a way that is
complementary to the Large Hadron Collider, indirect detection experiments, and
direct detection experiments like LZ and XENONnT that will search for WIMPs. The
SuperCDMS SNOLAB Collaboration is planning a new experiment equipped with
advanced cryogenic detectors that have unprecedented sensitivity to dark matter
particles with masses at and below the GeV/c^2 scale. The experiment is planned
to be sited in SNOLAB in Canada. The experiment’s phonon-mediated detectors have
applications in cosmology, astronomy, and industry. This project will also allow
the PIs to build computational skills into their existing outreach efforts
through short course modules, research projects, and workshops. In addition,
through these funds, the groups will leverage the SNOLAB outreach team by
increasing participation in tour groups and SNOLAB on-site exhibits. The
overarching outreach goal is to make a signiﬁcant and equitable impact in the
number of undergraduate students who pursue science careers. They propose to (1)
further develop this accessible analysis environment and (2) develop short
tutorials on critical data-analysis skills using the JupyterHub
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In May 2019, the CUTE facility — a new
cryogenic underground test facility located directly adjacent to the SuperCDMS
SNOLAB experiment site and thus shielded from cosmic rays — was completed. The
Collaboration will use this low-background testing facility to conduct a series
of electronic and environmental noise characterization and mitigation campaigns,
as well as systematic studies of bias voltage, charge leakage, and energy
calibration to optimize detector performance and operating protocols. This work
includes early testing of the electronics, DAQ, data-quality, and computing and
software subsystems, exercising end-to-end readout and processing of detector
data, starting with a Ge HV detector — the first test detector delivered in
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.