* 2012922
* Quantitative Characterization of Quark-Gluon Plasma Properties with Dynamical Fluctuations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Chun Shen, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 41,797.00

Quantifying the phase structure of matter at extreme temperature and density has
profound impacts on understanding how quarks and gluons, the building blocks of
nucleons, interact collectively and elucidating the property of the early
Universe within the first microsecond after its creation in the Big Bang. High
energy collisions of atomic nuclei create the Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP), a new
state of matter at about 2 trillion degrees Kelvin. The QGP behaves like a
nearly perfect fluid, which flows ten times better than water. This project will
develop a new theoretical framework to model how small ripples evolve in the QGP
fluid. By decoding these ripples' traces in the experimental measurements, the
PI will quantify the QGP properties and identify whether the nature of phase
transition from ordinary matter to the QGP is like water transits to vapor. This
project interweaves nuclear physics, high-performance computing, and advanced
machine learning techniques. The interdisciplinary nature of the project helps
the participating students acquire solid training in theoretical physics as well
as computational science skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
the first theoretical framework to model the 3D dynamical evolution of
stochastic fluctuations in relativistic heavy-ion collisions. By studying how
fluctuations of energy, momentum, and charge density dissipate in the collision
system, one can quantify the thermal, critical, and transport properties of the
QGP using experimental measurements. By integrating the proposed framework with
the Bayesian analysis and applying them to heavy-ion collisions over wide ranges
of collision energies, the PI and his group will extract quantitative
phenomenological constraints on the QGP properties. Searching the critical point
signature in experimental data is slated to break new ground in the application
of deep learning techniques to physical science. This proposed framework serves
as an essential infrastructure to guide and interpret the experiments at
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider Beam Energy Scan phase II, and high luminosity
runs at the Large Hadron Collider. The theoretical advancement in understanding
the dynamics of such a strongly-coupled many-body system can generate
interesting cross-talk with cold atomic physics, cosmology, and neutron
star/black mergers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.