* 2012125
* NSF-BSF: Universality Puzzles and Coherent Control of Efimov Physics with 7Li Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jose D'Incao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Interactions among a few atoms will be explored by this project, and in
particular, ways to achieve quantum control in the regime of ultracold
temperatures where a gas becomes quantum mechanical in nature. Few-atom systems
with their extremely nonperturbative interactions pose some of the greatest
challenges for atomic theorists and provide many opportunities to advance our
scientific knowledge with potential technological and fundamental impacts. This
project represents a theoretical and experimental collaboration via the US
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the US-Israel Binational Science
Foundation (BSF). The goal of the project is to develop the theoretical tools,
which, combined with experimental analysis, will enable a detailed investigation
of properties of strongly interacting quantum gases with a focal point on
developing control of the complex multichannel collision dynamics using either a
static external field or an electromagnetic field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
specific goal is to explore 7Li ultracold quantum gases to understand puzzling
observations related to the nature of the universality of Efimov states in the
system. These studies will serve as the base of the main focus of this theory-
experiment collaboration, which involves the exploration of new physics near the
7Li ultra-narrow Feshbach resonance and atom-dimer mixtures. Particular
attention will be given on the determination of the scattering properties and
lifetime of Efimov states as well as the underlying physical mechanisms which
make 7Li gases a unique system to explore universal quantum physics. The project
also includes studies for the implementation of coherent control over few-body
processes which can enable the stabilization of strongly interacting gases, by
turning off few-body losses, as well as open up ways to control three-body
interactions and superposition states, allowing for the creation of exotic
dynamical regimes. Beyond that, a deeper understanding of the ultracold atom
interactions can spawn applications to atomic clocks, quantum information
science, and the exploration of many novel phases of matter. The key educational
impact of this work derives from the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in state-of-the-art theoretical and computational research
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.