* 2012403
* Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: Geomicrobiology and Biogeochemistry in the Critical Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2022
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 89,816.00

The critical zone is the active upper crust of the Earth, from the lowest
groundwater to the top of the highest tree. Critical Zone science is at an
important juncture: it is incorporating life in more quantitative ways. This
project will evaluate the contribution of the microorganisms that drive so many
of the dynamics of the Critical Zone, addressing crucial gaps in our knowledge
of surface and deep soil microbes and their functions. The major goal of this
research is to develop a predictive understanding of the role of microbes as
drivers of Critical Zone biogeochemistry and soil formation. The researchers’
preliminary investigations across the former Critical Zone Observatory Network
identified variable patterns in microbial biodiversity with increasing soil
depth across sites, with some sites showing little to no change with depth, and
others a complete turnover of the microbial community members. The current
project will illuminate the mechanisms underlying these trends. This project
will train numerous undergraduate students, most of whom will be
underrepresented minorities at several Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) and
high schools in underserved communities across California. Results will be
disseminated to the greater public through a series of webinars that will
provide real life examples of how to address Critical Zone science questions by
leveraging diverse scientific backgrounds, as well as through incorporation into
the “Welcome to the Critical Zone” public museum exhibit at The University of
Arizona’s Flandrau Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address the hypothesis that soil type, hydrology, and lithology are key
determinants of the depth to which surface influences such as vegetation and
climate drive microbial community composition, diversity, and activity.
Specifically, where soils are deep or are derived from nutrient- rich bedrock,
the researchers hypothesize that rooting depths will be greater, resulting in a
greater similarity between surface and deep soil microbial communities compared
to those from shallower soils or those developed from less nutrient-rich
substrates. In this proposed project, the researchers will use a novel
combination of DNA and RNA sequencing, real-time soil gas and environmental
monitoring, quantified enzyme activities, detailed soil organic matter and
isotopic analyses, as well as root abundances to address the hypothesis. To
amplify the impact of this approach, the project will develop a unique and
detailed geomicrobiology characterization of key indicator species of bacteria,
archaea and fungi, grouped to distinguish those that are surface-based and those
representative of bedrock interactions. This novel framework will be tested
across years and will generate a resource for the larger NSF Geoscience
community for years to come. This project will also form an important
interdisciplinary aspect of the new Critical Zone Collaborative Network, through
collaborations with various other Clusters and the Hub. This award is co-funded
by the Critical Zone Collaborative Network of the Division of Earth Sciences and
the Ecosystem Sciences cluster of the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.