* 2012993
* SBIR Phase I:  Authoring Assistance via Contextual Semantic Labeling
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Steven DeRose, DOCUGAMI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 216,917.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance Natural Language Processing (NLP) to improve productivity,
compliance and insight for businesses. Documents are the underlying fabric of
business as they hold detailed agreements, obligations, requirements and terms
central to business operations with customers, suppliers, partners and
regulators. However, documents still represent "dark data", separate and
inaccessible to automated business processes. Businesses like commercial real
estate, insurance, professional services, financial services, legal firms and
many others produce and consume many documents containing similar patterns with
innumerable variations. Authoring and executing these agreements is laborious
and error-prone, but it is difficult to automate the use of this semi-structured
information. This project develops a series of sophisticated steps to discern
structure and information from narrative text, applying the latest techniques
from several schools of thought in artificial intelligence. This project will
enable knowledge workers to gain the assistance of artificial intelligence to
author and execute commercial agreements with greater ease, efficiency,
precision, confidentiality, compliance and insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enhance
unstructured human-centered text with a structured computer-optimized version, a
"shadow" representation of each document that uses XML and database technology
to enable innovative software assistance for users and organizations. The
research takes a multi-faceted approach, applying computer vision and then
creating a pipeline of new algorithms using techniques from Deep Learning,
Bayesian, Evolutionary, Symbolic and Classic NLP. The process operates on
"small" datasets (10-30 documents) with high accuracy as well as large
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.