* 2012258
* Development of Room Temperature Terahertz Quantum Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Zbigniew Wasilewski, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

The proposed research seeks to develop terahertz quantum-cascade lasers (THz
QCLs) that operate at and above room temperature. Such a development will have a
significant impact on the science and technologies in THz frequencies, where
potential applications are promising in detection of chemical and biological
agents, imaging for medical and security applications, astrophysics, plasma
diagnostics, remote atmospheric sensing and monitoring, and high-bandwidth free-
space communications.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Since 2012, the highest operating
temperature Tmax was 200 K, until 2019. During this period the PI’s group
investigated the possible mechanisms that hindered the development of higher
Tmax. First, they developed a novel method to extract the value of activation
energy in the thermal degradation of output power of THz QCLs. Using this
method, they identified a thermal leakage channel over the tunnel barriers that
were previously overlooked. Based on this finding, taller barriers were used to
suppress this leakage channel. Based on the taller barriers, for the first time
negative differential resistance (NDR) was observed at room temperature in a THz
QCL device. In order to increase the upper-state lifetime at elevated
temperatures, it has been recognized in the field that diagonal transition
structures are to be used. In those structures, the spatial separation of the
upper- and lower-level wavefunctions reduces electron scattering between the
two. The PI’s group first realized that a higher carrier concentration needs to
be used to compensate for the reduced oscillator strength. In a systematic
investigation of the doping effect on Tmax, the PI’s group discovered that
charging effect, which was negligible at low doping levels, became severe at
high carrier concentrations and it negatively impacted the device performance.
To mitigate the charging effect, the PI’s group investigated a new direct-phonon
scheme for the depopulation of the lower lasing level. Based on these two
features, tall barriers and direct-phonon scheme, the long-held record of Tmax =
200 K was finally broken this year, first to 210 K by a European group and then
to 250 K by the PI’s team. &lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage those recent
breakthroughs and involve a considerable design effort, as the number of quantum
wells will be large and their combination will be complicated. If an isolated
quantum well can be viewed as a one-dimensional "artificial atom", then a
multiple quantum-well (MQW) structure is an "artificial molecule". This project
is nothing short of designing and making such artificial molecules which perform
the desired function of THz lasers. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from
the proposed activity: Following the recent breakthroughs, the principal
investigator has been invited to give invited/plenary/keynote talks at many
prestigious conferences and the work has also been reported in media for broad
communities. Through collaborations, the THz lasers developed in the PI's group
have helped to enhance the infrastructures at other institutions in THz-related
activities by adding a crucial enabling component. The principal investigator
plans to incorporate elements in the research project into a undergraduate
course Signals and Systems. If room-temperature THz QCLs can be developed, the
PI plans to work with a recently founded start-up company based on this
technology, to commercialize compact THz imaging
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.