* 2012941
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Building Cybersecurity Inclusive Pathways towards Higher Education and Research (CIPHER)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to address cybersecurity education and training in
K-16.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As cyber threats continue to grow in sophistication,
no organization or individual is immune to cyberattacks. On one hand, there is a
widening skills gap. Unfilled cybersecurity jobs are expected to reach 1.8
million by 2022, as reported by the Center for Cyber Safety and Education. On
the other hand, the cybersecurity education and training institutions in the
nation have found it difficult to keep pace with the growing demand for cyber
talent. There exists a significant gap between K-12 and college education in
cybersecurity. Moreover, it is deeply challenging to achieve diversity and
inclusion given the highly technical and interdisciplinary nature of
cybersecurity. Lack of partnership and coordination between education
institutions further leads to gaps in the nationâ€™s current cybersecurity
education landscape. The project aims to pave the way for a national alliance
for building Cybersecurity Inclusive Pathways towards Higher Education and
Research (CIPHER), that will focus on a researcher-practitioner partnership for
the development of fundamental, theoretically-grounded, and systematic
approaches to inclusive K-16 cybersecurity education, especially for students
with low socioeconomic status (SES). This project will directly benefit at least
10 school districts (with a total of 175,163 students) and a dozen colleges and
universities. In the long term, it will provide essential support to inclusive
cybersecurity workforce development, mitigating the massive workforce shortage
and leading to long-lasting positive impacts on the national economy and social
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a series of planning
activities to engage a full spectrum of stakeholders and prepare the groundwork
for establishing CIPHER. Scholars from multiple disciplines and practitioners
from multiple fields will work together to fully understand the problems and
explore the design space. It will lead to fundamental findings about what
administrators, educators, counselors, and parents need to know and be able to
do to support cybersecurity education. The outcomes include the establishment of
a CIPHER researcher-practitioner partnership that engages all stakeholders, deep
understanding about the current knowledge and infrastructure gap, and creation
of an inclusive model for K-16 cybersecurity education, which can be replicated
national-wide for bringing cybersecurity education to all students. The project
will develop a range of effective ways including online resources to engage
underrepresented or underserved communities. This endeavor will lead to broader
and profound impacts, reshaping the landscape of K-16 cybersecurity education in
the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.