* 2012055
* Experimental Studies of the Higgs Mechanism in the Standard Model and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* John Hobbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,855,000.00

The start-up of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) a decade ago ushered in a new
era of research in hitherto inaccessible energy regimes. The discovery of the
Higgs boson is the first major highlight of the LHC program, which established
that the predicted particle content and interactions of the Standard Model (SM)
are complete. Despite this success, the SM is widely believed to be an
incomplete theory. Ongoing studies must determine whether or not this new Higgs
boson is that of the SM, and new experimental data are essential to discover if
and how Nature has chosen to extend the SM. These studies include new
measurements and searches for new physics, primarily using data recorded at a
center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV. The physics analysis activities form a
comprehensive program to extend characterization of Higgs boson
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze data collected with
the ATLAS experiment at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider. The research includes
standard model di-boson measurements, Higgs boson decay properties, and
speculative Beyond–the–Standard–Model searches involving Higgs boson production
and decay. In addition, the Stony Brook group will lead activities in ATLAS
maintenance and operations, algorithm development, and detector upgrades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the Higgs’ key role in standard model electroweak
symmetry breaking, as well as being the only known elementary scalar particle,
exploration of its properties is central to particle physics. To that end, this
project includes studies of WW production to understand the role of the Higgs
boson in vector boson scattering and searches for new physics through modified
quartic couplings in boson scattering, studies of the properties of the Higgs
boson in associated production focusing on the newly established bottom-
antibottom decay mode, extending the sensitivity to higher transverse momenta
based on jet substructure techniques and improved b-tagging, and searches for
the rare and BSM modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Stony Brook group has
responsibilities for liquid argon calorimeter operations including the
installation and commissioning of the Phase I upgrade liquid argon Back End
upgrade electronics, and responsibilities for silicon detector operations. They
are involved in the ATLAS tracker upgrade R&amp;D and have design, testing and
production responsibilities for the HL-LHC liquid argon calorimeter read-out
digital processor system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work provides undergraduate
and graduate students with the opportunity to participate in leading edge
scientific research and instrumentation development. Undergraduate students have
the opportunity to participate both through academic year research activities
and through the group’s participation in the Stony Brook REU program. This
project includes a program of student and community education to be initially
hosted at Stony Brook and then more broadly. The group also participates in the
local QuarkNet efforts and will host the Higgs Couplings 2020 conference, which
will include a public day with lectures and a panel
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.