* 2012033
* APS CUWiP: Supporting the Success of All Undergraduate Women in Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Monica Plisch, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,866.00

This award to the American Physical Society supports the continued growth and
improvement of the Conferences for Undergraduate Women in Physics (CUWiP), held
annually since 2006. The goals of the CUWiP effort are to increase retention and
improve career outcomes of undergraduate women in physics by (i) communicating
the breadth of education and career paths open to physics majors; (ii)
disseminating information and advice on applying for summer research, graduate
school and professional employment; and (iii) providing opportunities to share
experiences, advice and ideas with women at different stages of their education
or career paths. The CUWiP goals will be achieved by providing (i) inspiring
talks by female physicists, (ii) workshops and panel discussions on summer
research, graduate school, physics careers, professional development, and issues
facing minority women in physics, (iii) student presentations or poster
sessions, and (iv) opportunities for networking and informal
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CUWiP aims to broaden the participation of women
in physics by providing information, resources, networks and motivation to
pursue advanced degrees and/or careers in physics. The broad geographic
distribution of the conferences maximizes access to the conferences and
facilitates recruitment of students from underrepresented minority groups and
from local community colleges. Local conference organization provides
opportunities for students and postdocs to engage directly in broadening
participation in science. The proposed activities will enable the organizers to
probe how these conferences facilitate networking and improve participantsâ€™
attitudes concerning self-efficacy and identity as physicists. The results of
the proposed annual assessments will be used to improve the effectiveness of the
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported jointly by two
divisions of NSF's Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate: the Division
of Physics and the Division of Materials Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.