* 2012098
* Probing Multi-Electron Dynamics with Absolute Carrier-Envelope-Phase (CEP) Dependent Strong Field Interaction
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Wen Li, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 641,959.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atoms are made of equal numbers
of electrons and nuclei and they are charge neutral. Therefore, they should not
attract each other. However, it is well known that atoms can group together and
form the most complex molecules that are indispensable for life, e. g., proteins
and DNAs. The reason for this is because the correlated motions of many
electrons can glue atoms together. This is called chemical bonding. If one can
fully understand and control these motions, one can solve many practical
problems such as making new molecules as cures for diseases. However, because
the multi-electron nature of chemical bonding, the issue is very complex and
challenging to tackle. In this project Professor Li and students at Wayne State
University will use a very intense but well-controlled laser to rip one or two
electrons from atoms and small molecules and watch how they interact with the
rest of the electrons as well as the laser. This is a new way to study
electronic motions and will offer unprecedented knowledge that might lead to
novel control methods of chemical reactions. Additional benefit includes
developing new laser technologies and training of the next generation of
chemists and physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project an important aspect of multi-
electron dynamics - the multi-electron Coulomb potential, its interactions with
departing electrons and the consequences of such an interaction in strong field
ionization process - will be investigated. The major experimental approach is to
use high performing ion-electron coincidence/covariance techniques coupled with
few-cycle near infrared laser pulses (&lt;5 fs). The properties of few-cycle
pulses such as pulse duration, bandwidth and phase will be fully characterized.
Specifically, Professor Li and his students aim to develop a new technique to
determine the absolute carrier envelope phase (CEP) of linearly polarized few-
cycle pulses for the first time without theoretical input. This will provide
independent calibration of phase-dependent phenomena. Furthermore, the absolute
CEP dependent data such as double ionization yields, electron momentum
distributions and branching ratios of dissociative double ionization will be
compared directly with the results of different theoretical modeling with and
without the single active electron approximation (SAE) to reveal the importance
of multi-electron dynamics in atomic and small molecular systems. The proposed
research leverages cutting-edge experimental capabilities and will uncover new
information on complex multi-electron dynamics. The research will also provide
unprecedented tools for studying strong field
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.