* 2012424
* Computational Retinal Hemodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Shravan Veerapaneni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 282,586.00

Blood flow in the retina, also termed retinal hemodynamics, has long been known
to be affected by glaucoma, a neurodegenerative condition that is the leading
cause of irreversible but preventable blindness. Alterations in retinal
hemodynamics are also indicators of several other disease pathologies, including
systemic diseases such as hypertension and diabetes. Consequently, numerous
imaging modalities have been developed to non-invasively measure hemodynamic
parameters in the retina. Examples include color Doppler imaging, laser Doppler
flowmetry, optical coherence tomography, and fundus photography. While
hemodynamic analysis via imaging has been available for more than a century, the
advent of high-resolution retinal images combined with novel automated
annotation techniques created the need for accurate numerical simulations of
blood flow through retinal microvasculature. The primary goal of this project is
to develop stable, high-accuracy, optimal algorithms for direct numerical
simulation of particulate blood flow through patient-specific arterial graphs.
The project provides training for graduate students through involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two computational
bottlenecks that arise in large-scale simulations of particulate flows using
boundary integral methods. First, a new high-order nearly-singular integration
scheme in three dimensions using concepts from exterior calculus and harmonic
polynomial approximations will be developed. The appealing feature of these
schemes will be that they work directly on user-supplied boundary meshes (e.g.,
triangulated arterial graphs). If smooth line integrals on the given meshes can
be evaluated to high accuracy, then singular and nearly singular integrals can
both be computed to high accuracy. This contrasts with existing methods, which
often require pre-processing. Second, to improve the robustness and accuracy of
simulations without imposing excessive constraints on mesh sizes,
complementarity constraint based contact resolution techniques will be
developed. While the primary focus of this project is on simulating retinal
hemodynamics, the computational methods under development will be applicable to
more general microscale particulate flow, including flows of droplets, bacteria,
and colloids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.