* 2012344
* Collaborative Research: Network Cluster: Urban Critical Zone processes along the Piedmont-Coastal Plain transition
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Alan Berkowitz, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2025
* USD 118,137.00

The Earth’s Critical Zone spans bedrock to treetops. For urban areas, the built
environment is an integral but understudied part of the Critical Zone. Soil and
rock influence the chemistry of groundwater flowing through the subsurface to
streams. Rocks “weather” (chemically change) from the bottom up over long
periods, influencing groundwater and stream chemistry. Stream chemistry is
critical for freshwater habitat and drinking water quality. In urban areas,
human activities alter this geologic foundation, moving earth for construction,
burying water and sewer pipes, and applying road salt and fertilizer. Little is
known about how above-ground urban processes and below-ground geological
processes interact to change weathering and chemistry of groundwater and
streams. This project studies the interactions of natural and anthropogenic
weathering processes and their effects on water quality, using a cluster of four
cities as our laboratory -- Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, DC, and
Raleigh. The cities are located along the Fall Zone - a geologic transition that
creates waterfalls, along the Eastern Seaboard. The cities capture variation in
climate, development age, and population density. Research methods include
observational and modeling activities that integrated multiple processes in
urban Critical Zones. This project will train 7 undergraduates per year, 7
graduate students, and 1 post-doctoral associate. Project participants will work
with K-12 teachers to integrate Critical Zone science in the classroom and
provide professional development. A regional Critical Zone Citizen Science
Interest Group will be convened to adopt project protocols in local programs and
contribute to project research. An engagement plan to foster interaction with a
broad community of other Critical Zone scientists includes hosting open
quarterly science meetings and establishing a visiting scholar fund. Project
results will allow policy makers and regulators to incorporate Critical Zone
processes into management of water quality and resilient, sustainable, urban
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge of urban
critical zone processes through a Critical Zone (CZ) Cluster spanning four
cities on the U.S. East Coast: Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, DC, and
Raleigh. These cities were developed along the Fall Zone, a region of steep
rivers incised into crystalline Piedmont bedrock upstream of the Atlantic
Coastal Plain. The north-south gradient of this urban cluster is associated with
climatic trends and with a gradient in age from older and denser development in
Philadelphia and Baltimore to newer and sparser development in Raleigh. The
project will address the following research questions: (1) How does urbanization
in a temperate, Eastern seaboard landscape result in a shift from a supply-
limited to a transport-limited regime governing solute export?; (2) How does the
underlying structure of the CZ along the Piedmont-Coastal Plain transition
interact with urbanization to affect export fluxes?; and (3) How do chemical and
hydrological dynamics associated with urbanization affect material export along
the latitudinal gradient from Philadelphia to Raleigh? Research methods will
include development of a watershed-scale geochemical-hydrological model as a
framework for data collection, assimilation, and prediction; geophysics for
subsurface mapping; land cover/land use data analysis; soil and rock core
chemical analysis; soil gas sampling; stream and well sampling for solutes; and
analysis of sediment concentrations and yields. A new conceptual model of solute
movement from the land surface through the subsurface to streams, constrained by
geologic and geomorphic architecture and the overprinting of urban development
will be developed. This project will train 7 undergraduates per year, 7 graduate
students, and 1 post-doctoral associate. Existing institutional programs will be
utilized to recruit underrepresented groups into STEM fields for the project.
Project participants will work with high school science teachers to identify
topics for a CZ instructional module and a teacher professional development
program. A regional CZ Citizen Science Interest Group will be convened to
identify opportunities to adopt CZ project protocols in local programs and to
contribute to CZ project research. The project engagement plan includes hosting
open quarterly science meetings and establishing a visiting scholar fund to
support scientific exchange with other CZ cluster
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Critical Zone
Collaborative Network and the Hydrologic Sciences programs in the Division of
Earth Sciences and the Environmental Sustainability program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.