* 2012826
* RUI: Probing the Structure of Nucleons  in Omega Meson Electroproduction
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Philip Cole, Lamar University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

Understanding exactly how the strong force is generated inside the nucleus is
one of the greatest intellectual challenges facing nuclear physicists today. The
strong force gives rise to the nuclear forces that bind protons and neutrons
together inside the nucleus. The strong force is mediated by the exchange of
particles known as gluons. It is this gluon interaction that accounts for most
of mass of the nucleon. The nucleon is the general term for either a proton or a
neutron. Nucleons are formed of three valence quarks embedded in a frothing sea
of gluons. Our knowledge of how protons and neutrons are constructed from their
quark and gluon constituents, however, is rudimentary at best. An energetic
particle, such as an electron, incident on a nucleon can interact directly with
one of the valence quarks inside, causing the quark to undergo a flip in spin or
endowing the quark with an orbital or radial excitation. With a quark in a
higher energy state, the excited nucleon becomes more massive. These excited
states are called nucleon resonances (N*s) and exist for the briefest of moments
– on the order of a trillionth of a trillionth of a second (10−24 s), and thence
will decay into other particles. The types of particles produced and how they
are distributed in space provides key information on the make-up of the proton.
Lamar University is a Primarily Undergraduate Institution. Over the course of
the past two decades, the PI has established a strong record of involving
undergraduate students in his research program, and that practice will continue
with support from this award. These fundamental measurements on understanding
nucleon resonances at Jefferson Lab (Newport News, Virginia) and at ELSA (Bonn,
Germany), along with the strong educational focus of this award, are in keeping
with the key objectives of the Nuclear Science Advisory Committee’s 2015 Long-
Range Plan and thereby serve the national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program is a study of the fundamental properties and structure of
nucleons by using a beam of linearly-polarized photons and/or polarized
electrons at Jefferson Lab and at ELSA. The strong nuclear interaction is
responsible for phenomena over a large distance scale from the binding of quarks
by gluons, the combinations of quarks into colorless hadrons, the binding of
nucleons into nuclei, and the collective behavior of large nuclei. This research
group seeks answers to questions such as how valence quarks self-assemble when
sea quark and gluon contributions are minimal, the nature of how gluons attach
to quarks to increase the mass of current quarks to that of constituent quarks,
and how quarks resonate inside the nucleon to form excited assemblies of quarks.
The PI and his group of undergraduate students aim to understand the emergent
behavior and structure from assemblies of quarks and gluons. The probe for these
studies will be the omega meson. There is great discovery potential in probing
the structure of N*s through the clean and unambiguous signal of the omega
meson. Moreover, there is a significant dearth of data of baryon resonances
decaying through the omega mode as a function of momentum
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.