* 2012590
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Spatial Analysis into Long Term Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* W. Frederick Limp, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 102,057.00

The SPatial Archaeometry Research Collaborations (SPARC) Program promotes the
use of spatial analysis, 3D modeling, and remote sensing technologies in
archaeological research projects. The things archaeologists study—from artifacts
to sites to landscapes—almost always have spatial components that are essential
to understanding cultural processes. Digital museums allow for morphometric
analyses of remote, fragile, and/or priceless artifacts; geophysical
investigations help pinpoint subsurface features such as houses that save time
and money during excavation; the remote sensing technique LiDAR (Light Detection
and Ranging) identifies natural and anthropogenic landscapes such as ancient
roads through impediments like vegetation cover. Today, the increasing
availability and sophistication of digital technologies is not merely generating
new data but is facilitating entirely novel means of engaging with the
archaeological record. However, the high costs of instrumentation and software,
combined with the expertise they require, create a hurdle for many
archaeologists who aim to deploy geospatial technologies in research projects.
Through a competitive, peer-reviewed application process, SPARC facilitates
collaborations between archaeologists interested in adding a digital component
to their research with SPARC institutions, who leverage the technological
infrastructure of instrumentation, software, and expertise of faculty and
technical staff at the University of Arkansas' Center for Advanced Spatial
Technologies, Dartmouth College’s Spatial Archaeometry Lab, and the University
of Glasgow. Since 2013, SPARC has supported 35 collaborative projects involving
73 PIs and co-PIs from 46 different institutions for research in over 20
countries. SPARC has a strong track record of supporting women and early-career
researchers, providing external funding and publishing opportunities essential
to developing competitive careers, and for researchers located at public
universities and non-profits. Online seminars and workshops, student training
opportunities, leadership in professional organizations, methodological
innovations, and new grant awards all stem from SPARC
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPARC Program's goals are to: enhance the
research productivity of archaeological projects by making geospatial
technologies available to researchers who would not otherwise have access to the
tools or skills needed to collect and analyze these data; generate high-value,
efficient archaeological data by participating in fieldwork and analytical
projects; provide training opportunities for students and professionals seeking
to use geospatial techniques; promote the development of new geospatial
applications in archaeology and their visibility to the broader community; and
support good practice in archiving and publication of digital data. SPARC offers
direct support to archaeological projects through awards in three
categories—Fieldwork (on-site data collection), Data &amp; Analytics
(preparation, processing, and analysis), and Publication (presentation,
publication, and archiving)—that utilize a wide-ranging set of methods including
high-performance computing, surface reconstruction and morphometric analysis,
volumetric 3D imaging, near-surface geophysics, aerial remote sensing and survey
(e.g. “drones”), geodetic positioning and topographic survey, and 3D
visualization. SPARC strives to build a program that is increasingly visible -
attracting top research projects; efficient - as project staff build on their
experience; high impact - as pilot projects build skills in research teams
around the world; and innovative - with broader collaborations leading to
significant methodological advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.