* 2012524
* Mechanically Mediated Spin Entanglement in Diamond
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Diamonds consist of a regular arrangement, or lattice, of carbon atoms, which
often contains defects at the atomic level. Common defects include impurities,
such as nitrogen or silicon atoms, and vacancies - places in the lattice where
atoms are missing. A special defect is a “silicon-vacancy” center, which
consists of two vacancies that are adjacent to each other, with a silicon atom
inserted in between. An electron can be trapped around such a defect, and used
as a “qubit,” or “quantum bit”—a fundamental unit of quantum information. An
outstanding challenge for using these qubits to develop solid-state quantum
computers is the precise control of the interactions between them. This program
will develop an experimental approach that uses mechanical vibrations in an
ultrathin diamond film to mediate interactions between two silicon-vacancy
qubits. Mechanical waves can be conveniently confined and guided in a suitably
designed solid-state nanostructure with negligible loss, opening up a new
frontier in the development of quantum information technologies. In addition,
this program will also make contributions to education and human resources by
providing excellent training to graduate and undergraduate students in areas of
both scientific and technological importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
experimental program focuses on mechanically mediated coupling between electron
spins in a diamond nanomechanical resonator, with the long-term goal of
establishing a trapped-ion-like solid-state platform for quantum computing. The
primary building block of this platform is a diamond Lamb wave mechanical
resonator, in which electron spins in silicon vacancy centers couple to a
symmetric mechanical compression mode. The Lamb wave resonator is protected by a
phononic crystal lattice, which can enable the achievement of mechanical
Q-factors limited only by the intrinsic material loss of diamond. Two mechanisms
that take advantage of the special energy level structure of silicon vacancy
centers will be explored for the coupling between spins and mechanical
vibrations. One exploits optically driven sideband spin transitions. The other
uses mechanical vibrations to directly drive spin transitions. The sideband spin
transitions will be used for spin entanglement through a Molmer-Sorensen two-
qubit gate, which is widely used for trapped ions. The direct acoustic driving
will be used for spin entanglement via a phononic cavity QED
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.