* 2012029
* Travel Support: 19th US-Japan Conference on Composite Materials and Visit to Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA); Kakuda Space Center, Sendai, Japan; July 21-24, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Olesya Zhupanska, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/29/2024
* USD 48,832.00

This grant provides travel support for the 19th US-Japan Conference on Composite
Materials (CCM) from July 22-24, 2020 and visit to the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) Kakuda Space Center, on July 21, 2020, in Sendai,
Japan. The 19th US-Japan CCM is the next in a series of conferences organized by
the Japan Society for Composite Materials and the American Society for
Composites to promote science of composite materials and provide a platform for
the intellectual exchange between US and Japanese researchers. Composite
materials research enabled development of ground-breaking technologies across a
wide spectrum of industries such as aerospace, clean energy, and automotive,
that are vital to the United States’ economy, national security, and the
nation's current standing as the world’s leading research- and technology-driven
society. Early-career faculty from US universities will be the primary
recipients of the travel support. A special emphasis will be placed on
engagement of faculty from underrepresented groups and minority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theme of the 19th US-Japan CCM is
mechanics of composite materials. For the first time, the US-Japan CCM will be
collocated with the Euro-Japan Conference on Composite Materials, which is
supported by the European Society for Composite Materials and Japan Society for
Composite Materials. The award will provide a rare opportunity for the early
career faculty from the US institutions of higher education to participate in
the US-Japan and Euro-Japan CCM, visit the JAXA Kakuda Space Center and get a
deeper perspective on the ongoing research and development in composite
materials in Japan. Carefully devised group activities will promote intellectual
exchange, development of international research and mentorship networks, and
support professional success of the early career faculty from diverse
backgrounds and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.