* 2012518
* Collaborative Research: Apparatus for Normalization and Systematic Control of the MOLLER Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Rakitha Beminiwattha, Louisiana Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 02/28/2025
* USD 193,291.00

A central goal of nuclear and particle physics is to obtain a complete
understanding of the fundamental constituents of matter and the forces through
which they interact. The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics has proven
remarkably successful at describing the interactions of the known fundamental
particles for the past 50 years. However, the SM is known to be incomplete, and
there are compelling reasons to expect that the SM will eventually fail to
describe some observed properties of matter. To address the question of whether
there is new physics beyond the Standard Model, a precision measurement of the
weak charge of the electron will be performed in a collaborative experiment at
the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in Newport News, Virginia.
The electron’s weak charge is the weak force analog of the common electric
charge of the electron, and it is precisely predicted in the SM. Any deviation
of the measurement from this prediction would be evidence for undiscovered
phenomena that represent new physics beyond our current understanding. The
experiment is named MOLLER and it comprises a range of hardware design and
construction activities as well as software development which will provide
excellent training for students and young scientists. The experience of working
in a collaborative modern science enterprise with state of the art technology
provides a strong basis for a variety of careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds
provided by this project will support construction of essential apparatus for
the MOLLER experiment (Measurement of a Lepton-Lepton Electroweak Reaction) at
Jefferson Lab. MOLLER will measure the electron’s neutral weak charge by making
a precision measurement of the parity-violating asymmetry in the elastic
scattering of polarized electrons on unpolarized electrons at very low momentum
transfer. This will result in a determination of the weak mixing angle at low
energy with a precision comparable to the best determinations from high energy
colliders, providing excellent sensitivity to physics scenarios that extend
beyond the Standard Model. The MOLLER experiment consists of three major
subsystems: 1) the beam/target/spectrometer to prepare the scattered Møller
electrons to be observed, 2) apparatus to measure the raw parity-violating
asymmetry to the needed statistical precision, and 3) apparatus for
Normalization and Systematic Control to achieve sub-ppb and sub-% level
systematic uncertainty and normalization control goals. The collaborative
project described in this proposal will develop subsystem #3; namely the design,
construction, and testing of the MOLLER Normalization and Systematic Control
apparatus. The work will be done over the period December 2020 – November 2024.
This includes the tracking system, background detectors, auxiliary asymmetry
measurement detectors, and certain aspects of beam monitoring/control and beam
polarimetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.