* 2012860
* Computational Forward and Inverse Radiative Transfer
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Hong-Kai Zhao, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,001.00

The radiative transfer equation (RTE) is an important modeling tool with
applications in biomedical imaging, clinical radiation therapy treatment
planning, study of the composition and structure of atmosphere, and other
fields. Because of its complicated structure, the RTE presents challenges to
analysis and simulation. This research project aims at developing novel,
accurate, and eﬃcient computational methods for both forward and inverse
radiative transfer problems. More generally, the insights obtained in this
project are expected to provide new perspectives on solving a class of integral
equations. The mathematical tools and computational algorithms under development
will be disseminated broadly for advancing scientiﬁc and technological progress.
Integration of research with education at diﬀerent levels will provide training
for computational mathematicians. Supervised research projects and seminars
related to the proposed research will be available to junior/senior
undergraduates and graduate students. Participation of members of
underrepresented groups will be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions to
radiative transfer equations behave very diﬀerently in diﬀerent regions/regimes.
These challenges require well-designed and well-understood numerical algorithms
that can take into account special properties and structures of the RTE and its
solution associated with the underlying application. Although studies and
developments of numerical methods for RTE based on diﬀerential and probabilistic
formulations have been done, integral-formulation-based approaches are less
understood and not fully developed. This project will systematically develop and
analyze eﬃcient numerical algorithms based on integral formulation and also
explore a combination of integral and diﬀerential formulations. The key idea is
to utilize dimension reduction, careful treatment of singularity, and the
special structures of the resulting dense matrix to develop fast solvers. This
research is applicable to numerical simulation of radiation hydrodynamics and
modeling of wave propagation in random media.&lt;br/&gt;Further applications in
inverse problems that are modeled by RTE, such as optical tomography,
photoacoustic tomography, ﬂuorescence imaging, etc., will be studied as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.