* 2012117
* Precision Measurements with Laser-Cooled Cadmium: Optical-Lattice Clock and Cold Collision Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kurt Gibble, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 592,185.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
experimental techniques for optical-frequency atomic clocks based on Cadmium, an
attractive candidate for the next generation of primary atomic clocks and an
anticipated redefinition of international atomic time. Atomic clocks realize the
most accurate measurements of any type. The small tick-rate differences and the
short time intervals that atomic clocks routinely measure have wide-ranging
applications, including the Global Positioning System (GPS), secure financial
transactions, and official U.S. and international time. Scientific applications
of atomic clocks include tests of general relativity and fundamental physics,
geodesy, long baseline interferometry, and metrology. Atomic clocks address
questions such as whether fundamental constants, for example the ratio of the
mass of an electron and the mass of a proton, change in time. Just after the big
bang, were fundamental constants different than they are now? The attractiveness
of Cadmium atoms for highly accurate clocks and other precision measurements
stems from an insensitivity of a suitable excitation of the atoms to thermal
radiation from room-temperature surroundings, a limitation for many atomic
clocks. Additionally, a practical aspect is that the lasers needed to make a
Cadmium clock are expected to be more reliable than for other clock species with
small thermal sensitivities. Cadmium also has a long series of eight isotopes,
which have significantly different atom-atom collisions at the low temperatures
used in clocks, within a millionth of a degree of absolute zero. The Cadmium
isotopes include multiple bosons and fermions, which have different behaviors at
ultra-cold temperatures. At such temperatures, the quantum-mechanical nature of
atomic gases becomes evident and the basic science of these gases is of broad
interest in modern physics research. The project will also provide training of
graduate students in many areas of modern technology, including lasers, non-
linear optics, the generation of coherent ultraviolet light, radio-frequency and
microwave techniques, ultra-high vacuum, and atomic clocks and frequency
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals for this research program include
studying the ultracold scattering properties of the cadmium isotopes and
investigating the frequency shifts due to the optical lattice light in a variety
of lattice configurations. The lattice light frequency shifts depend non-
linearly on the intensity due to magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole
transitions, and the small hyperpolarizability of cadmium from two-photon
transitions. Different lattice configurations can reduce tunneling between
lattice sites at low lattice intensities, leading to smaller Doppler and lattice
light shifts. The different configurations allow the light shifts to be studied
to subsequently improve the accuracy of clocks. Another important component of
the project is collaborations with atomic clock groups around the world, for
example, to evaluate the accuracies of primary atomic clocks that contribute to
International Atomic Time (TAI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.