* 2012362
* Creating Validated Learning Objectives to Improve Course Design and Student Outcomes in Introductory Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Scott Freeman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 598,031.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping the United States
meet the need for qualified STEM professionals and scientifically literate
citizens. Learning objectives are statements of what students should know and be
able to do after instruction. In a well-designed science course, the curriculum
and the exams and other assessments are tightly linked to learning objectives.
However, no widely accepted set of learning objectives has been developed for
introductory college biology for majors or nonmajors, even though these
foundational courses are some of the most important in undergraduate STEM
education. This project will engage over 300 biology faculty nationwide in
creating a comprehensive set of learning objectives for these courses. In
addition, it will 1) produce a user’s guide to support instructors who are new
to implementing learning objectives, 2) publish an analysis of how learning
objectives and course goals compare in the majors and nonmajors courses, and 3)
launch the first large-scale study of how and why college science faculty begin
incorporating learning objectives into their courses. Widespread use of learning
objectives has the potential to improve the design of introductory biology
courses for majors and nonmajors, which nationally enroll over 500,000 students
each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Backward course design is a fundamental
component of scientific teaching and begins with explicit lists of overall
course goals and more-granular learning objectives. College biology faculty and
students have already benefitted from the general course goals articulated by
the 2011 Vision and Change Report and the BioCore and BioSkills Guides. This
project will complement and extend this previous work by producing the first
nationally validated set of learning objectives for majors and non-majors
introductory biology courses. These learning objectives will be drafted,
revised, and validated through an iterative process conducted with focus groups
and national surveys designed to incorporate feedback from over 300 faculty
members representing a diversity of institution types and locations. Once
consensus learning objectives are established for each course, the project team
will analyze how the goals of majors and nonmajors courses differ and use
interviews, focus groups, and surveys to research how biology faculty at
different types of institutions across the U.S. are using learning objectives in
their courses. The goal is to open a new field of inquiry on 1) how faculty
design their courses, and 2) how using learning objectives and other elements of
backward course design affects student performance. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.