* 2012995
* Probing the Standard Model with Parity-Violating Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Our current understanding of how particles and forces interact is called ‘The
Standard Model” of physics. But is there physics beyond the standard model? This
question will be addressed by a precision measurement of the weak charge of the
electron in a collaborative experiment at the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport News, Virginia. The electron’s
weak charge is the weak force analog of the common electric charge of the
electron, and it is precisely predicted in the Standard Model. Any deviation of
the measurement from this prediction could be evidence of yet undiscovered
massive particles that represent new physics beyond our current understanding.
The anticipated activities cover a range of hardware and software tasks that
will provide excellent training for the students working on the project. This
training in fundamental research provides a strong basis for careers both in
basic research and in more applied research and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds provided by this project will support activities
on the MOLLER experiment. MOLLER is an approved experiment at Jefferson Lab that
takes advantage of the recent 12 GeV energy upgrade for the accelerator. The
experiment will measure the electron’s neutral weak charge by making a precision
measurement of the parity-violating asymmetry in the elastic scattering of
polarized electrons on unpolarized electrons at a very low momentum transfer.
This will result in a determination of the weak mixing angle at low energy with
a precision comparable to the best determinations from high energy colliders. It
will have excellent sensitivity to physics scenarios that extend beyond the
Standard Model. During the period of this project, our group will make important
contributions to this experiment: including development and construction of the
scattered beam monitor system, development and construction of the scanner
system, coordination of the MOLLER beamline including beam charge monitor
upgrades and beam modulation system, installation of a halo monitor system, and
simulation design studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.