* 2012002
* RUI: The Three-Dimensional Momentum and Spin Structure of the Nucleon in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alexey Prokudin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 192,640.00

The visible universe is made up of nucleons: protons and neutrons, and
electrons. Nucleons themselves are interacting dynamical systems of partons,
quarks and gluons, the degrees of freedom of the theory of strong interaction,
Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD). Unfolding the QCD quark and gluon structure of
nucleons is one of the highest priorities of nuclear physics. The main objective
of this project is to advance theoretical and phenomenological studies of the
three-dimensional (3D) momentum and spin structure of the nucleon in QCD and to
map its internal landscape encoded in the Transverse Momentum Dependent parton
distribution and fragmentation functions. The PI will contribute to the
education of a diverse, globally-engaged workforce with world-class skills by
providing and developing courses on modern statistics and nuclear physics,
organizing and teaching summer schools for graduate students, and running annual
workshops on the 3D structure of the nucleon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goals of this project are to precisely extract the 3D nucleon
structure and Transverse Momentum Dependent distribution and fragmentation
functions from the existing experimental data. TMDs are intimately related to
the correlations of parton spin and motion with the spin of the nucleon and
generate Spin Asymmetries in scattering processes. The project is intended to
unify existing formalisms of the description of the 3D nucleon structure, and
ultimately explore the origin of the Spin Asymmetries in various processes. The
data from past and existing facilities, such as HERMES (DESY), COMPASS (CERN),
and Jefferson Lab, BELLE (KEK), BaBar (SLAC), BESIII (Beijing), RHIC (BNL), LHC
(CERN), will be used. This study will be performed for constructing the global
QCD fit of the data and unifying collinear and TMD physics. The PI will study
TMD evolution, extract the non-perturbative input from the experimental data and
use it for the description and prediction of future data. This project will
expand the impact of the existing programs at Jefferson Lab and Brookhaven
National Laboratory, and of the future Electron Ion Collider in the USA by
performing phenomenological and theoretical studies, providing analysis,
explanation of present data, and predictions for future
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.