* 2012522
* WoU-MMA: Studies of Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Vandana Tripathi, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 7,600,000.00

The nuclear physics group at Florida State University (FSU) will use their
experimental facilities to address long-standing questions about the nuclear
reactions that take place in stars and in stellar explosions. These reactions
are responsible for producing most of the naturally occurring elements in the
universe. A second goal is to measure and understand the behavior of exotic
nuclei – isotopes that have too many neutrons or too few neutrons to be stable.
FSU researchers perform their experiments on-campus at the John D. Fox
Superconducting Accelerator Laboratory and at national facilities such as the
Facility for Rare Ion Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State University, ATLAS at
Argonne National Laboratory, and at international facilities such as TRIUMF in
Canada. The research will be performed in close collaboration with theoretical
physicists at both FSU and around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FSU
nuclear physics program supported by this grant is one of the nation’s leading
educators of nuclear scientists at both the undergraduate and Ph. D. levels. At
the undergraduate level, the Fox Laboratory will be working closely with three
four-year institutions in Florida to provide research opportunities for the
faculty at these smaller institutions and the combined effort will give a head
start on nuclear science careers for undergraduates from these institutions. The
Fox laboratory’s Ph.D. graduates work in academics, at national laboratories and
in industry. Florida State University has trained many students who now play key
roles in nuclear science, homeland security, national defense, health care,
high-tech industry, and education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The FSU researchers
supported by this grant pursue two primary scientific goals. The first goal is
to reproduce in the laboratory the nuclear reactions that take place in stellar
explosions. By using these laboratory experiments to determine the rates at
which reactions occur in exploding stars, FSU researchers hope to understand the
abundances of elements in the universe and contribute to a deeper understanding
of the star explosions as well. The second goal is to measure the behavior of
exotic nuclei – that is, isotopes in which the ratio of neutrons to protons is
unusually large or unusually small and therefore are not stable and do not occur
naturally on earth. These exotic nuclei are more weakly bound than stable
isotopes, and so their measured properties provide tight constraints on the
mechanisms that bind nuclei together and guide advances in theoretical nuclear
physics. These experiments require a combination of techniques including the use
of the following facilities which are available at FSU: an active-target
detector for radioactive-beam experiments; a new SE-SPS spectrograph facility;
and a new Clarion-2 gamma-ray detector array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.