* 2012905
* Collaborative Research: NNA Track 1:  Sustainably Navigating Arctic Pollution Through Engaging Communities (SNAP-TEC)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Peter DeCarlo, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 506,208.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cold and dark wintertime conditions
of the Arctic lead to frequent poor air quality episodes linked to local
emissions along with temperature inversions that trap pollutants in the areas
where people live. Infrastructure planning such as energy generation and
industrial activities along with residential choices of heating fuels such as
wood, fuel oil or others are critical aspects of this problem. Residents spend
the majority of their time indoors during wintertime, so most exposure to
pollutants occurs indoors. From this background, fundamental knowledge gaps were
identified in: outdoor/indoor air transport, indoor pollution sources such as
leaky heating appliances, and chemical transformation of pollutants under these
Arctic conditions. These gaps must be closed to understand the impacts of air
pollution on Arctic communities and improve community health. Sustainably
Navigating Arctic Pollution -- Through Engaging Communities (SNAP-TEC) focuses
on improving understanding of wintertime Arctic outdoor and indoor air
pollution. Discussions with community members will assist researchers in
identifying local concerns regarding air quality and in designing appropriate
sustainable development frameworks with the goal of improving air quality for
Arctic peoples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate wintertime Arctic air
pollution issues at the intersection of the natural and built environments and
social systems, SNAP-TEC uses a convergence approach that starts with a
community engagement process to build a research and co-generation of knowledge
program that has direct impacts on the community. This project has grown out of
organizing efforts under the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC)
Project activity "air Pollution in the Arctic: Climate, Environment and
Societies" (PACES) and the Alaskan Layered Pollution and Chemical Analysis
(ALPACA) project, which have documented knowledge gaps in this area (see the
ALPACA whitepaper, readily available online). SNAP-TEC brings together a multi-
disciplinary team to investigate this problem, with the center focus being a
wintertime field campaign in Fairbanks, Alaska, where the scientific and social
issues surrounding poor air quality can serve as a case study to inform practice
and policy in similar cities and villages across the broader Arctic region. The
resulting knowledge of pollution sources and chemistry, housing and pollution
control technology, and social aspects can assist New Arctic communities to plan
appropriate solutions that work for residents. Local and Indigenous peoples are
most likely to be affected by Arctic development, so our community engagement
process will include local Fairbanks residents and Alaska Native community
members. The project measures indoor and outdoor air quality using state-of-the
art instrumentation to advance fundamental understanding of air pollution
sources and chemical processes under cold and dark conditions, indoor/outdoor
air exchange and physicochemical changes to pollutants upon warming to indoor
conditions, sulfur oxidation chemistry, and toxicity of air pollution. The field
program is combined with community meetings, public participation in scientific
data collection (a.k.a. citizen science, using inexpensive air-quality sensor
monitoring) and a survey to assess public understanding of air quality, trust in
science, perceived risk and uncertainty, and support for air quality policies.
The SNAP-TEC research team involves a diverse group of natural and social
scientists and engineers with extensive student involvement to address the
problem. Through the international PACES organization, lessons learned from this
investigation will be extended to an international pan-Arctic context through
identification of fundamental processes and best practices, informing Arctic
development and future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.