* 2012114
* Puzzling out the Proton with Precision Scattering Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jan Bernauer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 419,151.00

Protons are one of the basic building blocks of matter and even 100 years after
their discovery, they are still not fully understood. In fact, the precise
radius of the proton is a puzzle and multiple measurements of this quantity do
not all agree. A precise measurement of a proton’s radius is important because
it determines the interaction with, and cross-section for scattering, other
particles. The proton’s radius even affects the atomic spectroscopy of the
hydrogen atom, which is tightly linked to the value of the Rydberg constant that
has been so critical to the interpretation of all atomic spectra, because the
electron and proton wave functions overlap and the radius is an important
parameter in determining the amount of overlap. The research supported by this
grant aims to resolve this “Proton Radius puzzle”. The Muon Proton Scattering
Experiment (MUSE) at the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland, will scatter a
beam of electrons and muons off protons to measure the shape of the proton. The
work of undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral researchers
is central to these efforts, and they will gain knowledge and experience in
precision nuclear physics experiments, modern detector and accelerator
techniques, as well as in simulation and analysis algorithms. This international
research effort will expose them to researchers from all over the world,
fostering cultural exchange and give them opportunity to develop their
communication and leadership skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MUSE will make use of
the worldwide unique beam available at the Paul Scherrer Institute to measure
the lepton-proton cross section. It is the first measurement of muon-proton
scattering that is precise enough to address the 4% effect at the heart of the
proton radius puzzle. Through the measurement of muons of both charges, as well
as electrons and positrons over a wide kinematic range, MUSE will provide
crucial data to verify the existing e-p scattering results, test radiative
corrections including two-photon-exchange by comparison of the two charges, and
search for a violation of lepton universality by comparison of the two lepton
families. Dr. Bernauer’s group will play a crucial role in the development of
the software and the analysis of the data. Additional activities with the
MAMI-A1 and MESA-MAGIX collaborations in Mainz, Germany, aim to reduce the
leading systematic uncertainties on the proton electric form factor and will
prepare a future experiment at MESA which will reduce the uncertainty of the
magnetic form factor by two orders of magnitude. This will lead to an
unprecedented precision on both the magnetic radius and the Zemach radius of the
proton. The latter quantity is also accessible in spectroscopy and is, like the
charge radius, a rare point of overlap between atomic and nuclear
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.