* 2012196
* Manufacturing of Silicon Ceramic Membranes via One-Pot Deposition and Pyrolysis of Preceramic Polymers for Water Treatment and Hydrogen Separation.
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Malancha Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 488,000.00

This grant supports research toward the development of membranes for energy
applications. Increasing access to energy sources is very important for
advancing the U.S. economy. As the demand for energy continues to increase,
hydrogen has been increasingly considered as a viable alternative energy source
for engines, turbines and fuel cells. To make this a realistic option, hydrogen
must be efficiently separated from other gases and, therefore, it is crucial to
manufacture robust inorganic ceramic membranes that can operate at high
temperatures and pressures. Current methods to fabricate these membranes are
costly, time-consuming and produce toxic waste. This award supports fundamental
research that leads to the development of a solvent-free, one-pot or single step
manufacturing process to fabricate inorganic membranes for hydrogen separation.
This new manufacturing process leads to a more cost-effective and
environmentally-friendly way to provide clean energy sources, which leads to
national prosperity and security. This award supports the education of future
scientists and engineers through outreach to K-12 students and mentorship of
undergraduate researchers. This manufacturing technology can also lead to the
development of membranes for other applications such as water purification.
Hands-on modules demonstrating the use of membranes for water purification are
developed to educate middle and high school students on the lack of access to
clean water in many parts of the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
processes for making inorganic membranes require multiple steps and organic
solvents, leading to higher cost and toxic waste. This research gains scientific
insights that allow for the development of solventless, one-pot manufacturing of
inorganic membranes. Pre-ceramic polymers are deposited in a reactor using a
solvent-free process that requires very low energy and mild reactor conditions
and employs a broad range of monomers to generate a variety of polymer films.
Deposition of a dense, thin polymer layer on top of a macroporous silicon
carbide support is ideal for creating high-quality nanoporous ceramic membranes
for efficient hydrogen separation. A low vapor pressure liquid barrier layer,
which itself serves as a ceramic precursor, is placed on the support before
polymer deposition in order to prevent infiltration of the monomer into the
support and thus avoid negatively impacting the permeation characteristics of
the resulting membrane. Pyrolysis of these films is conducted in the same
reactor, hence one-pot, to produce reliable ceramic membranes with lower risk of
contamination. The research generates understanding of mechanistic insights on
bond cleavage and formation during pyrolysis. Experimental efforts are coupled
to multi-scale modeling studies to understand the fundamental reaction and
transport processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.