* 2012766
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for In-Situ Control of the Nitrogen Cycle (In-SINC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/31/2019,08/31/2020
* Gerardine Botte, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 41,587.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. This planning grant will
develop well-formulated plans for a future Engineering Research Center for In-
Situ Control of the Nitrogen Cycle. The program combines expertise in
engineering, chemistry, data science and analytics, environmental science, and
social and policy science, and establishes a flexible and robust process to
identify and engage stakeholders. These stakeholders span academia, industry,
and government, and will collaborate in the planning grant to define convergent
research themes within four primary thrusts: (1) distributed fertilizer
manufacturing, (2) efficient and controlled application of nitrogen fertilizer,
(3) fertilizer recycling, and (4) nitrogen cycles as social-ecological systems.
Development within these themes provides a platform for a sustainable "closed
loop approach" for 21st century food supply, where nitrogenous fertilizers are
efficiently produced, applied, and recycled at or near the site of application.
Information gathered from the core team and stakeholders during the initial
stages of the planning process will be developed into a formal set of technical
goals within each of the four thrust areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the potential to advance knowledge in the distributed small-scale ammonia
production, the availability of nitrogen flow and application models, knowledge
of soil and water chemistry and nitrogen-based environmental effects, and
achieving a heightened understanding of the interface of technologies with
socio-ecological systems. The proposed program establishes the necessary
convergence approach required to address these challenges, while narrowing focus
to challenges related to fertilizer inefficiencies, and to engineering-based
approaches and adoption. The program brings broad expertise, including expertise
required to link technology efforts with societal impact, establishes
convergence research themes, and develops metrics appropriate for measuring
progress towards these themes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over-production and
application of nitrogen fertilizer in the developed world is responsible for a
broad range of deleterious environmental effects, even while agriculture in the
developing world suffers from a lack of bioavailable nitrogen. The planning
grant catalyzes a process to solve challenges related to fertilizer production,
application, and recycling, with additional focus on the regulatory and economic
factors that ultimately connect engineering innovation with societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.