* 2012039
* Interacting Atoms in Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 683,734.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frontier of the
technological application of quantum mechanics involves taking advantage of
quantum entanglement, where the detailed interactions among particles are of
central importance. Such emerging technologies include quantum simulators,
quantum computers and quantum communication, as well as advanced versions of
older quantum technologies like quantum sensors and clocks. Advancing these
technologies requires understanding the dynamics of closed ‘quantum many-body
systems,’ i.e. systems containing many particles which interact with each other
and where quantum mechanics is important. The goal of this work is to help
develop a universal description of such dynamics. The researchers will
experimentally study the quantum many-body system that currently has the most
complete equilibrium theoretical description, one-dimensional gases, which they
make by putting ultracold atoms into optical lattices (periodic structures made
from laser light). By taking these gases out of equilibrium, in situations where
entanglement dominates dynamics, they can cleanly test emerging theoretical
approaches. The experimental system can be made progressively more complex, so
that the theories used to describe them can encompass a wide range of non-
equilibrium systems. The largest immediate impact is likely to be in our
understanding of the reliability of quantum simulators and the robustness of
quantum computers. The training in experimental physics obtained by
undergraduates and graduate students working on this experiment is comprehensive
and is good preparation for many different types of experimental
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI and his students will perform a series of measurements on one-dimensional
(1D) Bose gases, which consist of ultra-cold 87Rb atoms trapped in a 2D array of
tubes that are made with a 2D optical lattice. These interacting many-body
systems are integrable, which implies that they are characterized by a large set
of extra conserved quantities. The experiments generally involve taking these
systems out of equilibrium and studying the ensuing dynamics. Unlike generic
many-body quantum systems, the equilibrium properties of 1D gases can be
calculated exactly. Their non-equilibrium properties, however, have been a
challenge to calculate. A recently developed numerical technique, generalized
hydrodynamics (GHD), promises to describe, to within certain approximations, the
dynamics of integrable systems. GHD is based upon keeping track of the evolving
local distribution of ‘rapidities’, which are the momenta associated with the
quasiparticles that emerge in integrable systems. These important but abstract
objects have only recently been measured (by the PI’s team) and the team plans
to measure them in a much more diverse set of circumstances. With these
measurements will come the ability to quantitatively test GHD for the first time
in the interesting intermediate and strong coupling regimes. They will also
study the border at which GHD becomes applicable, by measuring the evolution of
momentum and rapidity distributions after a wavefunction quench. Finally, they
propose to extend these studies to a 1D gas in a weak lattice, a non-integrable
system for which GHD might also be a useful description, at least at relatively
short times. The search for a universal description of dynamics in quantum many-
body systems is an important physics frontier, and GHD holds the promise of
providing its core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.