* 2012216
* RUI: Commutativity in Numerical Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Brian Sutton, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 64,552.00

This project concerns consistency in scientific inferences. Multiple
observations of the same phenomenon rarely produce identical results.
Statistical noise may be the first complication that comes to mind, but there
are plenty of other possible discrepancies as well: different antenna
arrangements; different camera angles; different modalities, e.g., images and
text; and more. Inferring the true underlying phenomenon requires sophisticated
mathematics. This project focuses on matrix methods. Hiding within the simple
numerical entries of a matrix are intricate patterns called eigenvectors that
are connected to the harmonics of musical instruments. Even though different
kinds of measurements may produce different numerical values, they may share the
same eigenvectors when observing the same objects. One of the goals of the
project is to pull consistency out of inconsistent data. In theory, measurements
on the same object from different instruments should agree in certain ways, but
because of statistical noise and other sources of error and uncertainty, each
instrument provides an inexact view of the world, and the two instruments will
not agree perfectly with each other. The goal is to bring the measurements into
alignment using mathematics and therefore likely into better agreement with the
true state of the universe. The project will be completed at a Primarily
Undergraduate Institution, and introducing undergraduate students to research in
STEM fields is a primary objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical focus
of the project is simultaneous diagonalization of commuting Hermitian matrices.
In theory, commuting Hermitian matrices share a common eigenvector matrix.
However, numerically-computed eigenvectors may differ wildly in the presence of
ill conditioning. A numerical method for simultaneous diagonalization seeks,
either explicitly or implicitly, small perturbations of the input matrices that
commute exactly. The project objectives include contributions to theory, method,
and application. First, a reconsideration of "near commutativity" is planned, in
which eigenvalues are fixed in place and attention shifts from the space of
Hermitian matrices to the unitary group of eigenvector matrices. Second, the
project will pursue new numerical methods for simultaneous diagonalization,
motivated in part by relatively recent spectral divide-and-conquer methods.
Third, the new approaches will be applied to applications such as independent
component analysis and unsupervised machine learning with multimodal
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.