* 2012147
* Collaborative Research: Connecting Spins-First Quantum Mechanics Instruction to Quantum Information Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bethany Wilcox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 482,039.00

Quantum information science (QIS) is a rapidly growing area of research that can
revolutionize many aspects of our lives. Recently, the United States government
committed resources to ensure that the USA remains a QIS leader in both research
and industry. This effort has led to a growing number of QIS education
initiatives at institutions around the country. QIS education presents some
unique challenges, as QIS is a diverse field that will draw students from many
different disciplines, including physics, electrical and computer engineering,
mathematics, and chemistry. These students will need to speak the common
language of quantum mechanics (QM). While physics students will have had a QM
course during their degree, many other students will not have this preparation.
One of the award goals is to support students without prior quantum mechanics
instruction in learning the QM concepts necessary for QIS. The second goal of
this award is to increase the number of students who have the opportunity to
learn about QIS by developing instructional materials instructors can use in
their traditional quantum mechanics courses. Both of these efforts will be
supported by research into student understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award aims to support students without prior quantum mechanics instruction in
learning the QM concepts necessary for QIS courses. The award will increase the
number of students who can learn about QIS by developing instructional
materials. The work utilizes existing models for the development and
distribution of new and innovative curricular materials that can serve
instructors' needs. The effectiveness of these materials will be established by
direct assessment as an integrated part of their development and pilot
implementation. The curricula materials developed by this project will
facilitate the incorporation of QIS into existing courses. The materials will be
produced at multiple institutions with a diverse population of students who
better reflect the broader population. The advisory board for this award brings
expertise in collaborative dissemination, content, industrial needs, pedagogy,
and curriculum development. This knowledge will be used to ensure that the
materials developed by this project are effectively designed and disseminated to
ensure maximum impact on undergraduate and graduate physics and QIS
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE:
EHR) program in NSF's Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE), is providing co-funding for this
project in recognition of its contribution to improving the effectiveness of
STEM education for college and university students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.