* 2012430
* Studies of Light Meson Structure and Validation of the Exclusive Reaction Mechanism
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Tanja Horn, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Understanding the nature of matter in terms of its basic building blocks, how
these interact and form the elements and properties we observe, is one of the
mysteries of the universe. Nuclear physics research is fundamental to our
understanding of all forms of matter and how this knowledge can benefit society
in the areas of national health, prosperity and welfare, and national security.
This research program at The Catholic University of America is focused on
studying and comparing the underlying quark-gluon structure of the basic
building blocks of the atomic nucleus: its protons, neutrons, pions and kaons.
This research contributes significantly to educating the future advanced STEM
workforce through training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
in state-of-the art instrumentation and machine-learning-informed software
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims at deepening the
understanding of the lightest subatomic particles, the pions and kaons - their
form factors, their structure functions, and their masses, and at providing
measurements to validate the framework for 3D hadron imaging. The program
focuses in the near and intermediate term on Jefferson Lab 12 GeV, and in the
long term on the US-based Electron-Ion Collider (EIC). The experimental method
uses beams of highly energetic electrons and/or photons to probe the deep inside
of a hadron through exclusive and semi-inclusive scattering processes. Young
scientists and students at all levels play an integral part in this project,
which provides opportunities to gain experience in the design, assembly, and
testing of modern subatomic particle detectors, fast signal processing
electronics, and scientific data analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.