* 2012479
* EAGER: Data-driven Physical Model for Hurricanes' Intensity-size Relation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Ming Cai, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 179,172.00

Hurricanes are among the most deadly and destructive storms impacting the United
States, causing losses of life, devastating damages to buildings and
infrastructures, and enormous financial losses. Both hurricanes’ intensity and
size are the key factors determining their severity and destructive capability.
Therefore, accurate prediction of hurricanes’ intensity and size is essential to
general public and government officials. Observed hurricanes exhibit very rich
and complex intensity-size relations. Even after taking the differences in the
radius of the maximum wind into consideration, hurricanes with the same maximum
wind can still have various sizes or hurricanes with the same size can have a
large range of intensity. The existing empirical and theoretical models,
however, tend to predict a nearly one-to-one relation between hurricanes’
intensity and size after taking the differences in the radius of the maximum
wind into consideration. The goal of this project is to develop a data-driven
physical model whose solutions can reproduce the rich and complex intensity-size
relations of observed hurricanes. A successful project will lead to a better
understanding of the physics governing hurricanes’ intensity-size relations.
This project will provide a powerful tool to identify the major deficiencies in
reproducing the rich and complex intensity-size relation by operational forecast
models, leading to an improvement in forecasts and public safety and economic
benefits. This project will train a postdoc in fields of atmospheric dynamics
and data science and support STEM education by working with two undergraduate
students on their honor theses research. The PIs will actively engage with North
Florida Chapter of the American Meteorological Society and provide our
experimental real time assessment of hurricanes’ intensity to the Florida State
University/Tallahassee communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take
a novel approach that combines theories and data-driven techniques to build a
new model for the hurricanes’ intensity-size relation. Specifically, the PIs
will utilize data analysis techniques to explore what are the factors
controlling the variation of inward radial velocity among different hurricanes
and then link these factors to the variation of hurricanes’ angular momentum
loss. Another novelty of this project is that the developed model will be
validated by examining its ability to predict the radial profile of azimuthal
wind both inwardly from the boundary condition at outer radii and outwardly from
the boundary condition at inner radii. Such exchangeability of the predictends
and predictors allows ones to test whether the data-driven model possesses the
quality of physical laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.