* 2012982
* RUI: Hadron Structure and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Mary Alberg, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 191,590.00

The determination of proton structure is important for understanding matter in
the universe, and a central challenge for theoretical nuclear physics. The
proton is constructed from basic building blocks of matter called quarks,
antiquarks (antimatter counterparts of the quarks) and gluons, but the ways in
which these constituents contribute to the properties of the proton are not
completely understood. For example, the proton has a property called spin, which
is used in medical applications such as MRI scans, but it is not known how the
spins of the quarks and gluons combine to give the spin of the proton. In this
project the PI will use new theoretical models of the fluctuation of protons
into two-particle states to describe the contributions of quarks and antiquarks
created (the proton sea) to the properties of the proton. The results will be
compared to experimental measurements from Fermilab, Jefferson Lab, RHIC (the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider) and other facilities. Undergraduate students
will participate in the project, receive training in nuclear and particle
physics, and gain experience in research methods and scientific communication.
The students will present their work at professional meetings and to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this project are: (i) to
build a hybrid model for the momentum distributions of the antiquarks in the
proton sea by combining a new model for pion-nucleon wave functions, derived by
the PI from light-front perturbation theory, with a new statistical model for
the momentum distributions of the quarks and antiquarks in the bare proton (no
fluctuation) and in the pions and baryons created in the fluctuation states;
(ii) to extend this framework to calculate spin distributions in the proton sea
by including the contribution of vector mesons to the fluctuations; and (iii) to
study the effects of using a new pion-nucleon form factors in calculations of
nucleon elastic electromagnetic and axial form factors. The results of the
Fermilab SeaQuest experiment will test a hybrid model, and thereby the role of
the pion in contributing to the nucleon sea. The extension of the formalism to
describe vector meson fluctuations will contribute a new meson cloud model to
confront the RHIC experimental measurements of spin asymmetry. The form-factor
study will increase the understanding of the role of the pion in pion-nucleon
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.