* 2012269
* Collaborative Research:  Efficient, Accurate, and Structure-Preserving Numerical Methods for Phase Fields-Type Models with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Cheng Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The project will develop computational methods for simulations of phase
transformations in materials at the atomic and nanometer scales, aiming at
understanding behavior at large time scales. With these simulations, the project
will contribute to the understanding of processes such as complex biological
growth and cancer, multi-phase active-particle and ionic fluids relevant in
biological growth and development, and in the study of other complex phenomena
in physics, and material engineering. The focus will be on a particular class of
models: gradient flow equations with singular energy potentials. The project
will develop theory and software; the codes developed in this project will be
scaled up to conduct real-world three-dimensional simulations. In addition, some
numerical algorithms to be developed could impact the field of deep learning.
This project will provide interdisciplinary applied mathematics and scientific
computing training and research experiences for both graduate and undergraduate
students at the two institutions involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed
gradient flow models, a singularity is involved in the energy potential, so that
the positivity-preserving property becomes a crucial feature to make the
numerical approximation well-defined. In addition, energy stability and optimal
rate convergence analysis will be considered for these gradient model with
singular energy potential, such as the doubly degenerate Cahn-Hilliard model
describing surface diffusion, a new phase field crystal model with heat
transport for simulating solidification, a new quasi-incompressible Cahn-
Hilliard-Navier-Stokes model for two-phase density mismatched flow, the Poisson-
Nernst-Plank model for ionic mixtures, and multi-phase magneto-hydrodynamics
equations. Novel finite difference, mixed finite element, and/or Fourier pseudo-
spectral spatial approximations will be utilized. Convergence analysis up to the
third order temporal accuracy will be investigated in details, which will be the
first such work for gradient flows with singular potential. Moreover, numerical
solvers for these highly nonlinear schemes will be designed and analyzed, based
on the preconditioned steepest decent and Nesterov accelerated methods. Highly
efficient adaptive nonlinear multigrid methods based will also be tested and
studied in details.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.