* 2012891
* Expanding Sustainable Interdisciplinary Research to Inspire Undergraduate Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Linda Zarzana, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,679,250.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing STEM curricula
that promote inclusion of all learners and foster interdisciplinary problem-
solving skills. Issues faced by society today are complex, and STEM graduates
with diverse perspectives and real-world problem-solving skills are needed to
solve them. These skills may be developed through undergraduate research or
internships, but access to these experiences can be limited and unevenly
available. This project will engage students at California State University,
Sacramento and the four Los Rios District community colleges in course-based
Authentic Learning Experiences. These learning experiences will engage students
in the same processes that professionals use in the field to solve problems with
unknown outcomes. The learning experiences further focus on the common
scientific theme of human impacts on Northern California’s waterways, thus
engaging students in a local, socially relevant problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, more than 50 faculty teaching 67
courses at five institutions will engage in an interdisciplinary, faculty-led
community of practice with a shared vision for STEM education reform. The
faculty learning community aims to 1) elevate faculty expertise in curriculum
design and innovative pedagogies, 2) promote collaboration across disciplines
and institutions and 3) support the implementation of course-based authentic
learning experiences to broaden participation in research experiences. The
project will examine how faculty across different disciplines and institution
types collaborate to build, implement, and assess new curricula. It will further
provide data on the impacts of experiential curricula on students from ten
disciplines, as well as seek to generate new knowledge about Northern
California’s water ecosystems. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.