* 2012081
* Catalyst Award: Tuskegee University CURES
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Deloris Alexander, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,990.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Tuskegee University will provide research opportunities in undergraduate course
work. The students will engage in research projects, collect and interpret data
and present their findings to audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the
Tuskegee CUREs (Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences in STEM) project
lies in its ability to provide authentic research experiences to early career
college students as a part of undergraduate STEM courses, equipping them with
strong research interests, fostering integrative or interdisciplinary learning,
and to improving research skills. As a result of this effort, the over-arching
goal/objective of this proposed project is to increase the opportunities for
undergraduate students to increase both the number and percentage of
undergraduate students who have science knowledge/technical skills, persist to
graduation, and obtain advanced degrees in STEM disciplines. These
goals/objectives will be accomplished by 1) increasing undergraduate
participation in authentic research experiences by infusing traditional courses
with CUREs; 2) fostering the develop of inquiry and scientific communication
skills; 3) improving the persistence and retention of undergraduate students in
STEM degree programs (especially freshmen) by using introductory biology CUREs
to create learning communities; and 4) improving the persistence and retention
of undergraduate students in STEM fields (especially freshmen) by using research
experiences to foster/support the critical transition of undergraduates to
graduate school and other STEM careers. The success of the Tuskegee CUREs
project will contribute to increasing diversity in the STEM workforce, while
serving as a model for such programs at other HBCUs. This project is jointly
funded by HBCU-UP and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.