* 2012850
* Network Cluster CINet: Critical Interface Network in Intensively Managed Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Allison Goodwell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,757,247.00

Agricultural lands throughout the world are intensively managed to achieve high
levels of crop production. In the US Midwest, intensive management includes
frequent working of the soil through tillage, widespread application of
fertilizers, and efforts to improve the flow of water off of flat, poorly
drained fields by installing pipes within the soil and by enlarging streams.
Although these activities enhance crop production, over time they induce changes
that can degrade the environmental quality of soil and water, not only locally
but far downstream. Sustaining agricultural production while protecting
environmental quality depends on an understanding of how natural processes are
linked with intensive landscape management. This project seeks to advance
understanding of important elements that act as “Critical Interfaces” and play
important roles in regulating hydrological, biological, ecological, geological,
and chemical processes on which agricultural production and environmental
quality depend. Important critical interfaces examined in the project include
the soil surface, the root zone in the soil, and river corridors. The project
examines the extent to which these critical interfaces are interconnected and
control the response of the environment. Using a network of observational sites
across the US Midwest having different climates, topography, geologic history,
and other landscape attributes, this project will provide a comprehensive
understanding of how various components of intensively managed landscapes
function together to influence, and be influenced by, high levels of
agricultural production. The outcomes of this research will provide basic
knowledge and new predictive capabilities for developing sustainable and
resilient agro-ecosystems. The project will contribute to society by developing
a strong STEM workforce that can tackle multidisciplinary issues, establishing
programs to engage community members in critical zone science, communicating
results to the public, and facilitating venues for professional development and
certifications, and working with citizen groups and stakeholders to communicate
findings and gather feedback throughout the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical zone dynamics in intensively managed
landscapes (IMLs) do not operate uniformly over time and space. They are
intermittent and concentrated at critical interfaces (CIs) of exceptional
importance for regulating material (i.e., water, sediment, carbon and nutrients)
storage, transport and transformations. The central hypothesis of this research
is that the dynamics of critical interfaces exert disproportionately large
control on the overall dynamics of critical zones at the landscape scale; and
since these critical interfaces are undergoing rapid and co-evolutionary
transition due to human and weather stressors across spatial and temporal
scales, they constitute the most limiting elements for predictive understanding
to guide sustainable management of IMLs. Using a network of observational sites
across key environmental gradients, with novel data analytic and integrated
modeling approaches, this project will advance understanding of critical
interfaces individually as well as their interdependencies to overcome
predictability bottlenecks of hydrobiogeochemical phenomena and their
trajectories in IMLs from the small scale to the landscape scale, and from the
event time scale to seasonal, inter-annual and decadal time scales. The study
focuses on three interfaces that are strongly influenced by human action: the
near-land surface, the active root zone, and the stream corridor. The project
leverages existing infrastructure and knowledge from a network of sites in the
glaciated parts of US Midwest and outer reaches of the upper Mississippi River
basin, as well as critical zone international networks. The sites, which include
CZOs, LTARs and the Great Rivers Ecological Observation Network, incorporate a
wide range of geologic, weather, soil, land use and geomorphologic gradients.
Synthesis of this work will offer new predictive capability to earthcast
critical zone dynamics across the globe to advance convergent research of the
human influence on life-sustaining resources and improve our ability to
significantly reduce predictive uncertainty and advance environmental
sustainability goals. In collaboration with the National Great Rivers Research
and Education Center, a program of Lewis and Clark Community College in Godfrey,
Illinois, the project will further provide training and education for
postdoctoral associates, undergraduate and graduate students, community-college
students, and high-school teachers, while engaging stakeholders and members of
the broader communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Critical Zone Collaborative Network, Geobiology and Low-Temperature
Geochemistry, Hydrologic Sciences, and Geomorphology and Land-Use Dynamics
programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.