* 2012040
* Windows on the Universe: Study of Open Quantum Systems in Atomic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Bradley Sherrill, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,800,000.00

This award supports research to understand how protons and neutrons interact
when they are in a nucleus having far more neutrons than protons, also known as
rare isotopes. These neutron-rich rare isotopes straddle the limit of existence,
which defines the neutron drip line, where protons and neutrons no longer form a
nucleus because they become energetically unbound. The structure and properties
of these isotopes are relevant for understanding astrophysical processes. This
research will be conducted at scientific user facilities including the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL), soon to become the Facility for
Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB). Part of this research program will be performed with
the MoNA detector and the MoNA Collaboration, which consists of a group of
undergraduate institutions that has had a major impact on recruiting students to
STEM fields. The award includes support for students and faculty from HBCUs and
other Minority Serving Institutions to go to NSCL/FRIB and collaborate on
experiments for two-week long periods in the summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports experimental studies of weakly bound atomic nuclei in order to
test nuclear models that are relevant to understanding open quantum systems and
astrophysical processes in the universe. Proper modeling and understanding of
continuum effects are important in the era of multi-messenger astronomy where
nuclear properties, such as binding energies, are relevant for interpreting
optical, neutrino, and gravitational-wave observations. It will address
fundamental questions, such as what combination of neutrons and protons can form
an atomic nucleus and perhaps double our knowledge of the neutron drip line. The
team will use the powerful tools of the MoNA Collaboration along with the wide
range of new nuclei accessible at FRIB to measure properties of unbound states.
New techniques will be developed to exploit quasi-elastic proton removal
reactions to probe states near the particle emission threshold and the structure
of weakly-bound nuclei. Finally, due to the open-quantum nature of the states of
interest, the reaction mechanism to produce these states becomes an important
part of the measurement. The role of the reaction mechanism in the context of
open quantum systems will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses
and advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.