* 2012897
* Engineering Development for Establishing IsoDAR
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Janet Conrad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This award provides funds for the Research and Development and engineering
necessary to bring the IsoDAR (Isotope Decay-at-Rest) project from the current
Conceptual Design Report (CDR) stage to a Preliminary Design Report (PDR) stage.
IsoDAR is a novel, pure anti-electron-neutrino source that, when paired with a
large hydrogen-based, underground detector, allows for state-of-the-art Beyond-
Standard-Model searches for sterile neutrinos and non-standard neutrino
interactions. While the standard electron, muon, and tau neutrinos (and
antineutrinos) interact with matter through two forces (the weak force and
gravity), sterile neutrinos, if they exist, might interact only through gravity.
Searches for light sterile neutrinos with mass on the order of one electron Volt
are motivated by observed anomalies in several experiments. A positive result
from IsoDAR that could explain these anomalies would transform the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A centerpiece Broader Impact for this award is the
possibility for developing an isotope production cyclotron. A modest redesign of
the IsoDAR accelerator can be applied to the production of medical isotopes at
levels that are hundreds to thousands of times higher than present production
facilities, potentially saving many lives. For workforce training, the groups
are committed to bringing under-represented groups into the STEM Ô¨Åeld and plan
to integrate undergraduates into the IsoDAR hardware and development projects. A
main part of undergraduate participation is the summer research programs, which
include a very successful Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IsoDAR cyclotron and neutrino
production target are creative, original, and transformative. To meet the
physics goals, the cyclotron will capture, accelerate, and extract 5 mA of H+2
(10 mA of protons), which is an order of magnitude beyond current cyclotrons.
The novel targeting, cooling, and neutrino production, besides producing an
unprecedented rate of electron antineutrinos for experimentation, will also pave
new ground for accelerator and target technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.