* 2012792
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Best Practices of Instructors who Have Narrowed Performance Gaps in Undergraduate Student Achievement in Introductory STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Elli Theobald, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,340,085.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
student achievement in introductory STEM courses. It will do so by identifying
classroom practices that enable a greater number of students to thrive in these
courses. Whether or not a person completes a four-year undergraduate degree is a
primary driver of income levels. Thus, barriers to earning degrees can present
significant obstacles to socioeconomic mobility in the United States. One such
barrier is successful completion of introductory STEM courses. Persistence in
these courses varies even in STEM disciplines in which students from under-
represented groups enter the major at the same rates as their majority peers.
Persistence of students is affected by how their instructors teach. For example,
incorporating active learning methods in introductory STEM courses can increase
student achievement and lower performance gaps. However, not all implementations
of active learning are equally effective for supporting these outcomes. A meta-
analysis of over 46,000 students in a wide array of STEM courses compared
student outcomes in lecture-based versus active learning classrooms. Active
learning reduced achievement gaps in exam scores by an average of 40% and the
gap in failure rates by 75%. Surprisingly, some active learning interventions
widened achievement gaps, raising questions about why the variation exists.
Findings from the literature point to two complementary elements of the
classroom experience that are necessary to close achievement gaps: (1) an
inclusive environment where all students believe they can be successful, which
primes them to meaningfully engage; and (2) active learning that follows best
practices for how people learn. This project team aims to identify and test the
impact of specific elements of classroom culture and course design that
effectively narrow achievement gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three
aims: (1) Generate an explanatory model of achievement gaps by identifying and
measuring a set of critical elements for closing these gaps in 12 courses
identified in a meta-analysis that either narrowed or widened achievement gaps;
(2) Establish generalizability of critical elements on achievement gaps by
training and validating a predictive model on a national sample of 40 additional
introductory courses from a wide array of institution types; (3) Develop,
evaluate, and promote a Practitionerâ€™s Toolkit for Closing Achievement Gaps.
This Toolkit will include instructor and student questionnaires that feed
directly to a data processing application that fits the predictive model for
unique classrooms. In addition, the Toolkit will include self-reflection
activities to promote engagement with the personalized results of the predictive
model and a guidebook for improvement that explains implementation of each
critical element. Thus, this project intends to produce a novel set of tools
that instructors can use to enhance student performance in higher education,
helping to make a four-year degree attainable by all students. The tools
developed by the project will be freely available online and disseminated
through invited seminars, workshops, and presentations at national meetings. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.