* 2012647
* Quantitative Analysis of Single Cell Learning
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Jennifer Fung, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2023
* USD 737,438.00

Learning is assumed to require a brain, but even very simple animals are capable
of learning. Even single cells have been shown to display primitive types of
learning, but how such learning takes place, without a nervous system, is
currently not understood. In this project, a giant single cell organism,
Stentor, will be used to explore how a single cell can learn. Stentor cells are
preyed upon in their natural habitat but can escape from attack by contracting
into a ball when touched, but this contraction burns up energy. For a Stentor
cell sitting on a pond plant, it will often get tapped by pond plants or small
algae that are not threatening. In deciding whether or not to contract when
touched, the Stentor cell relies on past experience. The cells learn to ignore
light, non-threatening touches, and only contract when hit with a larger
aggressive force. In an analogous way, humans living by a railroad track get
used to the train and they donâ€™t jump when they hear it go by. This kind of
learning is seen in all animals, but it is usually displayed in those with a
nervous system. Can single cells learn? If so, how? Single Stentor cells grown
in the lab will be videotaped as they contract in response to a mechanical
force, and the response will be measured when different genes are shut down.
This will reveal how the cell learns at a molecular level. At the same time, a
simple mathematical model of behavior will be used to: a) predict genes that are
involved in sensing when touched; b) identify genes that are involved in driving
the contraction; and c) identify how the cell decides whether or not to
contract. This project will show, for the first time, how a single cell is able
to learn. Broader Impact activities will include the interdisciplinary training
of students along with public outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells
integrate multiple inputs and select between different behavioral responses, in
some cases seeming to learn from experience. The computational processes by
which cells process information to generate appropriate behaviors remain poorly
understood. Learning is usually considered to be a feature of multicellular
animals with some form of neuronal network, but the seeming ability of single
cells to learn suggests it is a more general feature of life. One of the most
tractable systems for studying learning by a single cell is Stentor coeruleus, a
giant cell that shows quantifiable behaviors in response to mechanical
stimulation. Repeated stimulation leads to habituation, in which the cell learns
to ignore a stimulus of a particular magnitude. Habituation in Stentor has been
well documented, but the mechanistic basis is unknown. In this project, an
expert on the biology of Stentor coeruleus will team up with an expert on
computational biology, to develop a quantitative understanding of how learning
takes place in a single cell. The project will combine quantitative measurements
of cell responses with a simple two-state mathematical model for cellular
learning and molecular perturbations of gene function, to ask fundamental
questions about how learning takes place, identify key molecular pathways that
underlie learning and memory in a cell, and probe the computational complexity
of cellular decision-making. Investigation of gene function will exploit
proteomic and phosphoproteomic information to identify the sensory and effector
molecules along with the signaling connections that link the stimulus to the
response. Once these elements are known, it will then be possible to determine
which aspects of the system (sensory, effector, or signaling) are modulated
during the learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.