* 2012046
* Collaborative: Novel Fast Microlocal, Domain-Decomposition Algorithms for High-Frequency Elastic Wave Modeling and Inversion in Variable Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jianliang Qian, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 215,000.00

Wave propagation is an important phenomenon in many science and engineering
disciplines. Computational wave propagation has become a fundamental, vigorously
growing technology in diverse disciplines, ranging from radar, sonar, seismic
imaging, medical imaging, submarine detection, stealth technology, remote
sensing and electronics to microscopy and nanotechnology. These applications are
important in particular for the petroleum industry, medical imaging, and
material sciences. One of the most challenging problems in computational wave
propagation is how to carry out large-scale high frequency wave propagation
efficiently and accurately. The investigators in this project will develop
novel, fast algorithms for high frequency elastic wave propagation and
inversion. In particular, they will focus on novel techniques including
microlocal-analysis and domain-decomposition based fast Huygens sweeping methods
and fast multiscale Gaussian beam methods to tackle this long-standing
challenge. Graduate students will be involved and receive interdisciplinary
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is motivated by science and
engineering applications, and it will foster innovations in several theoretical
and computational aspects. The goal is to develop efficient and accurate
Hadamard-Babich expansion based fast Huygens sweeping methods and multiscale
Gaussian wavepacket transform based fast multiscale Gaussian beams for elastic
wave propagation in variable media in the high frequency regime and in the
presence of caustics. Several thrusts will be considered. First, the proposed
new methods will address the challenges in large-scale high-frequency elastic
wave modeling and inversion in the presence of caustics. Second, advances will
be made in developing novel Hadamard-Babich expansion, domain decomposition, and
butterfly-algorithm based fast Huygens sweeping methods for partial differential
equation-based Eulerian geometrical optics and computational wave propagation.
Both the Hadamard-Babich expansion and domain-decomposition based fast Huygens
sweeping method and the fast multiscale Gaussian beam method are capable of
producing uniform asymptotic solutions beyond caustics for wave propagation in
the high-frequency regime. Third, the new methods will provide efficient tools
not used before for many elastic wave-related applications in inhomogeneous
media, such as seismic imaging and inversion, and medical imaging and
inversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.