* 2012857
* Numerical Methods for Geometric Partial Differential Equations with Applications in Numerical Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This project is concerned with the approximate solution of systems of stationary
and evolution partial differential equations (PDE) arising at the intersection
of mathematical physics and geometric analysis. Such systems of equations, known
as Geometric PDE, with both constraints and extra degrees of freedom, appear in
a wide range of physical and mathematical problems; examples include Maxwell's
equations (or more generally the Yang-Mills equations on a curved background),
and Einstein's field equations and other Hamiltonian systems. The initial-value
formulation for such systems yields a constrained evolution system which has to
be augmented with side conditions in order to get a unique evolution. The non-
dynamical geometric PDE (as constraints or otherwise) are of great interest in
their own right; examples include the Yamabe problem, the Hamiltonian and
momentum constraints in the Einstein equations, and the Monge-Ampere equations,
among others. One of the most challenging features of this class of problems,
for both mathematical analysis and computational simulation, is the underlying
spatial domain which has the structure of a manifold with potentially
complicated topology. Moreover, both the geometry and the topology may evolve
over time, depending on the particular model. The results of this project have
the potential for broad impact on areas of mathematics such as geometric
analysis, as well as in astrophysics and general relativity. The methods
developed here will contribute to the advancement of numerical methods for
complex three-dimensional constrained nonlinear dynamical simulations. The
simulation technology produced will provide powerful tools for the exploration
of mathematical and computational models in astrophysics and relativity, as well
as in some areas of pure mathematics such as geometric analysis. This project
provides research training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical aims of this project are to develop new
discretization techniques for a class of geometric PDE that includes the
Einstein equations. The emphasis is on modeling cases that present particular
challenges for current state-of-the-art methods and software currently used for
the Einstein equations, such as the case of extreme mass ration binary black
hole systems. The tools will be the development of approximation theory,
together with reliable and provably convergent adaptive methods, for the
intrinsic discretization of the class of nonlinear geometric PDE on Riemannian
2- and 3- manifolds. Most of the approaches to date, such as surface finite
element methods for two-dimensional problems, are based on exploiting the
embedding of the surface into three space, and then on use of method-of-lines
discretization for separating the space and time discetizations. For
applications such as general relativity, a more general approach is needed that
does not rely on the existence of such an embedding, and does not on an a priori
spatial slicing. This project studies the development of truly intrinsic
discretizations that use no extrinsic information to produce a discretization,
to allow for the development of numerical methods for evolution PDE on
Riemannian 2- and 3-manifolds with arbitrary topology and without imposing an a
priori discrete spatial slicing. The approach is to develop atlas-based
discretization techniques and space-time discretizations based on explicit tent-
pitching methods or fully implicit space-time discetizations. For the design of
such methods and their analysis, researchers will exploit variational crimes
frameworks developed by their team and collaborators for analyzing numerical
methods posed on surfaces, and through use of the finite element exterior
calculus framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.