* 2012940
* Investigating the Nucleon with Electromagnetic Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Evangeline Downie, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Protons are one of the basic building blocks of matter and even 100 years after
their discovery, they are still not fully understood. In fact, the precise
radius of the proton is a puzzle and multiple measurements of this quantity do
not all agree. A precise measurement of a proton’s radius is important because
it determines the interaction with, and cross-section for scattering, other
particles. The proton’s radius even affects the atomic spectroscopy of the
hydrogen atom, which is tightly linked to the value of the Rydberg constant that
has been so critical to the interpretation of all atomic spectra, because the
electron and proton wave functions overlap and the radius is an important
parameter in determining the amount of overlap. In 2010, a measurement of the
radius of the proton was made using muonic hydrogen (hydrogen where the electron
has been replaced by a muon). This proved to be the most precise experimental
determination of the proton radius ever made, but was massively inconsistent
with the accepted value for the proton radius at that time. This became known as
the Proton Radius Puzzle (PRP). Since its inception, many physicists have tried
to resolve the PRP, to no avail. MUSE (the MUon proton Scattering Experiment)
will make the world’s first measurement of the proton radius via elastic muon
scattering at a precision which can address this 4% radius discrepancy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is the supervision and
maintenance of the data acquisition system which reads out the MUSE detector
system; and the analysis of the resulting data to compare scattering cross
sections, form factors, and radii, and to extract charge asymmetries. The MUSE
experiment has been fully constructed and this project will support engineering
runs to further calibrate and test the equipment, followed by 12 months of
measurement. Measurements will take place in the Paul Scherer Institute PiM1
beam line, which affords a 3.3 MHz secondary beam with a mixture of pions, muons
and electrons. The beam momenta will be approximately 117MeV/c, 160 MeV/c, and
210 MeV/c. These measurements will cover a Q2 range of 0.002 – 0.07
GeV2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of the above described activities,
undergraduate students, PhD students, and postdoctoral researchers will be
trained in the development of modern electronics systems and modern data
analysis techniques. The PI will present this work as part of her involvement in
the National Organizing Committee Chair Line of the Conferences for
Undergraduate Women in Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.