* 2012865
* RUI: Machine Learning Approaches for Accelerating Scientific Discovery in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Raghuram Ramanujan, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 298,947.00

Experiments in nuclear physics have begun producing increasingly large volumes
of data. This phenomenon has been driven by various advances in technology - for
example, the increased sensitivity of the instrumentation that allows detectors
to record information at a higher resolution, and upgrades to particle
accelerators that enables them to utilize higher luminosity beams leading to
more reactions per experiment. Traditional analysis methods are thus becoming
intractable. In theoretical nuclear physics, accurate calculations and
predictions can be computationally expensive, and surrogate models that allow
for fast predictions and functional approximations are thus desired. The PIs
plan to address these challenges using tools and techniques from machine
learning (ML), a field at the intersection of statistics, mathematics, and
computer science that is concerned with designing, building, and studying
computational systems that improve at a task with accrued experience. ML-based
systems excel at extracting patterns and drawing inferences from data, and are
the method of choice in a number of challenging computational domains, such as
computer vision and machine translation. This work will apply cutting-edge ML
techniques to standing issues in nuclear physics. The PIs will conduct this
research in collaboration with undergraduate students, who will receive close
mentorship and scientific training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms,
statistical models, and software developed in this work is designed to aid in
scientific discoveries at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), Argonne
National Laboratory (Argonne), Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(JLab), and the upcoming Electron Ion Collider (EIC). The PIs will use machine
learning techniques to: (1) improve data analysis methods for experiments at
FRIB, (2) create novel theoretical models informed by experimental data for use
at JLab and the planned EIC, and (3) optimize beam delivery techniques at FRIB
and Argonne. The first goal will be achieved through the adaptation and
implementation of neural network architectures such as Convolutional Neural
Networks and Context Encoders, which are commonly used in supervised image
analysis applications. The second goal will be approached by utilizing
techniques from unsupervised learning, including generative modeling methods
such as Generative Adversarial Networks and Autoencoders, while leveraging
methods that predict distributions like Mixture Density Networks. Finally, the
third goal will be realized by applying algorithms such as Proximal Policy
Optimization from the area of deep reinforcement
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.