* 2012285
* A Fitted Finite Element Method for the Modeling of Complex Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Ovall, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Partial differential equations (PDEs) provide the principle mathematical models
of physical phenomena that undergo continuous spatial and/or temporal variation,
and the approximation of their solutions is of fundamental importance in a broad
spectrum of scientific and engineering applications. Finite element methods
(FEM) for solving PDEs are favored in the scientific community because of their
flexibility in representing materials with complex geometries and spatially-
varying material properties, and their ability to resolve local features of the
solution, such as sharp transitions (e.g. shocks, layers) and singularities
(unbounded derivatives). FEM works by partitioning the region of interest into a
mesh consisting of smaller computational cells, and approximating the solution
of the PDE in terms of “simple” functions defined on these cells. This project
aims to increase the flexibility of FEM by allowing for significantly more
general cell shapes and function types, to more efficiently model complex
materials. Publicly-available software will be produced, together with
supporting mathematical theory and numerical experiments illustrating its
practical performance on problems exhibiting challenging and realistic
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and collaborators will develop theory and
practical algorithms for computing with finite elements defined on meshes
consisting of rather general curvilinear polygons. Among the issues that will be
addressed are: (i) interpolation/approximation theory for the resulting finite
element spaces, which contain special locally-harmonic functions in addition to
local polynomials; (ii) basis selection and efficient and accurate quadrature
rules for assembling the finite element linear system; (iii) efficient and
reliable a posteriori error estimators, and self-adaptive refinement techniques
based on them; (iv) development of freely-available software, hosted on a public
repository, that includes example problems. The types of problems that motivate
this work are those involving PDE models of complex materials that may have
multiple complicated interfaces between material types. Numerical examples
supplied in the articles will highlight the performance of the proposed method
on such problems, making relevant comparisons with competing approaches where
feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.