* 2012086
* WoU-MMA: Expanding the Horizons of Gravitational Wave Searches and Parameter Estimation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tejaswi Nerella, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. In the
last five years, the LIGO-VIRGO collaboration has detected several gravitational
wave signals from merging binary systems consisting of black holes and neutron
stars. These observations are already yielding new insights into the assembly
and evolution of stellar remnants in the Universe, which are currently limited
by the low numbers of events. In this context, the award supports research that
will push forward innovative methods to (a) understand and mitigate factors that
limit the sensitivity of the searches, and (b) characterize the properties of
the signals that are detected. This approach is complementary to hardware
improvements that boost the sensitivity, and by helping to detect and
characterize the faintest and most distant signals, will help maximize the
scientific yield of the LIGO-VIRGO observations. The resultant rapid and robust
understanding of the source properties will also help better guide subsequent
observations. The program will also facilitate NSFâ€™s long-term vision on
expanding the gravitational wave community by developing broader expertise in
analyzing the LIGO strain data, releasing more derived data products, engaging
and involving local undergraduate and high school students in the research, and
organizing a pedagogical workshop for the wider field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research plan has two components. The first aim is to characterize and better
mitigate two systematics that have been proven to affect the noise background,
and consequently affect the sensitivity of searches: very short time-scale
glitches in the detector, which are known to be extremely localized in parameter
space, and moderate to longer-term variations in the noise characteristics,
which affect the precision on the recovered signal-to-noise ratios of events.
These systematics have been previously identified, but with the expanded level
of detail that would be achieved in this research, it is possible to develop
simple measures to curb their impact that are natural extensions of existing
methods (such as signal-quality vetos and re-weighted signal-to-noise ratios).
The second aim is to improve existing parameter estimation pipelines to help
rapidly and robustly infer the intrinsic and extrinsic properties of
gravitational wave sources. The methods build on existing codes that exploit the
frequency structure of the signals (i.e., the smooth behavior of their phase
with frequency), and insights from the searches on how to insulate the detection
process from localized instrumental artifacts, i.e.,
glitches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.