* 2012790
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Exploring a Collaborative Model for Broadening Participation in STEM through Digital Fabrication and Making
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Sonya Pryor-Jones, The Fab Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 07/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Over the past two decades, thousands of makerspaces, fabrication labs, and
digital fabrication spaces have emerged. From libraries and science centers to
institutions of higher education, the “Maker Movement” continues to gain
momentum and is recognized globally as being at the nexus of technology,
innovation, and education. This mounting interest may be in part due to
promising findings from extant research. Prevailing studies show meaningful
engagement in making and digital fabrication can result in marked positive
outcomes in STEM interest and careers, especially in engineering and
manufacturing fields. Some studies have also shown that while outcomes are
generally positive, there continues to be a diverse community of learners who
appear to be under-engaged and or excluded from participation. This planning
grant will address this gap by creating and fostering a diverse coalition of
organizations to work together, and with their respective networks of influence,
to design for and promote innovative, accessible, inclusive, and equitable high-
quality STEM learning environments for all learners through the lens of making
and digital fabrication. Through a multi-modal, lived cultural experience
framework, the coalition hopes to develop a plan for a strategic, coherent and
scalable approach that moves the bar significantly forward in addressing equity
in STEM. The effort brings together key stakeholders in the Maker, Fab Lab,
Digital Fabrication, and STEM Education movements to create a shared vision and
action plan that ignites a broader, more inclusive group of stakeholders in
education, both formal and informal. The initial cohort of organizations will
include the key national and international organizations Citizen Schools,
Digital Promise, Fab Foundation, FabLearn, Maker Ed and Nation of Makers to
begin the process of creating a shared vision, and communicating that vision
throughout their networks to a broader and more diverse community of
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the one-year project duration,
project partners will leverage existing expertise and networks to work
collectively to identify and pioneer effective culturally relevant making
practices and policies that increase STEM engagement and success among
underrepresented groups. Efforts will be centered on two of the five NSF
INCLUDES design elements of collaborative infrastructure: Shared Vision and
Leadership and Communication. In tandem with developing a common agenda, the
Shared Vision component will include several reinforcing activities: (1) map and
analyze relevant current programming, (2) establish a set of agreed upon equity
and inclusion specific definitions, (3) identify strategies for recognizing
existing funds of knowledge among learners, and (4) develop a strategic plan of
action. Reinforcing activities for the Leadership and Communication component
will include: (1) the establishment of a collaborative support model and
operations protocol, (2) documentation and exchange of practices across
organizational programming, and (3) a joint publication/policy white paper on
the state of broadening participation in making and digital fabrication
contexts. To ground this work, an equity and inclusion workshop will be held for
partner organizations to promote shared understanding and collective impact. In
addition, intentional connections will be made to the NSF INCLUDES National
Network through knowledge, data, and resource sharing, networking, and
participation in the online community. If successful, this planning grant has
the potential to lay a strong foundation for a future large-scale center,
alliance, or network focused on broadening participation in STEM through making
and digital fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is funded by
NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.