* 2012955
* New Frontiers in Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John Beacom, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Humanity has long been fascinated by the majesty of the night sky. Now, with
powerful scientific tools, we can better observe stars, galaxies, and the
universe itself. We can also better understand the mechanisms behind this
majesty. Nuclear physics processes are especially important. Stars are powered
by fusion reactions, supernova explosions produce and disperse chemical
elements, and the remnants of these explosions accelerate high-energy cosmic
rays. A better understanding of these nuclear processes would help us understand
the origin, nature, and fate of the universe. A way forward is possible using
neutrinos, tiny particles with zero charge, almost no mass, and only weak
interactions. Neutrinos are abundantly produced in many astrophysical objects.
Detecting neutrinos is very difficult, but doing so can reveal physical
conditions deep within these sources, beyond the reach of observations with
light. The PI will lead a broad program of theoretical work in neutrino
astrophysics designed to lead to breakthroughs in understanding astrophysical
objects and neutrino properties. Junior scientists will be trained on cutting-
edge research as well as career skills. The PI and junior scientists will work
to share results with the public and to broaden participation by under-
represented groups, including the Deaf and Hard of Hearing.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project features three main thrusts: solar neutrinos, supernova
neutrinos, and high-energy neutrinos. The central tenet of this work is that a
broad-based, tightly integrated, theory-led approach to neutrino astronomy can
decisively advance nuclear astrophysics. For solar neutrinos, long-term outcomes
could include significantly reduced detector backgrounds and thus improvements
in the precision of signals from existing detectors, along with a high-
statistics solar-neutrino measurement in the DUNE detector. For supernova
neutrinos, these could include better observing a Milky Way supernova and the
discovery of the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB). For high-energy
neutrinos, these could include new detection techniques that facilitate the
discovery of astrophysical neutrino sources. All three thrusts will benefit from
the addition of gadolinium to Super-Kamiokande in 2020, as originally proposed
by Beacom and Vagins in 2003 to help separate signals from backgrounds.
Throughout, the PI will use the progress in neutrino astronomy to advance multi-
messenger astrophysics and beyond-standard model
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows
on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big
Ideas for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.