* 2012906
* EAGER: Baseline Library of Undergraduate Metrics on Education and Research (BLUMER)
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Javed Mostafa, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,968.00

The scale and outcomes of undergraduate research in the US are poorly
understood, in part because they are difficult to track and no standardized
metrics exist for measuring them. While existing research has utilized surveys
of graduates over time to obtain data on this topic, this method is both
expensive and necessarily incomplete. Educational institutions and policymakers
therefore rely on incomplete information when making policies that impact or
promote undergraduate research activities. Given evidence that undergraduate
research experiences impact students’ willingness to undertake graduate study
and careers in STEM, as well as continuing challenges to diversity and equity in
these fields, more complete data is needed to inform both educational research
and effective policymaking. This project addresses the problem by developing
standards for measuring and understanding undergraduate research pathways using
untapped data sources, including scientific publications by undergraduates and
records maintained by the schools at which they study. The initial research
dataset of undergraduate research products and outcomes focuses on undergraduate
activities in multiple settings: research-focused universities, historically
black colleges and universities (HBCUs), and STEM-focused companies. In addition
to broadening the information base on undergraduate research available to
educational institutions, policymakers, and researchers, this project advances
new methods in educational data collection, data management, and dissemination.
Preserving the privacy and security of educational records is extremely
important and represents a technical challenge for researchers trying to collect
and disseminate such data at scale. This project draws inspiration from previous
innovations in health data systems that both preserve privacy and allow for
responsible research on large-scale real-world data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project aims will be accomplished through the
collaborative development and refinement of a data collection protocol,
implementation of the data collection protocol across partner institutions, and
initial development of a secure, compliant, and usable system for storing and
working with data. A systematic literature review on methods for evaluating
undergraduate research activities, outputs, and subsequent student outcomes will
be conducted at the start of the project. Next, interviews will be conducted
with appropriate staff at partner institutions to understand and evaluate their
existing practices for tracking undergraduate research. Based on the information
gathered through these steps, metrics to answer important questions about
undergraduate research outcomes along with a corresponding data collection
protocol will be jointly developed with partner institutions. An initial dataset
will be collected using the developed protocol, focusing on undergraduate
research in the fields of computer science and engineering. The policies,
procedures, and research methods found to be most suitable to this work will be
published to enable more effective and responsible research of undergraduate
activity by the broader research community. Finally, requirements for a system
to store and disseminate the data will be developed with the goal of providing a
platform for future data collection and research at a national scale, across all
undergraduate majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.