* 2012194
* Quantum Optics with Ultra-Narrow Gamma Resonances
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Olga Kocharovskaya, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 511,409.00

Resonance, the strong response of matter to a periodic (oscillating) force in a
narrow frequency range (called the "resonance width") in the vicinity of the
characteristic frequency of the system (the "resonant frequency"), is a
widespread general physical phenomenon. Different types of resonances such as
electronic, plasmonic, atomic, and molecular resonances, occur in a wide range
of frequencies (from radio frequency to infrared, optical, and ultra-violet),
and find numerous applications. For example, they are used to pick up a
particular radio station, to generate laser radiation, to detect trace amounts
of specific chemical compounds, and to keep a clock ticking at the same rate.
Resonance quality factors (defined as the ratio of the resonant frequency to the
resonance width) have been achieved as high as 10 to the 17th power (1 followed
by 17 zeros) using the electrons inside ultra-cold atoms. By using the atomic
nucleus rather than the electrons, researchers funded by this grant are
attempting to reach orders of magnitude higher quality factors (such as 10 to
the 19th power). These resonances are at x-ray/gamma-ray frequencies rather than
at the frequencies corresponding to visible light. Using the nucleus does not
require a deep cooling of the atom, and is not limited to small diluted
collections of atoms--it can be done in bulk (solid) matter at room temperature.
However their investigation is challenging due to the absence of the techniques
to produce relatively bright spectrally narrow x-ray/gamma-ray radiation and to
control its interaction with the nucleus. This project aims at the development
of such techniques and at the demonstration, exploration and applications of the
ultra-narrow nuclear gamma-ray resonances. Its successful realization would give
strong impetus to the development of quantum nuclear metrologies and
technologies, from nuclear clocks to super-resolution nuclear spectrometers,
from spectrally enhanced quasi-monochromatic x-ray sources to compact long-lived
nuclear quantum memories with potential applications in high-precision tests of
fundamental physics, quantum information science, chemistry, biology, medicine,
and material nanoscience. The graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in this emerging highly interdisciplinary research field on the
borderlines between quantum and x-ray optics by learning the experimental
techniques, analytical methods, and numerical modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two parts. The first one aims at
the development of the techniques for coherent control of the spectral content
and temporal shape of x-ray radiation via its resonant interaction with nuclear
targets. It includes the demonstration of i) slow single gamma-photons
propagating through matter with an effective speed of ~30m/s, ii) transparency
for the bichromatic gamma-ray photons, iii) quantum nuclear memories, and iv)
spectral intensity enhancement of gamma-ray photons. The experiments will be
based on the recent theoretical proposals and experimental achievements of the
supported research group (X. Zhang et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 250504 (2019);
Y. V. Radeonychev, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 163602 (2020)) and performed in
the researchers lab at Texas A&amp;M University using a 14.4 keV transition of
Iron-57 nuclei with 1.1 MHz radiative line broadening excited with the heralded
radioactive source of Cobalt-57. The second part of the project aims at
demonstrating the ultra-narrow (0.17Hz) resonance at 12.4 keV for a nuclear
transition in Scandium-45. These experiments will be performed at the European
XFEL, currently the brightest source of hard x-ray radiation in the range of
10-25 keV photons, while the fabrication and preliminary testing of the required
monochromators and beam splitters will be done by the co-PIâ€™s group at the
Argonne National Laboratiory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.