* 2012991
* The Highest Energy Astroparticle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Paolo Privitera, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 655,774.00

The origin of Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays (UHECR) is a long-standing mystery.
Because they have such a tiny flux, an extensive international collaboration
built the world’s largest cosmic ray detector, the Pierre Auger Observatory,
covering 3000 square kilometers in Argentina. Auger has unequivocally
established various UHECR features, but the emerging picture is complex and
requires the improved measurements of the AugerPrime upgrade, currently under
way. This award continues the research activities of the University of Chicago
Auger group. Making progress on the puzzles of UHECR may radically change our
understanding of the most extreme astrophysical objects in the Universe, of the
magnetic fields which permeate it, or of particle physics. Planned immersive
research experiences and engagement of the local community and partnerships will
bring UHECR science to both formal and informal audiences. Research experiences
developed in collaboration with programs focused on under-represented groups
will enhance student diversity. Other activities include partnership with The
Array of Things, integrating under-represented minority high school students
into the Space Explorers Program, and communicating science to older adults via
the Life-long Learning Program. An especially interesting idea is a 3D-printed
sky map in Braille as an exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses
crucial pieces of the UHECR puzzle by precise measurements, searching for
sources with a new method to study anisotropy which employs composition-
sensitive observables. Novel analysis methods for composition-assisted
anisotropy studies will use new data from AugerPrime. Operating fluorescence
detectors of a novel design at Auger and also at the northern Telescope Array
UHECR observatory allows for cross-calibration of the two experiments,
potentially resolving suggestions that the northern and southern hemispheres
have different UHECR skies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.