* 2012149
* Evaluation of PM2.5 Oxidative Potential (OP) as a proxy for the aerosol toxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Vishal Verma, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Small airborne dust particles smaller than 2.5 micrometers in size (known as
PM2.5) are widely recognized as detrimental to human health. The mass
concentrations of PM2.5 in outdoor air are highly regulated in developed
nations. Exposure to high concentrations of PM2.5 can cause various health
problems including decreased lung function, aggravated asthma, and premature
death in people with heart or lung disease. To date, the mechanisms by which
these particles induce toxicity in humans are not well understood. Recent work
has focused on the ability of PM2.5 to damage cells through the production of
oxidants. However, the correlation between the oxidative potential (OP) and
toxicity of PM2.5 has not been explored. The goal of this project is to address
this knowledge gap. To achieve this goal, the PI will measure the OP of a large
number of samples of PM2.5 collected across many polluted sites around the
world. Both statistical and mechanistic approaches will be utilized to unravel
the role of PM2.5 OP in inducing cellular toxicity. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge to identify and target the most toxic sources of PM2.5. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student research training and
public outreach. This will include the recruitment and mentoring of
undergraduate students from under-represented groups along with the development
of virtual labs and tutorial materials on PM2.5 toxicity for public
dissemination during meetings of the GeoHealth section of the American
Geophysical Union (AGU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous epidemiological studies
have shown strong linkages between PM2.5 concentrations and human diseases
related to respiratory and cardiovascular systems. However, the spatiotemporal
variability in the strengths of these associations suggests that bulk PM2.5 mass
concentration is not the best surrogate of aerosol toxicity. Recent
investigations have indicated that the capability of ambient PM2.5 to generate
oxidants â€“ known as oxidative potential (OP), might be a more relevant indicator
of toxicity than PM2.5 mass concentration in outdoor air. However, the
relationships between particle OP, cellular toxicity, and health endpoints have
remained elusive. The goal of this project is to advance our fundamental
understanding of the relationships between the OP of ambient PM2.5 and their
cellular toxicity. To achieve this goal, the PI will compare the results of OP
assays with observed cellular toxicity of a large number of PM2.5 samples
collected from many countries across the world. The novel approach of exposing
antioxidant-enriched cells to ambient PM2.5 samples will provide the most direct
evidence for assessing the role of particle-driven oxidant generation in
inducing cellular toxicity. Comparison of this approach to well-established
chemical assays will allow the assessment of how induced toxicity is related to
measured particle OP. Successful completion of this project has potential for
transformative impact in air pollution management through the development of new
knowledge and insight that will enable the use of particle OP as a proxy for
aerosol toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.