* 2012087
* Collaborative Research: LIGO SEC Partnership Strengthening Communities of Learners
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Albertha Lawson, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,500,000.00

This award is a component of a collaborative effort to fund the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) Science Education Center
(SEC) Partnership. This project is a combined effort with multiple partners:
LIGO Livingston, Southern University of Baton Rouge (SUBR), and San Francisco’s
Exploratorium. These partners collaborate with Greater New Orleans-STEM (GNO-
STEM), the University of Glasgow in Scotland, Scottish Schools Education
Research Centre (SSERC), Fletcher Technical Community College (FTCC), and the
Southern University Shreveport Louisiana (SUSLA) College Connect program. The
project is focused on scientific outreach to the public, teacher training, and
teacher education focused on LIGO activities in Louisiana. The partnership plans
to engage under-represented undergraduates and K-12 students in STEEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, Education, and Mathematics). Previous awards helped
create the SEC building, with a classroom and a large exhibit hall, with
exhibits developed by the Exploratorium and staffed by SUBR student docents and
a (separately funded) professional staff. The multilayered partnership, a
cutting-edge research facility, and a renowned informal science center created a
model for future collaboration models. With the expansion of this partnership,
the model is extended, and research on the effects of these extensive
collaborations can provide information for future attempts at leveraging the
resources of research laboratories for educational purposes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; SUBR &amp; SUSLA Connect STEEM undergraduates will be engaged as
docents and role models in school and community outreach led by LIGO’s Science
Education Center in consultation with the Exploratorium. Docents will facilitate
field trips to LIGO, conduct activities at family math and science nights and
public outreach events. Workshops through SUBR, GNO-STEM, and FTCC will be given
to in-service and pre-service teachers to strengthen their conceptual
understanding of and excitement for the physical sciences. These teachers will
then be supported in field trips to LIGO to enhance their students’ STEM
Identities. Select teachers will be trained to be leaders in their school
communities, magnifying their training effect. Louisiana science teachers will
attend Exploratorium’s Summer Institute, and Louisiana physics teachers will
participate in an exchange with colleagues in Scotland. Ph.D. students in the
SUBR SMED program will conduct detailed research on programs and activities
performed by the LIGO-SEC Partnership. Inverness Research will conduct formative
and summative assessments of the programs and provide recommendations for
strengthening the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.