* 2012165
* Investigations in Proton-Proton Collisions at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,274,607.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all the elementary particles known at the time into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many
questions about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the
Higgs mass has the value it has. One of the goals of the ATLAS experiment at the
Large Hadron Collider which remains the premier Energy Frontier particle
accelerator, operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva Switzerland, is to
discover new physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). This award will contribute
to the potential discoveries of BSM in three main categories: 1) maintain the
on-going operations of the ATLAS detector including trigger and calorimeter
systems, 2) contribute physics analysis to both Standard Model physics (so we
can recognize BSM physics) and searches for new particles which directly reveal
BSM physics, 3) contribute to education and outreach efforts to explain BSM
physics to non-scientists including elementary
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to the Michigan State University group
targets physics studies under four general categories: the search for new vector
bosons; the study of Higgs boson production and decay; the physics of top
quarks, singly and in pairs; and the study of the strong interactions,
especially jet production in association with vector bosons and heavy quarks.
The group will complete work on the Tile Calorimeter Phase I upgrade which is
nearing completion at CERN now. Similarly work on the Trigger for the level 1
Calorimeter envisioned for the Phase I upgrade will be completed in the first
year of this award. The longer-term hardware work will be on the HL-LHC upgrade
for the Tile Calorimeter, taking place over the next five years. Members of the
MSU high energy physics group have traditionally had a strong involvement in
education and outreach, and the group has been especially innovative in informal
education. A notable element of these activities has been the development of a
planetarium show on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). In
collaboration with other US groups on the ATLAS experiment, the group has also
just developed a major planetarium production on dark
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.