* 2012661
* Collaborative Research: In Situ Surface Spectroscopy of 2D Material-based Electrocatalysis and Photoelectrocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Wei Xiong, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 347,384.00

Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical processes are important to a wide range
of energy-related and environmental applications, including solar energy storage
and carbon remediation. Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production is especially
exciting for its potential to convert solar energy into carbon-free chemical
fuels. The project will enable increased efficiency of photoelectrocatalytic
reactions through study of the fundamental physical and chemical processes
occurring in a class of ultrathin catalytic materials important for the
sustainable production of fuels and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will investigate electrocatalysis (EC) and photoeletrocatalysis (PEC) in two-
dimensional dichalcogenide materials using various forms of in situ linear,
nonlinear, and ultrafast spectroscopy to characterize three critical factors in
EC/PEC reactions: interfacial electrostatics (local (i.e., surface)
electrostatic fields), interfacial dynamics and electrostatics (photoexcited
charge carrier dynamics), and interfacial molecular structures (surface bound
intermediate species) produced during the EC and PEC processes. Sum frequency
generation (SFG), second harmonic generation (SHG), vibrational Stark Shift
(VSS) spectroscopy, and transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) will be employed
to reveal key mechanistic information regarding the EC and PEC processes
primarily for the reduction of CO2 to methanol and carbon monoxide.
Spectroscopic data will be acquired in situ as a function of the electrochemical
potential and electrolyte composition, and correlated with product yield and
selectivity. The project includes educational and outreach activities that build
upon the research to promote engagement of students in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include
workshop for high school science teachers, are directed at improving the
education of promising high school students and encouraging their interest in
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.