* 2012057
* WoU-MMA: Inference about Gravitational-Wave Sources and Source Populations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Richard O'Shaughnessy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 411,353.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Only a
few years ago, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO)
began a revolution in our understanding of the universe, with the first
gravitational wave (GW) observations of coalescing black holes and neutron
stars. These ripples in spacetime carry information otherwise hidden from view,
enabling unique insight into the most energetic transient phenomena in our
universe. Due to ongoing NSF support, gravitational wave observations now
accumulate at an ever-increasing pace. Previously unidentified sources are and
will be uncovered. Some, like merging neutron stars, can produce associated and
distinctive electromagnetic emission. These new sources and populations may push
the frontiers of what we predict can happen, or challenge our capability to
interpret what did happen. The physical parameters of individual sources can be
estimated from observed signals based on approximate predictions of their
gravitational wave and/or electromagnetic emission. Likewise, the physics
responsible for an individual source or collection of sources can be deduced
from their distinctive or well-measured collective properties, based on models
for how they form. The goal of this project is to help produce and interpret
this new cosmic census, rapidly and reliably identifying new events and
populations to inform follow-up observations and
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two major activities designed to
enable multimessenger observations of GW sources to achieve their immense
potential. First, the group will construct and operate high-cadence, low-latency
parameter and population inference codes for gravitational wave sources.
Principally created for interpreting LIGO's concrete observations, the group
will also use these codes to assess and mitigate how much astrophysical
conclusions depend on key uncertainties: the presence of matter (versus vacuum);
the accuracy of our approximations to general relativity; and the significance
of each source, given data quality. Second, the team will develop and employ new
phenomenological methods with which to interpret the cosmic multimessenger
census, emphasizing physically-parameterized and generative approaches based on
detailed physical models. One long-term goal of this project is to help assemble
the necessary framework for the discovery and interpretation of new high-impact
populations, including high-mass and high-mass-ratio binaries; binary neutron
stars; neutron star/black hole binaries; and more exotic populations with
distinctive observable signatures in their physical parameters. The group will
deliver infrastructure to support rapid parameter estimation and source
classification to inform multimessenger followup
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.