* 2012365
* Collaborative Research: Common Environmental Drivers Determine the Occupation Chronology of Adélie Penguins and Moss Peatbanks on the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Johnston, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 117,935.00

This award is funded in whole or part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
(Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;Part I: Non-technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;Adélie penguin colonies are declining and disappearing from the
western Antarctic Peninsula. However, not all colonies in a certain area decline
or disappear at the same rate. This research project will evaluate the influence
of terrestrial surface properties on Adélie penguin colonies, leveraging five
decades of research on seabirds near Palmer Station where an Adélie colony on
Litchfield Island became extinct in 2007 while other colonies nearby are still
present. The researchers will combine information obtained from remote sensing,
UAS (Unoccupied Aircraft System, or drones) high-resolution maps, reconstruction
of past moss banks and modeling with machine learning tools to define suitable
penguin and peatbank moss habitats and explore the influence of microclimate on
their distributions. In particular, the researchers are asking if guano from
penguin colonies could act as fertilizers of moss banks in the presence of
localized wind patters that can carry airborne nitrogen to the mosses. Modeling
will relate penguin and peatbank moss spatial patterns to environmental
variables and provide a greater understanding of how continued environmental
change could impact these communities. The project allows for documentation of
terrestrial Antarctic ecosystems in support of seabirds and provisioning of such
information to the broader science community that seeks to study penguins,
educating graduate and undergraduate students and a post-doctoral researcher.
The research team includes two young women as Principal Investigators, one of
them from an under-represented ethnic minority, first time Antarctic Principal
Investigator, from an EPSCoR state (Wyoming), broadening participation in
Antarctic research. Researchers will serve as student mentors through the Duke
Bass Connections program entitled Biogeographic Assessment of Antarctic Coastal
Habitats. This program supports an interdisciplinary team of graduate and
undergraduate students collaborating with project faculty and experts on
cutting-edge research bridging the classroom and the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to understand the changes at the microclimate scale (meters) by
analyzing present and past Adélie penguin colonies and moss peatbanks in islands
around Palmer Station in the western Antarctic Peninsula – interlinked systems
that are typically considered in isolation. By integrating in situ and remote
data, this project will synthesize the drivers of biogeomorphology on small
islands of the Antarctic Peninsula, a region of rapid change where plants and
animals often co-occur and animal presence often determines the habitation of
plants. A multi-disciplinary approach combine field measurements, remote
sensing, UAS (Unoccupied Aircraft Systems) maps, paleoecology and modeling with
machine learning to define suitable habitats and the influence of microclimates
on penguin and peatbank distributions. The link between the two aspects of this
study, peatbanks and penguins, is the potential source of nutrients for peat
mosses from penguin guano. Peatbank and penguin distribution will be modeled and
all models will be validated using in situ information from moss samples that
will identify mechanistic processes. This project leverages 5 decades of seabird
research in the area and high-definition remote sensing provided by the Polar
Geospatial center to study the microclimate of Litchfield Island where an Adélie
colony became extinct in 2007 when other colonies nearby are still present. The
research team includes two early career women as Principal Investigators, one of
them from an under-represented ethnic minority, first time Antarctic Principal
Investigator, from an EPSCoR state (Wyoming). Researchers will serve as mentors
for students through the Duke Bass Connections program entitled Biogeogrpahic
Assessment of Antarctic Coastal Habitats which bridges the classroom and the
real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.