* 2012103
* Persistent Mission Planning and Control for Renewably Powered Robotic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Christopher Vermillion, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2023
* USD 365,463.00

The objective of this research is to pioneer new techniques for the mission
planning and control of robotic systems that derive their propulsive energy
either solely or primarily from renewable resources. Examples of renewably
powered robotic systems include tumbleweed rovers for remote terrestrial
exploration, solar powered aircraft for aerial observation, and sailing drones
for oceanographic surface exploration. By relying on renewable resources for
propulsion, such systems can explore hostile and remote regions that cannot be
explored through traditional mobile robots due to range limitations, including
the surfaces of distant planets, deep waters of the ocean, and the Arctic
region. This research effort will focus on the creation and validation of
fundamental tools for controlling renewably powered systems through a propulsive
resource that varies stochastically in space and time, thereby necessitating a
fundamentally new set of control tools relative to traditional mobile robots.
The theoretical results from the research will be validated on a small fleet of
sailing drones, to be deployed in inland waters. The research effort will be
complemented with educational and outreach opportunities involving Autonomous
Marine Systems, Inc., the Carolina Sailing Club, and North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional mobile robotic systems can
typically be characterized by very limited range but relatively predictable
mobility, wherein the reachable domain of the robotic system (or team of robotic
systems) can be characterized with a high degree of certainty at any given time.
This research fundamentally reverses that paradigm, focusing on robotic systems
with unlimited range but stochastic mobility. Due to the stochastic,
spatiotemporal variation in the renewable resource, the application of
traditional energy-aware control techniques on such systems will typically
result in either ineffective or extremely conservative mission planning
strategies. To address this challenge, this research project will pursue a
hierarchical mission planning and control framework in which an upper-level
mission planner prescribes preferred exploration directions based on statistical
characterizations of the propulsive resource, and lower-level dynamic mobility
optimizers will maximize expected mobility along preferred directions, taking
into account the dynamics of each agent and the stochastic resource model.
Gaussian Process modeling will be used to characterize the spatiotemporally
evolving resource. Polynomial chaos approximations and stochastic response
surface methods will be used to facilitate a receding horizon optimization of
search directions at the upper level, whereas stochastic dynamic programming
results will be used to extract probabilistically time-optimal waypoint
following algorithms at the lower level. Theoretical performance limits will be
analyzed in the context of statistical regret bounds. Mission planning and
control algorithms will be validated in two settings: (i) a small fleet of
instrumented sailing drones to be tested in inland waters and (ii) a larger-
scale simulation study wherein the goal of the sailing drones is Gulf Stream
resource assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.