* 2012947
* Benchmarking a Multi-Phase Transport for Relativistic Heavy Ion Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Zi-Wei Lin, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,913.00

The soup of elementary particles, quarks and gluons, that characterized the
universe for a few millionths of a second after the Big Bang, known as the
quark-gluon plasma (QGP), has been created in high energy heavy ion collisions
at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) in the USA and the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) in Europe. Such experiments allow physicists to study the QGP
properties and understand the strong interaction at extreme temperatures and
densities. A rich set of data has been measured from these experiments,
including the recent evidence that the QGP is even formed in small collision
systems. Hydrodynamics-based models as well as transport models have been quite
successful in describing many observables. However, because transport models
include non-equilibrium dynamics, they are expected to be different from
hydrodynamic models for small systems. Open questions include the onset and
origin of the observed collective motion of the produced particles from small to
large systems, and how an interacting system transitions from the dilute limit
to the hydrodynamic limit. This project focuses on using the improved transport
method to address these questions, with the PI mentoring students in this
research at both graduate and undergraduate levels. The improved multi-phase
transport model as a public code also serves as a convenient event generator and
testbed for the nuclear physics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this project is to address open questions regarding the QGP properties by
improving the theoretical foundation and accuracy of a multi-phase transport
model. This model contains a parton cascade phase and a bulk hadronization model
in addition to fluctuating initial conditions and a later hadron cascade phase.
The objectives include the following: i) benchmark and improve the accuracy of
the parton transport method in describing the evolution of the dense matter; ii)
improve the hadronization process, including starting the quark coalescence
around a critical energy density instead of the parton kinetic freeze-out and
applying fragmentation to heavy-flavor partons at high transverse momentum; iii)
improve a multi-phase transport model with the verified parton cascade and
improved hadronization and then make direct comparisons with experimental
observables such as anisotropic flows. With the improved transport model
constrained by bulk observables, properties of the dense matter such as the
shear viscosity can also be quantitatively studied and compared with results
from other approaches such as viscous-hydrodynamic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.