* 2012811
* The SMU SuperCDMS Program
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jodi Cooley, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,506.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data give strong evidence that
nearly a quarter of the Universe consists of dark matter. Weakly interacting
massive particles (WIMPs) and axions have been proposed as theoretically favored
candidates for dark matter. Despite the strong evidence for the existence of
dark matter, neither WIMPs nor axions have been conclusively detected. This
award will provide funding for the research program at SMU that is dedicated to
advancing the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment towards its goal of exploring the low
mass (&lt; 10 GeV/c^2) dark matter region, and ultimately to having sensitivity
to WIMP-nucleon cross sections where solar neutrino-nucleus scattering becomes
significant (the so-called “neutrino floor”). Part of achieving this objective
is an already-planned upgrade of the experiment that will include more massive
detectors made of Ge and Si crystals operated in both an ultra-sensitive high-
voltage mode and standard voltage mode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
objective of this award is to create research opportunities for undergraduate
students at SMU and foster relationships with the North Texas community. The
approach is to enhance the Engaged Learning program at SMU by providing support
for 1 - 2 undergraduate students to engage in research during both the summer
and academic year. To foster relationships with the community of North Texas,
the group will volunteer their time participating in a variety of mentoring
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the next three years, several critical
milestones must be achieved to advance the SuperCDMS SNOLAB program. These
include installing the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment, commissioning and operating
the experiment, publishing results from early science taken at the CUTE detector
test facility, and a surface assay of materials for the purpose of developing a
radon background model. In addition, SuperCDMS must maintain a controlled low
background environment, and characterize this background to a level that allows
the collaboration to take advantage of more sophisticated analysis techniques
that employ tools such as maximal likelihood
estimations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.