* 2013762
* Role of Spatial Structure in Decision Making
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lanying Zeng, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2024
* USD 749,910.00

Phages are a form of viruses that infect bacterial cells. Upon infecting an E.
coli cell, phage lambda can make different choices in its fate. It can either go
to the lytic (virulent) pathway where ~100 progeny particles are produced and
released upon lysis of the cell, or go to the lysogenic (dormant) pathway in
which phage DNA is integrated into the host chromosome where it gets replicated.
Current data suggests that infecting phages inside the cell can individually
"vote" for lysis or lysogeny and depending on the outcome, phages exhibit
different interactions to propagate through an interplay of competition with
cooperation. We have an incomplete quantitative understanding of the subcellular
workings of the phage system. This project will investigate the heretofore
unexplored idea that spatial organization of the phage-host system may be a
pivotal "hidden variable" in determining cell fate. The overarching goal of this
project is to construct a quantitative picture of phage lambda decision making
with single-cell accuracy. This project will set up a benchmark and generate a
framework for studying other phage systems via quantitative experiments and
modellings, and shed important light on decision-making processes in other
phage-host systems and perhaps also to contribute to how other viruses operate
in higher organisms. The Broader Impacts of the project will involve integrating
quantitative modellings into the course curricula at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels in the university, and therefore, help build a modern biophysics
and quantitative biology program. Additional outreach efforts will involve
providing images and videos for educational purposes nationwide and
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subcellular lambda decision making will be
studied through high-resolution, super-resolution microscopy and multi-scale
spatial stochastic modeling. Specifically, this project has two objectives.
Objective 1 is to investigate the role of subcellular spatial structure in
decision making by fluorescence microscopy, focusing on quantifying individual
phage gene expression in space and time and on examining the subcellular
locations of relevant biomolecules to correlate them with the final phage/cell
fate. Objective 2 is to formulate a spatial stochastic dynamics model. Spatial
degrees of freedom at subcellular level will be addressed for the first time in
the constructed stochastic model to account for the spatial effect in multi-
scale stochastic modeling of the lambda system. Through the studies, the
understanding of the following aspects regarding phage decision making will be
advanced: 1) role of protein diffusivity/locality in individual viral decision
making in cell decision process; 2) precise measurements of biomolecules within
phage compartments; 3) phage-host spatial interaction in decision making and
development; and 4) integration of noise with spatial structure to a more
accurate account of stochasticity. Upon the completion of this project, the
prediction of lambda decision making will be expected to be achieved with
single-cell resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.