* 2013505
* Benchmarking and Improving Makerspaces Using Quantitative Network Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Julie Linsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 244,093.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’
makerspace experiences so that all students can benefit from this learning
environment. Previous work has shown that makerspaces can help engineering
students learn and apply engineering concepts. As a result, there has been
dramatic growth in the number of makerspaces at educational institutions. More
research is needed to understand student interactions in these spaces and how
these spaces should be designed to support student learning. This project will
use network analysis techniques to study the network of activities in a
makerspace that lead to successful student experiences. The proposed analyses
will model a makerspace as a network of interactions between equipment, staff,
and students. Results from this study will help educators to 1) identify and
remove previously unknown hurdles for students who rarely use the space, 2)
design an effective space using limited resources, 3) understand the impact of
new equipment or staff, and 4) create learning opportunities such as workshops
and curriculum integration that increase student learning. This project will
benefit engineering students from the high school level to graduate level, in
small programs and at large universities. The new knowledge produced by this
project may be useful for maximizing equipment and support infrastructure, and
for guiding new equipment purchases. Thus, the results will support further
development of effective makerspaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
hypothesizes that network-level analyses and metrics can provide valuable
insights into student learning in makerspaces and will support what-if scenarios
for proposed changes in spaces. Systems modeling and analysis have been used
successfully to understand complex human and biological networks. In the context
of makerspaces, this technique will provide measures of interaction between
system components such as students, staff, and equipment. The relative
importance of these components in the space will also be measured. The analyses
will identify the system components that are frequently used when students work
in the makerspace over multiple visits. The identification of important system
components will inform the creation of new makerspaces where resources are
limited, ensuring that equipment investments will have the largest impact on
student learning. The key project objectives are to (1) use network analysis to
understand the connection between makerspace structure and successful
functioning of the space, (2) create design guidelines for both new and existing
makerspaces, derived from the analyses of two successful makerspaces, and (3)
identify potential barriers that prevent students, especially underrepresented
minorities, from using makerspaces. The project will allow for the comparison of
makerspaces that have different levels of integration with the curriculum and
methods of student introduction (pop-up classes, tours, extra-curricular
competitions, advertising, and “bring a friend”). Demonstration of the
effectiveness of the analyses in characterizing makerspaces and the ease of data
collection will help support the use of this approach in future work that
compares makerspaces nationwide. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.