* 2013465
* Analyzing a Multigenerational Mentorship Environment Designed to Advance STEM Persistence of Undergraduate Women of Color
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Dionne Cross Francis, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,549,141.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the participation
of women of color in STEM. It will do so by examining the impact of a
multigenerational mentorship environment designed to support persistence of
undergraduate women of color in STEM. This environment focuses on supporting
student well-being and thriving. Women of color include women who identify as
Black/African American, Latina, Asian American, and Indigenous. This group
remains significantly underrepresented at all levels of education in the
physical sciences, technology, engineering, and mathematics. This continued
underrepresentation does not reflect limited academic capacity to excel in STEM,
but instead appears to be driven by experiences that lower the sense of
belonging in STEM. More research is needed both to understand the psychological
toll of persisting in an unwelcoming STEM environment, and to implement
effective interventions. This project will examine efforts to transform STEM
participation through creation of spaces (i.e. counterspaces) that holistically
support the complex interplay of students’ intersecting identities, including
their STEM identities. Such counterspaces have the potential to shift deficit
narratives to asset narratives and thus promote students’ persistence and
achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) evaluate
the effectiveness of a counterspace on student persistence; 2) extend the
application of this counterspace to a minority-serving institution and compare
its effectiveness among women of color enrolled at an minority-serving
institution and a predominantly white institution; 3) understand the ways in
which an intentional and explicit focus on psychosocial wellbeing affects STEM
persistence among women of color; and 4) examine the long-term impact of
engagement in the counterspace on women of color, including on degree completion
and entry into the STEM workforce. To achieve these goals, the project team will
conduct a multi-methodological longitudinal research and evaluation study that
includes both process and outcome metrics. This intersectional examination has
the potential to advance knowledge and theory in three significant ways. First,
these studies will add to the understanding of counterspaces, and the features
of counterspaces that are supportive of women of color in STEM. Second, it will
identify the similarities and differences in the experiences of women of color
in different types of institutions and in both urban rural settings. Third, the
longitudinal results will suggest ways in which continuous engagement in a
counterspace may facilitate persistence and retention in the STEM workforce. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This is an Engaged Student
Learning project, through which the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.