* 2013348
* Pillars of Inclusion
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lethia Jackson, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,960.00

According to Data USA, there were 35,342 Computer Science degrees awarded in
2016 as compared to other STEM degrees awarded in 2016 such as 180,651
Engineering degrees and 150,020 Biology degrees. Additionally, there is a
disparity among the number of Computer Science degrees awarded to
underrepresented groups. Females earned 21% of the Computer Science degrees, of
which less than 1% were awarded to women of color. Utilizing National Science
Foundation core values to accommodate contributions from all groups, this
project funds Pillars of Inclusion (POI), an annual hands-on symposium with
education and technology teachers as well as leaders in Computer Science for the
next four years. The vision of the POI symposium addresses the challenges to
educate and prepare qualified Computer Science teachers that define and
implement classroom practices that reflect diversity and inclusion necessary to
broaden computer science education communities. The POI Symposium presents a
paradigm shift of thinking in the realm of the question, “What is equitable
teaching for all?” Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) of the Association of American
Colleges encourages STEM faculty to promote excellence in social responsibility
and diversity to graduate all students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PKAL
Capital Regional Network represents university members that embody various
levels of exposure to teaching Computer Science from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCU) such as Bowie State University, Morgan State University,
and University of the District of Columbia. The goal of the POI Symposium is to
provide a forum in which the PKAL Capital Regional Network can explain, instruct
and demonstrate hands-on practices that explore equitable teaching practices of
Computer Science to include implementation and practices of the following terms:
Diversity, Inclusion, Empathy, Exposure and Equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.