* 2013156
* US Students Participation in the 22nd Course of ISCRA; August 28 - September 5, 2020; Erice, Italy
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Todor Stanev, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 02/28/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The International School of Cosmic Ray Astrophysics (ISCRA) is a biannual summer
school designed to provide an overview of the field to graduate students and
young postdoctoral scholars through both lectures and informal discussions with
Particle Astrophysics experts. This is the only regular Particle Astrophysics
summer school in the world and it has an excellent history of training future
leaders in the field. The 22nd ISCRA course will take place in Erice, Italy,
from the 28th of August through the 5th of September 2020. The sessions will
include discussions of new experiments, new experimental results and the new
understanding of those results, emphasizing the multi-messenger approach to
astrophysics. This award will support the participation of US graduate students
and young postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the 22nd
ISCRA is "From cosmic particles to gravity waves: now and to come." Topics for
discussion are expected to include neutrino astrophysics, gravitational waves,
acceleration and interactions of high energy particles and radiation,
measurements of cosmic rays and gamma rays, and future space- and ground-based
experiments. Proceedings are published to more broadly disseminate the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.