* 2013707
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated propulsion solution to enable reusable upper stages of space vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Andrew Lapsa, STOKE SPACE TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to advance the development of reusable vehicles for
space. Current space launch solutions use multi-million-dollar rockets discarded
after a single use, increasing launch costs and limiting availability. Even the
best solutions reuse only a portion of the rocket a handful of times, resulting
in launch costs of $5,000/kg and higher. Rockets offering 100% reusability and
operating like aircraft reduce cost, availability concerns, and service
potential of space launch vehicles. The proposed technology advances reusable
space launch vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop new technology enabling space launch vehicles to re-enter the
atmosphere and land propulsively at a target destination for reuse. Importantly,
robust design solutions are proposed so that extensive refurbishment efforts are
not required. Technical challenges include the combination of high-efficiency
propulsion, rigorous thermal protection, and low structural mass needed to
complete in-space mission objectives. This research investigates a new technical
solution combining fundamental vehicle performance with system-level
efficiencies to enable reusable second-stage vehicle designs. The optimization
parameters include environmental conditions, energy balance, performance
predictions, component sizing, and mechanical design
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.