* 2013340
* Phenomenology of Electroweak Symmetry Breaking, Supersymmetry, and the Frontiers of the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Stephen Martin, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Stephen P. Martin at
Northern Illinois University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our
knowledge of the basic building blocks of matter and the forces of interaction
between them. Among the fundamental subatomic particles is the Higgs boson,
which was discovered in 2012 and is now the subject of intense studies at the
Large Hadron Collider. Professor Martin will pursue an enhanced understanding of
the Higgs boson and other subatomic particles. He will also study theories that
extend the known particles and forces, including a possibility known as
supersymmetry. The central prediction of this theory is that for each of the
known types of fundamental particles, there must be another type with very
similar properties but which are much heavier. Professor Martin will work on
strategies for discovering such new particles at the Large Hadron Collider and
proposed future collider experiments. He will also do the same for theories that
provide alternatives to supersymmetry. These activities advance the national
interest by promoting our understanding of how nature works at the most
fundamental level. This project will also have broader impacts. Professor Martin
will mentor and train students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels on
relevant methods of research. He will also interact directly with pre-college
students and other interested members of the public through exhibitions and
judging at local and regional science fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Martin will compute multi-loop corrections to the effective
potential that governs the scalar field associated with the Higgs boson. He will
extend existing results for the effective potential in general non-
supersymmetric theories to include supersymmetric models, using regularization
methods that respect supersymmetric invariance. He will also develop methods for
evaluating three-loop contributions to particle masses, including the Higgs
boson and the W and Z bosons of the Standard Model of particle physics. He will
study non-minimal theories of supersymmetry, exploring possibilities that
address a puzzle called the little hierarchy problem. He will study the
production and decay of supersymmetric particles at proposed future proton-
proton and electron-positron colliders, to understand the reach of those
experiments for making new discoveries. He also plans to continue studies of new
particles in non-supersymmetric theories, including, for example, new vector-
like leptons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.