* 2013557
* RUI: Fundamental Symmetries and Interactions Studies in Weak and Electromagnetic Decays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth George, Wittenberg University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The Standard Model of nuclear and particle physics is remarkably successful in
describing a wide range of physics topics but there are still many important
unanswered questions. One crucial question has to do with diﬀerences in how
matter and anti-matter behave. And the Standard Model’s description of the weak
interaction, one of the four fundamental forces of nature, is believed to be
incomplete. This research searches for new physics beyond the Standard Model by
making precise measurements in simple systems such as in the annihilation of
electrons by their anti-particles (positrons) or by measuring the beta decay of
a nucleus. Three projects are proposed: one to measure the decay of positronium
(an unstable bound state of an electron and a positron), and two to measure the
beta decay of Carbon-14 and Fluorine-20. These projects will enable talented
undergraduate students at Wittenberg University, where the proportion of women
physics majors is well above the national average, to work closely with faculty
on leading-edge research. The students involved in this research will develop
instrumentation and computer skills important for many post-college paths in
STEM ﬁelds. Further, they will learn to think independently, solve practical
problems, and communicate clearly. These skills prepare them well for graduate
work in physics, engineering, and related ﬁelds, and for the STEM workforce,
including physics teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major eﬀort will be a high-
precision search for CP violation in positronium decay, using an instrument
under development with support from a previous MRI award. CP violation is
described in the Standard Model (SM) through the CP-violating phase of the CKM
quark mixing matrix. CP violation is necessary to explain the observed matter-
antimatter asymmetry in the universe, but the level of violation present in the
SM is far too small to explain this asymmetry. This has motivated searches for
CP violation in a broad range of systems. Searches for new mechanisms of CP
violation in observables where the SM CP-violating eﬀects are strongly
suppressed are among the most sensitive probes to search for new physics. With
Michigan State University collaborators, the group is developing and will employ
a highly eﬃcient, symmetric, and high-rate-capable instrument to search for CP
violation in the decay of tensor polarized positronium (Ps). The goal is to
improve by an order of magnitude the current limits on a CP-violating
correlation involving the spin of Ps and the momenta of the two most energetic
gammas in the 3-gamma decay of Ps. The group will also complete two high
precision measurements of the shapes of nuclear beta spectra as tests of the SM
description of the weak interaction, that is, Vector and Axial Vector parts (V-A
description) in a left-handed, maximally parity violating combination. Other,
non-SM interaction forms (e.g. Tensor) give rise to shapes of nuclear beta
spectra that diﬀer from those expected from a pure V-A interaction. The group is
measuring the shape of the beta spectrum of 20F to put tighter limits on such
non-V-A contributions to the weak interaction. The SM also predicts a
contribution (“weak magnetism” (WM)) to the shape of beta spectra due to the
theory’s formulation in terms of a conserved vector current (CVC). A precision
spectrum shape measurement in 14C, as well as the 20F shape measurement, will
quantitatively test CVC in its strong form. The 14C experiment complements a
recent high-precision measurement by the group in the 14O
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.