* 2013228
* Cosmic-ray Antinuclei as Messengers of New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Philip von Doetinchem, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 719,519.00

This project will use cosmic-ray antinuclei as messengers of new physics,
including searches for dark matter. This requires analysis of data from the
Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Experiment (AMS-02), now operating on the
International Space Station. The work will improve understanding of (anti)nuclei
formation and interactions for the cosmic-ray data interpretation, using
existing data and analysis results of an experiment at the European Laboratory
for Particle Research (CERN). First-time detections of low-energy cosmic
antideuterons and antihelium nuclei would be unambiguous signals of
transformative new physics. Confirming the existence of cosmic antihelium would
revolutionize the understanding of Big Bang nucleosynthesis. The group provides
a hands-on computer programming outreach program for underrepresented high
school students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds through UH Manoa's
Office of Student Equity, Excellence and Diversity. They will also adapt this
established course for older adult learners in collaboration with the Osher
Lifelong Learning Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMS-02 surprisingly detected
several cosmic-ray antihelium candidate events, but could not identify any
strong antideuteron candidates, in contrast to theoretical expectations. It is
thus crucial to study antiprotons, antideuterons, and antihelium nuclei
together. It is also important to reduce systematic errors for the cosmic-ray
data interpretation by improving understanding of (anti)nuclei formation and
interactions. That work uses existing data and analysis results from the fixed-
target SPS Heavy Ion and Neutrino Experiment (NA61/SHINE) at the Super Proton
Synchrotron (SPS) at CERN. This combination allows deep searches for new physics
with cosmic-ray antinuclei. One unique aspect is the seamless exchange of
information between the AMS-02 data analysis and the reduction of uncertainties
for the data interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.