* 2013427
* Transforming Undergraduate STEM Gateway Teaching and Learning by Emphasizing Core, Interdisciplinary STEM Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Christopher Bauer, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,413,409.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving teaching and
learning in introductory biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics. It will
do so by making curricular improvements that help students learn core STEM
skills that are needed in all STEM disciplines: reading and interpreting graphs,
comparing and contrasting using ratios and proportions, and revealing one’s
thinking through reflective and rich explanation. Traditional curricula do not
explicitly develop these skills. Through recurring encounters with these skills
across the new introductory STEM curriculum, students will learn to recognize
and use these skills across disciplines and thus acquire a more integrated view
of science. The new curriculum will be supported through teaching tools and
approaches developed by teams of STEM faculty and undergraduates. Specifically,
the faculty instructors will partner with one hundred undergraduate students who
will contribute to the design of curricular materials and implement the
materials as learning coaches for lecture sessions or study teams. The project
includes research studies designed to document changes over time in students,
learning coaches, and faculty instructors. Particular attention will be paid to
including students from all populations in opportunities to serve as learning
coaches and in terms of understanding the specific impacts of the teaching
approach on student learning outcomes. This project has the potential to be a
model for engaging students deeply in the intellectual mission of the
University, through students' service as co-designers and learning coaches, and
for research-guided institutional improvement in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enact a PKAL/Keck model for
institutional change that is research-informed, needs-based, community-
supported, and student-resourced. It will engage faculty across STEM disciplines
to collectively transform teaching and learning in the biology, chemistry,
mathematics, and physics gateway courses at the University of New Hampshire. The
novelty of this project lies in engaging faculty in developing materials and
assessments to teach interdisciplinary scientific, mathematical, and
metacognitive practices that have been of persistent difficulty for students to
learn and instructors to teach. The specific practices include graphical
representation, proportional reasoning, and reflective self-explanation. Gateway
faculty will join a learning community led by disciplinary-based education
research colleagues with specialized knowledge about domain-specific
disciplinary learning challenges and domain-general cognitive approaches. The
faculty will be mentored along a trajectory of improved comfort, knowledge, and
skill with research-based pedagogy. Undergraduate peer learning coaches, who
have experienced all the gateway courses, will partner with faculty to field
test and implement the designed activities with students. The project will
result in new knowledge about development of students’ scientific, mathematical,
and metacognitive practices and how this intellectual skill development affects
STEM performance. This information can guide efforts to improve STEM education
and prepare the professional STEM workforce of tomorrow and provide insights
into faculty pedagogic trajectories. Project evaluation efforts will monitor
faculty affordances and barriers using journals, interviews, and observations.
For students, quasi-experimental contrasts of learning outcomes (concepts,
skills, attitudes) will be explored as a function of exposure to interventions.
It is anticipated that this project will provide a simple and replicable model
that can be used at other institutions, and that could be broadened to include
additional STEM disciplines and different course levels. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.