* 2013974
* Quantum Metrology in Complex Noise Environments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lorenza Viola, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

The ability to precisely measure physical quantities such as the strength of a
field, a force, temperature or time plays a pivotal role in today’s world.
Precision measurement is essential for scientific and industrial research, and
underpins technologies like the Global Positioning System, cellular phone
networks and power grids. It follows that progress in metrology, the study of
measurement, has the potential to both advance fundamental knowledge frontiers
and improve society at large. One of the most promising areas for advancement
lies at the intersection of metrology and quantum science: quantum metrology
aims to harness the extraordinary sensitivity of quantum systems (such as atoms,
photons, or spins) to their surrounding environment to increase the achievable
precision beyond what is possible by using only classical sensors and
measurement strategies. This boost in sensitivity is a double-edged sword,
however, in that it also makes quantum sensors more susceptible to “noise” that
is inevitably present in practice. The broad aim of this project is to build a
quantitative understanding of the impact of general – spatiotemporally
correlated, non-classical – noise environments in quantum metrology. This cross-
disciplinary endeavor will determine precision bounds and develop new methods to
counter the effects of realistic noise environments on quantum sensors. In
parallel, it will incorporate a strong educational component at the graduate and
undergraduate level, on subjects at the boundary between open and many-body
quantum systems, quantum estimation, and quantum control theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The metrological impact of spatiotemporally correlated
quantum noise collectively coupled to a system of two-level (“qubit’’) sensors
was recently examined by the principal investigators in the paradigmatic setting
of Ramsey interferometry. This study demonstrated a previously unrecognized
effect, namely, that coupling to a quantum environment can mediate uncontrolled
entanglement between the sensors, resulting in an additional source of
measurement uncertainty. Building on these findings, the present project will
explore several interrelated research directions – including: (i) Fully
quantifying the effects of spatiotemporally correlated quantum noise, by
considering a broader set of initial sensors’ states, measurements, and non-
collective couplings, with application to force sensing in trapped-ion devices.
(ii) Assessing the potential for noise-optimized protocol design and dynamical
control to restore metrological advantage. While standard open-loop control and
error-correction strategies can suppress noise, they often also remove the
signal of interest or are inapplicable to correlated noise. By leveraging
techniques from dynamically corrected quantum gates and filter-function design,
a key objective will be devising open-loop controls that optimize these
competing objectives under realistic constraints. (iii) Determining the extent
to which non-Gaussian noise statistics may impact quantum estimation protocols,
along with more generally quantifying estimation bias that realistic noise
sources may introduce. In pursuing these questions, the group will keep in mind
the bigger goal of exploring whether quantum information science may inform yet
new modalities for sensors in the face of realistic open quantum system
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.