* 2013525
* Non-delaminated 2D MXene stacks modified Li surface: a reliable, scalable thin inter-layer-calated Li metal anode with improved cyclability and dendrite suppression
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Junjie Niu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 422,180.00

Energy storage at an affordable cost has emerged as one of the challenging
issues for the energy sector, being critical for a wide range of applications
ranging from electric vehicles to grid storage of renewable energies. The
rapidly growing demand in high energy-density batteries for electrical vehicles
requires scientists to explore new electrode materials that can deliver higher
energy capacity. To this end, Li metal is attracting extensive attention in
next-generation lithium-ion batteries. However, unstable and irreversible Li
plating/stripping can result in a short battery lifetime and a serious safety
issue related to the possible dendrite growth of lithium. This fundamental
research project seeks to develop a hybrid electrode that is composed of novel
2-dimensional carbide or nitride nanomaterials called MXenes as a substrate to
construct composite lithium metal anodes. The coated 2D MXene layers provide
large volume of empty space between layers, better conductivity, and suppression
of the dendrite growth. This approach of material design is also amenable to
large-scale manufacturing methods for making battery anodes. If successful, the
developed Li-metal electrode can be applied in various liquid-electrolyte and
solid-state batteries. The experimental design, problem solving, and performance
analysis of this project will be integrated with educational outreach for
undergraduate students in the science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
fields particularly in energy storage field of materials science and engineering
via a series of ‘Interest-Inspiring’ research experiences and courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional nanomaterials such as MXenes display
intense promise for lithium batteries due to the efficient and fast ion
transport between layers and large surface areas available for improved ion
adsorption and faster surface redox reactions. The open ion transport channels
in MXenes shorten ion diffusion pathways and enable fast ion transport. In
addition, they can act as functional substrates for incorporating various active
materials for lithium ion batteries, improving the total capacity of the
electrodes and enhancing the overall performance. The technical goal of this
research project is to design a scalable 2D MXenes such as Ti3C2Tx stacks inter-
layer-calated thin Li metal hybrid anode, which shows a highly reversible
plating/stripping with a low overpotential upon long cycles in lithium ion
batteries. The large surface area of the multi-layer MXene stacks with high
mechanical flexibility ensures a high-capacity and reliable Li nucleation/growth
upon plating and stripping. The highly reversible Li through the confined 2D
configuration reduces the dead Li and electrolyte consumption by forming a thin
solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer. The mossy/dendritic Li on the
controllable inter-spaces between MXene layers is suppressed due to the lateral
nucleation/growth on the 2D layered configuration, which is studied using in-
situ observations and modeling. The fast charge-transfer due to the high
electron conductivity and large inter-layer spacing leads to small
contact/transfer resistances and rapid lithium ion diffusion on the MXene
surface with terminations, enabling a drastically lowered energy barrier for Li
nucleation/growth through inter-layer-calation as well as less SEI formation. If
successful, the full cell batteries paired with nickel-manganese-cobalt oxide
(NMC) or nickel-cobalt-alumina (NCA) as cathode will exhibit an improved
capacity retention when compared with pure Li foil. This project will provide an
example to design a new, reliable Li metal electrode with dendrite suppression
by integrating 2D material design, simulation and electrochemical performance
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.