* 2013184
* Elucidating the Fundamental Properties of the Nucleon with Dispersive Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Emilie Passemar, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2023
* USD 312,196.00

Modern nuclear physics and particle physics are concerned with understanding the
fundamental parameters and symmetries of nature. A crucial new piece of this
puzzle has recently become available with the Nobel-prize-winning discovery of
the neutrino flavor oscillations, which showed that neutrinos had masses
contrary to the paradigm of the Standard Model. Today, the field of neutrino
physics enters the precision era, with accelerator-based neutrino oscillation
experiments taking center stage in the experimental program in the US and in the
world. To understand neutrino interactions with nuclei in the detector requires
accurate modeling of strong interactionsâ€”the force that binds the nucleus
together. The PI will do this using state-of-the-art analytical techniques,
focusing on the quantities of most direct relevance to neutrino experiments at
Fermilab and elsewhere. This project will thus provide the necessary theoretical
foundations needed to support these experimental breakthroughs. It will also
provide excellent training ground for students and young researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is be on a specific piece of
physics that plays a crucial role in modeling neutrino interactions at GeV
energies: the nucleon axial form factor. It describes the structure of the
nucleon which is not a point-like particle but has a structure that is still not
well known. The PI and her collaborators will develop a physics-based framework
to accurately model this form factor, based on the methods of chiral
perturbation theory and dispersive techniques. Moreover, a bridge to numerical
evaluations on the lattice will be established by applications of various
analytical constraints, such as current conservation. Agreement with various
electron scattering data will also be explored. This will support state-of-the-
art nuclear physics experiments at Thomas Jefferson Laboratory, particularly
GlueX or CLAS, as well as the upcoming precision neutrino-nucleus scattering
experiments at Fermilab and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.