* 2013711
* Safety in Ocean and Field Sciences:  Developing best practices for harassment prevention and response
* BIO,DEB
* 11/08/2019,05/31/2023
* Anne Kelly, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 81,665.00

This award will fund a workshop (place and dates to be determined) to develop
policies and best practices to deal with sexual harrassment associated with
field research. While many institutions and organizations are revisiting their
policies and practices regarding sexual harassment, there remains a gap in
attention to policies and best practices specifically tailored to the remote and
isolated nature of the field environment. Institutions lack policy on response
to the acute safety issues caused by harassment in remote settings, as well as
guidance on jurisdiction for potential responses,This workshop will: (1) open a
dialogue between sexual harassment experts and the field research community to
develop best practices and recommendations; (2) build coordination and
encouraging consistency in policy setting and enforcement across field stations
and oceanographic platforms; (3) develop processes to monitor the reporting of
sexual harassment instances occurring at remote field locations; and (4) promote
a safe culture for scientists conducting research at remote field stations and
on oceanographic vessels. Participants will include sexual harassment experts,
leadership from academic research institutions, research stations, and ship
operators, field researchers, technical/crew managers, and representation from
member associations. The recommendations will be broadly distributed at
appropriate scientific meetings and associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.