* 2013205
* RUI: Neutrino Scattering Experiments at the Spallation Neutron Source
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Diane Markoff, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 290,000.00

Of all known elementary particles, neutrinos stand out for the difficulty
involved in their detection, a result of their tiny probability of interaction
with other forms of matter. Large (ton or multi-ton) detectors are typically
involved. Coherent Elastic Neutrino-Nucleus Scattering (CEvNS) is a mechanism of
neutrino interaction predicted more than four decades ago, but only recently
observed by the COHERENT collaboration using a Cesium-Iodide detector. The
probability of neutrino detection via CEvNS is much larger than for any other
known mode of neutrino interaction with matter, but the signals generated are
subtle, hard to isolate, and dependent on the elemental composition of the
detector. Measuring these interactions helps to constrain the many unknown
properties of the evasive neutrino and contributes to the refinement of the
underlying theories of particle interactions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal supports the North Carolina Central University (NCCU) neutrino group to
continue its participation in the COHERENT Collaboration activities including
the deployment of a multi-ton Sodium Iodide detector and the development and
deployment of a Germanium detector array. The full range of detectors (Cesium
Iodide, Sodium Iodide, and Germanium) will allow for a robust test of the theory
describing the CEvNS interaction. NCCU is a masterâ€™s granting, primarily
undergraduate Historically Black College or University (HBCU) in which the
majority of students participating are African-American or Hispanic-American.
This award will support the engagement of NCCU students in forefront physics
research. The award also supports the NCCU Telescope Team in which students from
the neutrino group contribute to local Outdoor Astronomy programs, and give
lectures to high-school STEM programs and the public on the use of nuclear
physics techniques for analysis of cultural artifacts. In addition, the PI will
initiate activities with the Clement Early College High School students at NCCU
to participate in the building and deploying of environmental monitoring
instruments including radiation detectors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The CEvNS
interaction is one of the largest cross sections relevant to supernova dynamics
and plays an important role in core collapse processes because the CEvNS cross-
section is predicted, in the Standard Model, to scale approximately with the
square of the target nucleus neutron number, N. This N-squared dependence is in
fact the signature of the coherent nature of the interaction, indicating that
the target nucleus recoils as a whole rather than as an individual neutron or
proton. In order to fully probe the CEvNS interaction, a range of nuclei must be
tested. This proposal enables NCCU to contribute to the deployment of a multi-
ton NaI detector array and to develop a shielded array of low-background, low-
threshold, p-type point contact Ge detectors. In addition to the spectral
N-squared dependence, the precision CEvNS measurements in Ge will lead to
information on nuclear form factors. CEvNS measurement in the odd-proton nucleus
23-Sodium will hopefully be sensitive to axial vector contributions to the
interaction. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The measurements of neutrino scattering
cross sections are of interest to a broad range of physics communities. With a
well-predicted Standard Model cross section, deviations from the expected values
become a probe of non-standard neutrino interactions and may put limits on light
mediator particles. The CEvNS interaction with solar and atmospheric neutrinos,
for example, is an irreducible background to direct dark matter weakly
interacting massive particles (WIMP) searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.