* 2013011
* Investigation of the Low-Lying Nuclear Isomeric Transition in the A=229 Isotope of Thorium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Eric Hudson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 560,702.00

A nuclear isomer occurs when protons or neutrons in an atomic nucleus become
excited but do not immediately decay back to their ground state. Forty years
ago, a nuclear isomeric state was discovered in Thorium-229 which has especially
unusual characteristics. The energy of this state is only 8 electron volts above
the ground state and it has a half-life of 15 minutes. This is the lowest energy
nuclear transition known and it can potentially be excited using lasers in the
vacuum ultraviolet region (VUV). If the transition can be harnessed, then it
would allow for the manipulation of a nuclear state using lasers, which has
never been done before. The ultimate goal is to use the characteristics of this
state to investigate one of the most compelling questions in modern science: Are
the constants of nature actually constants? Further, the isomeric state should
allow the construction of a nuclear clock which may outperform all current and
planned optical clocks, thereby improving navigation and communication.
Previously, the Thorium-229 isomeric state has been produced using high energy
collisions in a particle accelerator. This award will enable a research team
from UCLA to create the isomer using table-top lasers, and to precisely measure
the excitation energy, improving our knowledge of the transition energy by 4 to
5 orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team will use a custom
VUV laser system to excite the transition from the ground state to the isomeric
state in both a crystal doped with thorium-229 and a sample of thorium oxide
containing the A = 229 isotope. In the case of the crystal, any excitation of
the nucleus will subsequently lead to nuclear fluorescence which will be
detected by sensitive photon detectors. In the case of the metal, any excitation
of the nucleus will subsequently lead to emission of an internal conversion
electron which will be detected by a sensitive electron detector. These signals
will be monitored to determine the transition energy and lifetime of the nuclear
state. Once the transition is found, the potential of the transition for use as
a clock oscillator will be explored by comparing a preliminary thorium clock
architecture to more established atomic clocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.