* 2013947
* Static Liquefaction of Mine Tailings under Non-Standard Stress Paths
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Jorge Macedo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 170,576.00

Static liquefaction of mine tailings has caused numerous recent failures in the
United States and around the world. Failure of tailings storage facilities lead
to devastating consequences for the environment and civil infrastructure, and
lead to loss of human lives. The 2008 Kingston fossil plant failure in
Tennessee, an environmental disaster with associated losses on the order of 1.2
billion dollars, is a prime example of the tremendous impact that a tailings
storage facility failure can cause. Future failures could have similar
devastating consequences for the local and state economies, populations, and
industries. Therefore, evaluating the safety of tailings storage facilities is
vitally important in any region where mining is active, such as in Colorado,
Nevada, Utah, Arizona, and others. Mine tailings are intermediate soil materials
often classified as sandy silt to almost pure silt. Conditions for static
liquefaction (sudden loss of stability even in the absence of extreme events
such as earthquakes) on these materials cannot be evaluated using known
engineering procedures. This research will create new knowledge for improving
resilient design of tailings storage facilities against static liquefaction and
provide insights into creating new design protocols to mitigate potential
disasters in the United States and worldwide that are induced by the static
liquefaction of mine tailings. The research will also establish an educational
and outreach program focused on curriculum development on intermediate soil
materials for K-12 students, through STEM centers at Georgia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an integrated experimentally and numerically-
based program inspired by recent failures in tailings storage facilities, this
research advances liquefaction engineering by investigating (1) the mechanical
response of mine tailings under standard and non-standard stress paths, while
considering a range of boundary conditions; (2) the conditions for static
liquefaction under drained loading conditions, where recent failure events point
to a lack of thorough understanding despite the opposite perception among
geotechnical engineers; (3) the micromechanics of mine tailings under shearing
through image-based experimental techniques; and (4) the effects of
micromechanical configurations (i.e. fabric) and induced anisotropy on
triggering static liquefaction by using the novel anisotropic critical state
theory. Gaining insights into the key parameters that govern the triggering of
static liquefaction in mine tailings and developing well-calibrated numerical
procedures using the anisotropic critical state theory will transform the
ability of geotechnical engineering profession to more effectively evaluate and
mitigate the risk of static liquefaction in mine
tailings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.