* 2013929
* WOWCLAN People: Workshop on Water, Culture, Language, and Native People in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* John Anderson, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2023
* USD 26,757.00

The Workshop on Water, Culture, Language, and Native People (WOWCLAN) will be a
three-day workshop attended by Indigenous representatives from Siberia, Alaska,
and the Pacific Northwest. The workshop is designed to discuss the collection of
reliable water quality data in these respective regions, as well as discuss data
management and archival techniques for Indigenous data sources. The workshop
explores the boundaries and connections between Indigenous Knowledge and western
science and will create an ongoing dialogue between Indigenous Peoples and the
science community on the issue of water quality and data collection and sharing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop organizers will train participants in data
collection and testing, as well as cultural preservation and documentation. In
addition to learning scientific techniques and the use of various monitoring and
recording devices, Indigenous participants will have the opportunity to build
relationships and exchange views and ideas. Western scientists will gain an
understanding of Indigenous needs and perspectives with regard to human health
and the environment, as well as a new understanding of water quality in several
remote regions that have seen little data collection on this topic. This project
will contribute to broader impacts by improving understanding of spatially
distinct cultures, advancing cultural understanding, advancing understanding of
water quality and, by extension, environmental quality. The effect of blending
Indigenous Knowledge with science will lead to greater understanding of human
and environmental well-being, with a goal to increased diversity and Indigenous
representation in various scientific enterprises. Outcomes of this workshop will
include extensive training opportunities for conference participants and a final
workshop report that will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.