* 2013987
* Collaborative Research: Freeze-on of Subglacial Sediments in Experiments and Theory
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lucas Zoet, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 275,101.00

The fastest-changing regions of the Antarctic and Greenland Ice Sheets that
contribute most to sea-level rise are underlain by soft sediments that
facilitate glacier motion. Glacier ice can infiltrate several meters into these
sediments, depending on the temperature and water pressure at the base of the
glacier. To understand how ice infiltration into subglacial sediments affects
glacier slip, the team will conduct laboratory experiments under relevant
temperature and pressure conditions and compare the results to state-of-the-art
mathematical models. Through an undergraduate research exchange between
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Dartmouth College, and the College of Menominee
Nation, Native American students will work on laboratory experiments in one
summer and mathematical theory in the following
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice-sediment interactions are a central component
of ice-sheet and landform-development models. Limited process understanding
poses a key uncertainty for ice-sheet models that are used to forecast sea-level
rise. This uncertainty underscores the importance of developing experimentally
validated, theoretically robust descriptions of processes at the ice-sediment
interface. To achieve this, the team aims to build on long-established
theoretical, experimental, and field investigations that have elucidated the
central role of premelting and surface-energy effects in controlling the
dynamics of frost heave in soils. Project members will theoretically describe
and experimentally test the role of premelting at the basal ice-sediment
interface. The experiments are designed to provide quantitative insight into the
impact of ice infiltration into sediments on glacier sliding, erosion, and
subglacial landform evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.