* 2013443
* Advancing Adaptation of Writing Pedagogies for Undergraduate STEM Education Through Transdisciplinary Action Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* John Gallagher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating how to help
engineering and science students develop effective communication skills. Both
the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering have
emphasized this critical competency. Nevertheless, communication skills remain
challenging for students to develop. The long-term objective of this work is to
improve the writing skills of undergraduate students pursuing science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) degrees in a lasting, cost-
effective, and scalable way. This transdisciplinary project will build on an
intensive existing collaboration between STEM and writing-studies faculty. Best
practices for teaching writing have been established by previous research in
writing studies. However, these practices remain largely unadopted in most STEM
classes. STEM students must master different genres and conventions, depending
on their discipline. Examples include technical reports and talks, standards,
laboratory reports, and scientific papers for the archival literature. In
addition, STEM classes tend to be large and few STEM faculty are trained to
teach and respond effectively to student writing. This project will investigate
the effectiveness of a program called Writing Across Engineering &amp; Science
(WAES) in promoting faculty adoption of best practices and engaging students
with professional writing throughout the undergraduate curriculum. This research
project will i) inform continued developments to the WAES program, ii) build a
faculty community working to adapt and innovate best practices from writing
studies to suit the constraints and objectives of different types and sizes of
STEM classes, iii) initiate evaluation of the effectiveness of those adaptations
and innovations, and iv) advance understanding of how to promote pedagogical
change, both within writing studies and for overall faculty development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WAES is a transdisciplinary program that empowers STEM
faculty to teach writing more effectively within their disciplinary contexts.
The project will apply a transdisciplinary action research approach that
integrates cross-disciplinary collaboration, ongoing research, and educational
reforms. The effectiveness of the WAES program at promoting pedagogical change
and engaging students with writing will be evaluated through a rigorous mixed-
methods, triangulated assessment plan. Objective 1 will evaluate the
effectiveness of the WAES program in increasing STEM faculty awareness of best
practices from writing studies and encouraging their creative adaptation of
those best practices. The qualitative, mixed-methods approach will include
faculty surveys, course materials, faculty interviews, and observations of WAES
sessions, mentoring meetings, classes and course staff meetings. These data will
be analyzed for uptake/rejection of concepts from writing studies and for
emergent themes. Objective 2 will assess the impact of the WAES program on
studentsâ€™ engagement with writing. Student engagement will be assessed first
through surveys in paired WAES-impacted and control classes, using both
affective and behavioral questions. Stimulated elicitation interviews will be
conducted with students for a deeper understanding of impacts. Student writing
samples will be collected, and multidimensional analysis of linguistic and
rhetorical features of the writing will be initiated. This project is supported
by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources. The IUSE: EHR program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in
the Engaged Student Learning track, through which the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.