* 2013263
* Study of Preservice Teachers' Science Content Knowledge and Pedagogical Content Knowledge
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,831,805.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the preparedness
of pre-service STEM teachers. For the nation to remain competitive in a global
economy driven by technology, excellent STEM teachers are needed to prepare new
generations of a large and highly competent STEM workforce. Toward this end, the
project will conduct a nationwide study of the strengths and weaknesses of STEM
and teaching knowledge of individuals who will soon enter the STEM teaching
workforce. By examining these pre-service teacher experiences before and during
their preparation, this research seeks to reveal the experiences that optimize
teacher knowledge for effective science teaching. It will also assess the
prevalence and efficacy of novel approaches developed for pre-service teacher
preparation, which can provide policy makers with information to inform the
design and expansion of pre-service teaching programs. It is anticipated that
the work will also lead to more efficient use of scarce resources. Any pre-
service teacher will be able to use the assessment instruments at no cost for
self-assessment. Undergraduate instructors of both science and education courses
will also be able to use these assessment to gauge the knowledge of incoming
students, as well as the knowledge gains they experience over the duration of
their course. Results of this research have the potential to identify the most
promising features of undergraduate pre-service programs for future
implementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making use of psychometrically valid and
reliable assessments previously developed by the project team with NSF support,
the study will characterize two essential types of teacher knowledge: 1) subject
matter knowledge; and 2) pedagogical content knowledge concerning the common
preconceptions and misconceptions held by learners, reflecting stages in student
learning progressions. High levels of these two kinds of teacher knowledge have
been shown to predict large student gains in science classrooms. Using data
collected from a survey accompanying each assessment, pre-service teachers’
knowledge will be modeled in multiple linear regressions to determine the
predictive contribution of knowledge acquired prior to college (from high school
grades, coursework, and standardized science scores), the number and type of
college courses taken, attributes of their teacher preparation program and
student teaching experiences, as well as demographic variables. Administration
of these assessments and surveys to 2,000 undergraduate pre-service teachers by
faculty in 100 science methods classes will ensure a large and comprehensive
national sample of new teachers, including elementary school generalists,
elementary science specialists, and middle school and high school science
teachers, because virtually all those intending to teach science take these
classes. Pre-service teachers will be able to choose the assessment that most
closely aligns with their intended content focus and grade level, along with any
subjects that they may teach. The project has the potential to contribute to
improving the training of pre-service science teachers. This project is
supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR program, which supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. It is
a Level 3 Engaged Student Learning project that addresses the IUSE: EHR Pre-
service STEM Education and Research/Evaluation/Assessment
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.