* 2013067
* Physics-Reinforced Deep Learning for Structural Metamodeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Yanzhi Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 599,005.00

This research will develop new computational methods to advance modeling,
analysis and assessment of civil structural systems subjected to earthquakes.
Currently available simplified or reduced-order models widely used in structural
analysis have severe limitations in accurately predicting the complex
nonlinearities in structural response under earthquake loading (e.g., in the
presence of large nonlinear drifts, damage, failure, etc.). The infusion of
artificial intelligence (AI) into civil engineering offers a powerful new
approach for structural modeling. However, currently large amounts of data are
required to train a reliable AI model, and even with rich data, the trained
models are difficult to interpret and have little physical meaning. To address
these fundamental issues and to bridge the knowledge gap between AI and
performance-based engineering, this project will integrate deep learning and
physics principles for efficient and probabilistic modeling of nonlinear
structures under earthquake hazards. This research will advance more efficient
design, reliability analysis, control and optimization of engineering structures
with much less computational efforts. The project will also establish an
integrated research-education-outreach program that will (i) transform the
fundamental understanding of machine learning grounded with domain-specific
knowledge, (ii) promote participation by undergraduates, in particular, women
and minorities, and (iii) inspire high school students to pursue STEM-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will breathe novel elements of
machine learning into performance-based structural engineering, opening a new
avenue by leveraging deep learning integrated with physics knowledge for
modeling of seismic response of structural systems. The specific research aims
of this project include: (1) developing unsupervised learning-based ground
motion selection for optimal generation of seismic response database, (2)
establishing rigorous formulation and algorithm for an innovative, physics-
reinforced deep Learning paradigm for structural metamodeling, (3) developing a
neural network compression approach to prune the metamodels for efficient
inference, and (4) incorporating variability for probabilistic seismic response
prediction and fragility analysis. The resulting deep-learning-based metamodels
will possess salient features including (i) interpretability with physical
meaning, (ii) generalizability and extrapolation to unseen cases, (iii) real-
time inference based on a lightweight/compressed metamodel architecture, and
(iv) capability of addressing incomplete and scare data. This approach will be
applicable to a wide range of nonlinear dynamical systems under complex loading
conditions. This project will advance the knowledge base in multiple disciplines
of nonlinear structural dynamics, computational modeling, robust and efficient
machine/deep learning, optimization and uncertainty
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.