* 2013217
* RUI: Experimental Neutrino Research at Minnesota Duluth
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Alec Habig, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2024
* USD 628,526.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. A primary area to search for answers to these and
other open questions about the universe, how it came to be and why it is the way
it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to use what we
know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the Standard
Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact with practically
nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and were once thought
to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were believed to have an
antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the Standard Model predicted
that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that were
distinguishable through the different interactions that they did undergo
whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have totally changed
our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and because
they do, they can actually change from one type to another. The Intellectual
Merit of this work is in the detailed measurements of these changes, along with
other current neutrino experiments. These form one of the most promising ways to
probe for new physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) and are the subject of
this investigation. This research will involve the work of undergraduate
students at the University of Minnesota, Duluth, an RUI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty and students working on the NOvA and MINERvA
experiments will further the neutrino oscillation measurements and are working
toward first astrophysics results. The effort includes enhancing the ability for
NOvA electronics to self-detect the neutrino burst from a potential galactic
supernova and share that alert with the world-wide supernova detection network.
Neutrino interaction measurements continue with existing and incoming data from
the MINERvA experiment. Finally, the group is pursuing work toward the next
generation experiment, DUNE, including roles in the data acquisition system,
design of the near detectors, and the role of neutrino interaction uncertainties
in the design sensitivity of the experiment. This grant also supports broader
impacts via participation and leadership of the NOvA outreach program, which
includes regular summer tours of the Soudan Underground Laboratory and the NOvA
detector at the Ash River, MN site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.