* 2013052
* Intersections Between Dark Matter and Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Walter Tangarife, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 94,668.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Walter Tangarife at Loyola
University Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of the most intriguing puzzles in
particle physics are the nature of dark matter and the origin of neutrino
masses. Dark matter is a major ingredient of the Universe whose effects on
galaxies and other astrophysical objects can be measured by physicists, but no
other property of dark matter is yet known. Neutrinos are particles that are
described as massless within the so-called "Standard Model of particle physics".
However, experiments have shown that while neutrinos are indeed incredibly
light, they are not massless. In his research, Professor Tangarife aims to
explore testable models in which neutrino physics and the dark-matter problem
are intertwined. Research in these topics advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of fundamental science through investigation of the laws
that govern the universe. This project is also envisioned to have significant
broader impacts. Professor Tangarife will involve undergraduate students in his
research, providing them with critical skills of great utility in both academic
and industrial careers. He also intends to give public lectures on his research
results and organize outreach events in high schools within the local community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Tangarife will investigate
models of keV sterile-neutrino dark matter in the presence of self-interactions.
New interactions enhance the production mechanism and provide signals to be
probed in next-generation experiments, including DUNE. Additionally, self-
interacting sterile neutrinos make good candidates for self-interacting dark
matter, which may be relevant for small-structure phenomena. This project will
also study Dirac dark-matter models in which the dark matter participates in the
generation of masses for the Standard-Model neutrinos. The goal is to constrain
scenarios in which the difference between baryon and lepton numbers is a gauge
symmetry. The phenomenology of such models will be constrained by dark-matter
detection experiments, dark-photon searches, and cosmological
bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.