* 2013073
* Non-Accelerator Physics with The Super-Kamiokande Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Henry Sobel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 473,040.00

This award will provide support for the group’s non-accelerator physics program
at the Kamioka Laboratory in Japan with the Super-Kamiokande (Super-K) detector.
Super-K has been a prime example of an astrophysics detector searching to help
understand the properties of neutrinos and the search for proton decay since
1996. With the current upgrade, it is now preparing to precisely determine
neutrino oscillation parameters with atmospheric neutrinos. Atmospheric
neutrinos also provide an opportunity to understand the relative masses of the
various neutrino flavors and are sensitive to the so-called Charge-Parity
(CP)-violation phase, which could help identify why there is so much more matter
than anti-matter in the Universe. This award will also support the possibility
of observing other types of neutrino interactions that will extend the indirect
search for dark matter to medium/low Dark Matter
masses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kamioka Laboratory has an extensive program for
involving the public, undergraduate students, and K-12 students in the
excitement of this research. The graduate student working on the new system will
be integrated into these activities and lecture on the physics that comes from
looking at astroparticle physics in Super-K. Each summer, the group selects
undergraduate students from UCI and high school students to work at UCI or in
Japan. The State of California COSMOS program provides a residential academic
experience for high school students with a mission to motivate the most creative
minds of the new generation of prospective scientists, engineers, and
mathematicians. UCI faculty create course “clusters” in topics from astrophysics
to mathematical modeling to marine ecosystems just for COSMOS. Here, they
propose to originate a cluster in experimental particle physics emphasizing
detection techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A previous NSF grant supported the
design, construction and installation of a new trigger system, the Wideband
Intelligent Trigger (WIT) system, which completely processes all of the data in
the un-triggered, raw stream and extracts electrons with high efficiency down
2.49 MeV, the limit of stable and reliable event reconstruction at Super-K. The
UCI group will capitalize on the investment of the previous award and take the
lead in WIT data analysis. Super-K is currently in the process of being upgraded
with the addition of gadolinium in order to enhance its neutron detection
capabilities. At present, neutrons are observed by the 2.2 MeV photon emitted
from capture on Hydrogen after about 200 micro-sec. On average there are only
seven detected photons and the detection efficiency is quite low. After
dissolving 0.2% Gd2(SO4)3, 90% of the neutrons will capture on Gd which makes an
8 MeV gamma cascade and produces about 22 detected photons per capture after
about 35 micro-sec. High efficiency neutron detection will benefit many physics
topics in Super-K-Gd. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.