* 2013314
* Workshop on Mid-scale STEM Education Research Infrastructure
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Jessica Avery, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 96,609.00

With support from NSF’s Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal
Settings and the Division of Undergraduate Education, this project will serve
the national interest by exploring midscale approaches to improving STEM
education for all students. The award will fund a workshop that brings together
education researchers and other key stakeholders to explore how NSF’s Mid-scale
Research Infrastructure Big Idea could facilitate STEM education research. This
Big Idea aims to address research infrastructure needs of the scientific,
engineering, and STEM education fields by investing in the development of
experimental research capabilities in the mid-scale range, defined as $20-70
million total project cost. Mid-scale infrastructure funding is intended to
support development, design, and construction of cutting-edge research
infrastructure to support scientific advances. In the STEM education field, such
investments have the potential to advance research on many topics, including the
development of technologies for use in educational settings, models of
education, and career pathways. The results of this research could help the
nation meet the learning needs of an increasingly diverse population at all
stages of the learning lifecycle. Successful implementation of this workshop
will produce a vision and a set of priorities for the mid-scale research
infrastructure needed to support STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop on Mid-scale STEM Education Research
Infrastructure will convene STEM Research education experts and stakeholders to
exchange ideas about how mid-scale research infrastructure can advance the
frontier of STEM education and to develop a community of stakeholders around
this topic. Mid-scale research infrastructure is necessary to enable the
advancement of knowledge about how best to educate all learners regarding STEM
concepts and skills. Developing foundational skills and knowledge in STEM is an
imperative for all students in primary and secondary education. At the
postsecondary level, success in STEM is crucial to a broad range of professions
and career pathways. Graduate training both prepares the researchers who will
advance basic knowledge as well as the next generation of teachers and
professors. Informal STEM educators also play a key role in providing
opportunities to engage with STEM applications and concepts. Although much
progress has been made across sectors in developing effective instructional
practices in STEM, the proliferation of new technologies such as mixed reality
and simulations, of computational applications across disciplines, and of
interdisciplinary educational and career pathways will lead to new challenges
and opportunities to be addressed by education research. This workshop aims to
advance the nation’s STEM education by enhancing knowledge of relevant research
infrastructure needs. The workshop will convene an interdisciplinary group of
experts with the charge to identify opportunities and gaps that can inform the
potential for mid-scale research infrastructure to advance STEM education
research. The resulting workshop summary will detail potential projects and
identify anticipated near-term outcomes and long-term impacts of mid-scale STEM
education research infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.