* 2013316
* The Role of In-Class Inquiry in Shaping Student Identity and Outcomes in Entry-Level STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Perry Samson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the educational
experiences in large entry-level STEM courses. In these courses, many students
feel uncomfortable asking questions. This reluctance is caused by issues such as
a lack of confidence, fear of looking foolish, and discomfort with interrupting.
The reluctance to ask questions in class is more pronounced for students
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. Accordingly, mitigating these
classroom climate factors is considered critical to decreasing STEM college
student attrition. A promising approach to increase student inquiry in large
classes is to use in-class anonymous backchannels as a social layer to improve
student classroom engagement. Backchannels are digital conversations, such as
“chat,” that occur during a class session and allow students to anonymously post
questions. There is evidence that the use of a backchannel increases the
frequency of questions posed and the range of students participating in
classroom interactions. Thus far, however, the research has not connected the
use of backchannels in classes to the broader goal of maintaining student STEM
persistence. This research will obtain information about the effectiveness of
backchannels as a teaching technique to improve STEM education for undergraduate
students, determine whether the use of backchannels increases student STEM
identity and persistence, and determine whether backchannel use differs for
students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines. Research will be
conducted in coordination with a consortium of eleven universities that are
working to improve foundational STEM courses through development of equitable
and inclusive STEM curricula and teaching practices. Further dissemination will
occur via a higher education video-platform company that can share lessons
learned by the project with their client institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is grounded in existing educational frameworks and is based on
a model that includes potential mediators between backchannel availability and
its influence on STEM identity and persistence. The mediators are based on
Expectancy-Value Theory, Self-Determination Theory, and extensive studies of
belonging, classroom questioning, and help seeking. Expectancy-Value Theory
focuses on student efficacy, values, and the personal and social cost of asking
questions, and is relevant to recent studies in the STEM education literature.
Self-Determination Theory mediators are the basic needs of belonging and
autonomy, the extent to which students feel that they belong to the class as
well as the STEM discipline, and are especially important for underrepresented
student populations. The extensive literature on student questioning and help
seeking is critical since it has yet to be incorporated into backchannel
research. This research will compare students’ perceived help-seeking threat
versus the perceived benefits of asking questions. Mediators will be tested
using multi-level and multi-group analyses and include statistical controls for
non-backchannel between-class differences (e.g., class size). The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources.
Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.