* 2013825
* SBIR Phase I:  Active Smart Wearable Compression Technology for Treating Breast Cancer Related Lymphedema
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Anand Doraiswamy, KOYA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,957.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to address needs related to lymphedema. Lymphedema is a common and
lifelong side-effect of cancer surgery that occurs from injury or damage to
lymphatics, affecting approximately 10 million patients in the US. When it
occurs in the extremities, this condition causes swelling that can restrict
patient motion, cause discomfort, damage skin, and untreated it can lead to
cellulitis, ulceration and infection/hospitalization. Depending on the disease
stage, standard treatments include garment wraps, manual drainage/massage,
pneumatic compression and complete decongestive therapy. This project will
develop an ambulatory compression solution that is programmable, calibrated, and
quiet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project supports the development of a next-generation wearable
therapeutic platform for treating chronic venous and lymphatic diseases using
sequential compression therapy. The project will develop a shape-memory
electromechanical actuator platform and system architecture to achieve precise
and remote control over compression therapy to stimulate the bodyâ€™s lymphatic
and venous system. The wearable system will comprise of a controller and a
segmental garment with multiple, programmable, individualized compression
channels. The device will be powered with a lithium-ion battery and
microprocessor control integrated in a wearable solution the size of a
smartphone and enabled for remote monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.