* 2013859
* Multi-loop amplitudes and precise predictions for the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andreas von Manteuffel, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Andreas von Manteuffel at
Michigan State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way of understanding matter
and interactions at a fundamental level is by colliding small subatomic
particles against each other at high energies and examining the new particles
that may emerge. For this reason, collider experiments are crucial for this
quest. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN Laboratory allows for
precision physics at very high energies, probing details of the current so-
called "Standard Model" of particle physics and searching for small signals of
possible new physics beyond it. The research of Professor von Manteuffel enables
particularly precise theory predictions in order to draw firm conclusions from
available and future collider data. New computational methods allow for the
formulation of theoretical predictions with unprecedented precision and lead to
an improved structural understanding of the theoretical framework, perturbative
quantum field theory, which underlies these calculations. As such, this research
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its purest forms: the understanding of the basic laws of Nature. Bridging the
fields of theoretical physics, applied mathematics, and computer science, this
project is also expected to have a broad impact beyond the primary field of
study. This project will also involve the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in theoretical physics and other disciplines, equipping
them with strong skills, both in analytical reasoning and information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor von Manteuffel will
calculate radiative corrections for LHC observables involving the Higgs boson, W
and Z bosons, the top quark, and other particles at high perturbative orders in
the gauge theory of strong and electroweak interactions. A central focus will be
on the calculation of scattering amplitudes and Feynman integrals with multiple
loops, multiple legs, and internal masses. These calculations are enabled by the
development of improved computational methods, ranging from symbolic to
numerical approaches and employing high-performance
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.