* 2013502
* Generalizing Data-Driven Technologies to Improve Individualized STEM Instruction by Intelligent Tutors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,999,578.00

Intelligent tutors are computer systems that use technologies such as artificial
intelligence to provide learners with personalized instruction and feedback.
They have been shown to be highly effective at improving students' learning,
largely because of their ability to provide students with individualized,
adaptive support as they learn. This project aims to advance the technology for
building intelligent tutors. To do so, it will develop a framework for building
intelligent tutors that makes it easier to create personalized learning
experiences that adapt to individual learners. The resulting intelligent
tutoring system will use data to determine what actions the system should take,
when the system should act, and explain why these actions should lead to
improved learning. This new intelligent tutoring system has the potential to
transform STEM learning environments by providing accessible, low-cost,
individualized instruction for complex STEM topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a generalizable data-driven framework to induce a wide
range of instructional interventions and robust, yet flexible pedagogical
decision-making policies across three STEM fields (logic, probability, and
programming) and types of intervention (worked examples, buggy examples, and
Parsons problems). The system will be designed to allow use of the intelligent
tutor in a wide range of STEM-related domains. The system will use advanced
machine learning and data mining techniques to generate instructional
interventions, mixed-initiative pedagogical policies, and human-in-the-loop
explanations. This research will advance knowledge about data-driven generation
of mixed-initiative decision making that balances a student’s sense of agency
with their need for effective instructional interventions at critical decision
points. The efficacy of the resulting system will be evaluated via a series of
empirical studies comparing the new interventions with existing tutoring systems
to determine the impact on learning outcomes, agency, personalization, and
effective interactions. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources. The IUSE:
EHR program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the Engaged
Student Learning track, through which the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.