* 2013863
* TCUP SGR: Salish Kootenai College Life Sciences Hg(II) Methylating Microbiota and Methyl-Hg(II) Concentrations in Flathead Lake
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Christina Rush, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,942.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover may prove to be a model for similar
engagement at other small community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to identify microbiota and methyl-Hg(II) concentrations in Flathead Lake to
map the environmental impacts climate change may be incurring on the Flathead
reservation and in the wider Flathead valley in Montana. Elemental mercury (Hg)
is deposited into the atmosphere primarily from sources including coal-burning
and forest fires. Atmospheric Hg(II) accumulates in large water bodies, such as
Flathead Lake on the Flathead reservation. Hg(II) in the lakebed soil sediments
is subject to methylation by methylating microbiota, such as the methanogens sp.
Once methylated, Hg(II) bioaccumulates/biomagnifies in the environment
increasing with the size and phylum of animals reaching, often, toxic levels in
apex predators and humans. Preliminary work by undergraduate students at the
Salish Kootenai College has identified methanogen sp. in the soil-bed samples
from two locations in the lower Flathead Lake and methyl-Hg(II) in the water.
Salish Kootenai College will sample Flathead Lake for Hg(II)-methylating
microbiota in the lakebed soil and for concentrations of methyl-Hg(II) in the
water. Experimental procedures will include RNA isolation and sequencing to
identify the local microbe population and to measure the concentration of
methyl-Hg(II) in the water at those microbe sites. Further sampling will aim to
provide a solid statistical basis for climate change reference as it will impact
the Flathead valley where climate change will result in higher Hg(II) deposition
in the lake and promote microbial growth for Hg(II)
methylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.