* 2013854
* Excellence in Research: First Principles Defect Engineering of Plasmonic Diluted Magnetic  Semiconducting Oxide Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Mogus Mochena, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This HBCU-UP award supports
theoretical and computational research to simulate and predict novel quantum
dots on the one hand and to develop a multidisciplinary computational physics
program within the Department of Physics on the other. Quantum dots have been
termed artificial atoms or molecules depending on their size and composition.
They range in size from 1 â€“ 100 nm in diameter and in numbers of atoms from
hundreds to tens of thousands. While the composition and properties of atoms are
predetermined by nature, the properties of artificial atoms or molecules can be
manipulated by varying their size and composition. Myriad opportunities exist to
create novel nanostructures, and this makes quantum dots a rich system for
investigating fundamental physics as well as for technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to merge two different
kinds of quantum dots, namely plasmonic quantum dots and diluted magnetic
quantum dots. Plasmonic materials are based on collective motions of electrons
in solids known as plasmons. These materials had been studied mostly on the
macroscopic scale with classical electromagnetism theory until recently. A new
property of plasmons known as localized surface plasmons was discovered on the
surface of quantum dots a decade ago. The existing approach of classical physics
has to be replaced with quantum mechanics in order to understand the emergent
phenomena. But developing a new theory for a finite system such as a quantum dot
requires computational methodology, since the finiteness breaks the
translational symmetry often invoked to solve problems for periodic systems. The
PI will apply quantum-mechanical as well as semi-classical computational
techniques to study a range of plasmonic quantum dots. These dots are expected
to have application in photonics and optoelectronics. On a separate track, the
project will investigate the plasmonic materials for the onset of ferromagnetism
when doped with a dilute amount of magnetic ions. These materials are of
interest in their own right for applications to prospective quantum computers
and spintronics at large. Eventually, the two tracks will be combined to see the
possibility of a multifunctional novel material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
will support the establishment of a computational physics program. The PI will
work with computational physicists and computer scientists to offer courses
modelled after a similar program at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC).
TACC resources will be used to train the students on high-performance computing
platforms. During their senior year, the students will work on research
problems. The course offerings and training are expected to prepare the students
for jobs in high tech industry or to continue their research and computational
experience into graduate school. In addition, the award will support a graduate
student. The PI will be involved in outreach programs to community colleges and
high schools to increase the number of students in the computational physics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to design multifunctional semiconducting oxide quantum dots by co-
doping them with magnetic and non-magnetic dopants. The project will have three
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;1) Semiconducting nanoplasmonic oxides: First-principles
calculations with density functional theory and the kinetic Monte Carlo
technique will be performed to develop new physical models that could address i)
the effect of band-to-band transitions, ii) localization of carriers, iii)
ligand and proximal effects, iv) quantum confinement effects for small-sized
quantum dots, and v) fewer carriers than those of noble metal nanocrystals that
are well described by the Drude-Lorentz model.&lt;br/&gt;2) Semiconducting oxide
quantum dots doped with TMs: The evolution of ferromagnetism in semiconducting
oxides is controversial in general because of the large number of competing
parameters involved in the synthesis. A detailed study of the electronic and
magnetic structures of transition-metal-doped semiconducting oxide quantum dots
throughout a wide parameter space which covers the incorporation of varying
amounts of dopant impurities, vacancies, and crystalline defects such as
interstitials will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;3) Plasmonic diluted magnetic
semiconducting oxide quantum dots: After steps 1) and 2) have been undertaken,
the combined system will be studied. The nanoplasmonic oxides will be doped with
dilute amounts of transition metal atoms and the diluted magnetic oxide quantum
dots with non-magnetic donors. Electronic and magnetic structures of the
combined system will be compared to results from 1) and 2).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve a graduate student and introduction of
undergraduates to research protocols. In tandem with the research, a
computational physics track will be launched that will train undergraduate
students in scientific supercomputing. The computational physics program is
expected to increase the number of physics majors. The PI will be also involved
in outreach programs to community colleges and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.