* 2013127
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: JEDI Alliance:  Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion in the Geo-and Environmental Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Gillian Bowser, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,658.00

JEDI Alliance: Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion in the Geo- and
Environmental Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES
planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in
discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion, and broadening
participation in STEM at scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of our planning
grant is to harness the collaborative potential of the GOLD community so that we
can understand what each of the five GOLD projects has learned regarding faculty
leadership development for justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion. We also
want to combine these strategies into a national alliance focused specifically
on justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion in the geo- and environmental
sciences. Given these goals, four overarching questions will guide our inquiry:
&lt;br/&gt;1. How do the successes and challenges of each of the five GOLD
projects broadly inform the process of developing leadership for broadening
participation? &lt;br/&gt;2. How can the component pieces from GEO GOLD be woven
into a comprehensive model for leadership for broadening participation? How is
impact measured across the diverse projects?&lt;br/&gt;3. How does the GOLD
learning community effectively transform itself into a collective impact
community? &lt;br/&gt;4. What form of a backbone organization best serves the
goals and aspirations of the JEDI Alliance? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning
efforts will lead to the creation of a comprehensive alliance proposal that
builds on the groundwork of the five GOLD projects and creates a national
alliance to influence a culture of change within the geo- and environmental
sciences that promotes justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (JEDI). The
shared vision of our five GOLD projects is to develop the capacity of leadership
teams within the field to identify and redress organizational practices that
impede broadening participation efforts in the GES. Although we focus on the
geosciences, our efforts will be applicable to disciplines in which there is
significant fieldwork involved and working in remote research locations. Our
planning efforts will also result in identifying a robust backbone organization
that will allow us to have true collective impact through coordinated
communication, data collection, and collective decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.