* 2013750
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of Advanced Discrete Simulation (PADS)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Dong Jin, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 5,000.00

Discrete simulations are widely employed across a variety of settings, from the
large-scale models that are commonplace in national laboratories (e.g., to
simulate particles or populations) to industrial applications (e.g., in
healthcare or transportation). The growing interest in simulations is also
fueled by dynamic research in big data, which is both used and generated by
simulations. In line with ongoing national efforts to train and diversify the
workforce in science, this award supports students in the United States to
attend the annual Conference on Principles of Advanced Discrete Simulation held
in Miami in June, 2020, with special emphasis on members of under-represented
groups such as female, minorities, and students with disabilities. This serves
the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the progress of
science as it provides a forum to disseminate research efforts, connect
researchers, and train the next generation of
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selected students have access to traditional
opportunities to support their career success and gain tools that support the
advancement of science in theoretical as well as applied research on discrete
simulations. Such traditional opportunities include presenting their work at the
event (through oral presentations as well as posters), developing their
scientific networks, and acquiring new state-of-the-art methods. Although the
conference builds on a rich history dating back to 1985, the innovative format
of the 2020 edition goes beyond traditional opportunities offered to students.
In particular, the conference actively supports workforce development and the
advancement of science by organizing (i) panels on careers beyond a doctoral
program, with contributors from national laboratories, liberal arts colleges,
and research universities; and (ii) a PhD colloquium where students create and
present a poster, among other activities. The funding provided by NSF thus has a
significant impact on the careers of the future generation of researchers in
discrete simulation, while encouraging diversity in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.