* 2013451
* Enhancing Undergraduate Learning About Biomechanics and Data Science Through Augmented Reality and Self-motion Data
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Karen Chen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to combine learning about biomechanics with learning about
data science. Biomechanics is the study of the structure and movement of living
things. Biomechanics uses data about motion and the science of mechanics to
answer questions such as how birds fly and how people walk. This knowledge can
then be used for many purposes, such as designing artificial joints and helping
workers avoid injuries. Data science applies methods such as artificial
intelligence and algorithms to analyze data from any source, including data
about human motion. These analyses can lead to new insights and new discoveries
about the source of the data. This project will enable biomechanics students to
become the source of the movement data that they will analyze using data science
methods. Students will use computer vision and machine learning to create
datasets from their own movements. They will then use these personally relevant
datasets to learn both biomechanics and data science, and to gain a
comprehensive understanding of human motion. To support the data collection and
analysis, the project will develop a platform for augmented learning and
associated curriculum modules for both in-class and out-of-class
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and implement an
augmented learning platform that will enable undergraduate students in different
STEM paths to "be the dataset" and interactively acquire formal concepts and
feedback in biomechanics and data science. The project has the potential to
advance learning sciences and education technology by expanding the
understanding of students' interactions with self-generated motion data, as well
as the effectiveness of the specific instructional technologies and strategies.
The project includes an educational research project that will employ a two-
phase design-based approach. Questionnaires will be used to collect data about
student demographics, and semi-structured interviews will be used to learn more
about student experiences with analyzing self-motion data and using augmented
reality technologies, as well as their interests and self-efficacy in
biomechanics or data science. Descriptive statistics will be used to acquire an
overall understanding of the student sample. Repeated measures ANOVA and ANCOVA
will be used to analyze changes in student interests and self-efficacy over
time. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources. The IUSE: EHR program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning track, through
which the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of
promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.