* 2013873
* Quantum Gravity on the Inside
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* David Kaplan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 35,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Jared Kaplan at Johns
Hopkins University.

For many years, physicists have been searching for a way to combine our
understanding of the gravitational force, which is based on Einstein's theory of
general relativity, with quantum mechanics. However, such a fusion gives rise to
the so-called Black-Hole Information Paradox, which seems to challenge one of
our most fundamental physical principles, namely the principle of locality,
which states that objects can only interact if they are near each other. But
just as Heisenberg's uncertainty principle was only a harbinger of all manner of
quantum weirdness, the information paradox may presage other subtle violations
of locality. The goal of Professor Kaplan's research is to study some of these
exotic phenomena in order to determine if the laws of physics, and in particular
the principle of locality, can be maintained near black holes. As a result, this
research advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science
towards the discovery and understanding of fundamental physical principles. This
research project will also have broader impacts, as Professor Kaplan will
involve graduate students in his research and plans to disseminate the results
of this research through public talks.

On a more technical level, Professor Kaplan aims to study locality in quantum
gravity using the AdS/CFT correspondence. In particular, he will focus on the
following questions: (1) How can the AdS/CFT correspondence make predictions for
physical bulk observers beyond perturbation theory? (2) Are previously-
discovered non-perturbative locality violations in (2+1)-dimensional AdS space
robust and physical? (3) Can the impossibility of screening the gravitational
field in AdS/CFT be demonstrated? Professor Kaplan will use the AdS/CFT
correspondence, the conformal bootstrap, and Virasoro symmetry to perform
explicit calculations that will help to address these questions. Professor
Kaplan will also endeavor to interpret technical developments in CFT in terms of
quantum gravity in AdS in order to shed light on the mysteries of black-hole
evaporation and the limitations on locality in quantum gravity. Finally,
Professor Kaplan will work to extend his results to higher dimensions and to
more physically relevant spacetimes, including quantum gravitating cosmologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.