* 2013969
* An Entropy Approach to Invariance and Reachability of Uncertain Control Systems with Limited Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Majid Zamani, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 379,327.00

This grant will investigate the control of uncertain nonlinear systems with
limited information and with respect to reachability (i.e., the ability to
eventually reach a desired region) and invariance (i.e., the ability to always
remain in a desired region) objectives. Digital components such as communication
systems, digital sensors, and microprocessors are being used ubiquitously in
modern control systems to implement closed-loop control. Example systems that
utilize closed-loop control include traffic network, autonomous transportation,
power networks, and assisted living systems. The intricate interactions between
the digital and physical components introduces major challenges in the analysis
and control of such systems that cannot be addressed by the methods available in
classical control theory. For example, due to the finite bandwidth of
communication channels between sensors and controllers, information exchange
between them is limited. The fundamental question of whether certain control
objectives are realizable by taking into account such limited information
exchange cannot be answered by classical control theory. The notion of entropy
(i.e., a measure of uncertainty in a systemâ€™s initial condition) as an
information measure has shown to be a key concept in addressing these types of
questions. This project will investigate novel notions of entropiesy for
invariance and reachability properties for uncertain nonlinear systems. The
results of this project will enable the first step towards the efficient
deployment of many innovative applications including underwater vehicles, sensor
networks, and industrial control networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this project is the analysis of information measures for nondeterministic
control systems to determine the minimal data rates necessary for the
realization of invariance and reachability properties. In addition, this project
will also analyze minimal data rates for interconnected nondeterministic control
subsystems to enforce invariance properties based on data rates of subsystems.
Specifically, the project will introduce the notion of subsystem invariance
entropy, in which lower and upper bounds for the invariance entropy of the
overall interconnected system are computed compositionally. Similar to the
analysis of limited information feedback, formal synthesis of controllers for
solving certain complex control objectives, taking into account the digital
components, is a challenge that cannot be addressed with classical techniques. A
relatively recent approach, namely, the abstraction-based controller synthesis
method, has proven to be a promising candidate to address this class of
problems. This project will use the developed information measures to quantify
the computational complexity underling the abstraction-based synthesis approach.
Finally, the project will research numerical algorithms using abstraction-based
techniques to compute upper bounds of the researched entropy
notions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.