* 2013930
* Advances in Bayesian Nonparametric Methods for Jointly Modeling Multiple Data Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Li Ma, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

Bayesian nonparametrics is a statistical modeling framework that combines
flexibility of classical nonparametric statistical methods with principled
assessment of uncertainty under the Bayesian paradigm. Traditional Bayesian
nonparametric methods, however, have largely focused on models based on a single
data set, while many modern statistical scenarios involve multiple data sets of
similar nature collected under related or comparative conditions. This project
develops a suite of new modeling and computational strategies that are tailored
for effective joint modeling of multiple data sets in ways that (i) capture
cross-sample variation in modern complex data, and (ii) are computationally
efficient to allow application to massive data. The developed methodology will
have impact in a range of fields including biology, economics, education,
astrophysics, political science, and climate science, where the task is to
properly characterize variation across data sets. The project provides excellent
research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel models, methods, and algorithms will be
developed in the context of two classes of widely used Bayesian nonparametric
models: (i) mixture models with discrete random measure (DRM) mixing
distributions (e.g., Dirichlet process mixtures) and (ii) tree-structured random
measure (TSRM) models (e.g., Polya tree type models). These two model classes
are different in nature with each having its own advantages and limitations in
modeling multiple data sets, and as such the strategies in advancing these two
model classes are distinct. A key limitation of DRM mixtures in modeling
multiple samples is their lack of flexibility in characterizing the cross-sample
variation, and thus a new latent variable modeling strategy will be developed
for substantially enhancing their capacity in this regard. Also to be
investigated are the theoretical and empirical properties of the resulting
dispersion mixture models, as well as generalizations of this strategy in
broader ranges of hierarchical models where incorporating flexible cross-sample
variation in observed and latent quantities is important. For TSRM models,
capable of characterizing complex cross-sample variation, the focus is on
addressing their lack of scalability, both computational and statistical, with
respect to increasing dimensionality as well as their sensitivity to the
underlying tree structures, a critical component for building such models. The
development for these two model classes will form a powerful and general toolbox
that can be applied in a variety of scientific and engineering problems
involving the analysis of multiple related data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.