* 2013436
* Doctoral Dissertation: Indigenous Land Defense: Emerging Networks of Survival
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Dana-Ain Davis, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2022
* USD 37,280.00

Indigenous peoples are developing novel social mechanisms to deal with rapid
change and emerging conflicts, including land resettlement, language
revitalization and traditional skill-building. However, we know little about the
processes and contexts from which these strategies
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a case study from the
Northwest Coast of North America to evaluate how Indigenous communities socially
and culturally adapt to conflicts over sovereignty, land use and access. This
research aims to document the new social networks that emerge in these contexts
and how they contribute to Indigenous resiliency. To understand the
opportunities and consequences of emerging networks, this project will (1)
document the socio-cultural norms that emerge amidst Indigenous resettlement of
traditional territories; (2) identify types of social networks that develop; (3)
evaluate connections between these new networks and gender, race, and economic
factors. The ultimate objective is to trace community networks and evaluate
their impacts on Indigenous resilience, an issue with broad implications for
Arctic Indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.