* 2013268
* Investigating the Effects of a Mastery-based Assessment Approach on Undergraduate Engineering Education across Multiple Engineering Courses and Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,996.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
students’ problem-solving skills and understanding of engineering principles.
Within engineering education, students need repeated practice to achieve the
expected level of learning and mastery. However, such opportunities for repeated
practice are typically limited and students frequently choose learning
approaches that require less effort. For example, students may try to learn
something by just copying solutions to homework problems, rather than solving
the problems by themselves. In addition, they often memorize a few problem-
solving approaches and “plug &amp; chug” on an exam to earn partial credit. Both
learning strategies are ineffective, but they can give students an illusion that
they understand the material when they do not. This false sense of understanding
can be perpetuated by typical assessment techniques that emphasize a few, high
stakes exams. To increase students’ authentic conceptual understanding and
problem-solving skills, educators at Michigan State University have implemented
a mastery-based assessment approach in a limited number of courses. This
approach improved students’ problem-solving ability and encouraged them to use
more effective study habits. This project will expand the deployment and
evaluation of the mastery-based assessment approach to additional engineering
courses and to two additional universities. By improving engineering students’
problem-solving skills, this project has the potential to enhance the technical
capability of the engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of the project is to fully investigate the effects of a mastery-based assessment
approach on student learning, in the context of different engineering topics,
different learning environments, and different student populations. In addition,
the project will evaluate the effects of structural supports such as testing
centers that are designed to reduce barriers to faculty adoption of mastery-
based assessment. The mastery-based assessment approach will be implemented in
multiple foundational engineering courses (statics, strength of materials,
dynamics, and thermodynamics) at three universities: Michigan State University,
the University of Illinois, and the University of Maryland. Student learning
will be assessed in comparison to courses that use traditional assessment
strategies and in terms of student performance in subsequent classes. The impact
of mastery-based assessment on student learning will also be evaluated for
students from underrepresented and at-risk populations to identify potential
disparities in the effectiveness of this approach. Student perceptions of the
assessment technique will also be studied. To support broader implementation of
this technique, which requires the administration of additional examinations, a
computer-based testing facility strategy will be deployed using large
repositories of questions. The impact of the testing facility on faculty
workload and perceptions of the mastery-based assessment approach will be
investigated. This project will support the refinement of the mastery-based
assessment approach, enhance computer-based testing facilities to support
repeated testing, and expand the evaluation of the technique’s efficacy. These
efforts have the potential to increase student success in engineering, as well
as enhance their problem-solving skills. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources,
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.