* 2013181
* Biology Education in CRISPR-based Gene Editing Technologies for Advanced Biology Undergraduates, Pre-service Teachers, and In-service Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* J. Michael Wyss, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate and
high school biology education. It will do so by creating a course in which
students will learn to use one of the most promising new experimental
technologies in the biological sciences. This technology, called CRISPR-based
gene editing, is being used in fields ranging from basic research to
agribusiness. This technology also offers possibilities for treating or curing
diseases like sickle cell anemia and AIDS. However, few U.S. colleges offer a
lab-based course where students can develop the knowledge and skills needed to
successfully use CRISPR-based gene editing. This project seeks to develop and
implement a hands-on CRISPR-based gene editing course for advanced undergraduate
biology students, both those headed to research careers and those who are
preparing for careers as high school teachers. It also will include training for
in-service high school teachers. The interaction among these groups is predicted
to provide a synergistic learning environment in which each group will inform
the learning of the others. In addition, the high school teachers in this
project are expected to engage their students in learning about CRISPR-based
gene editing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to enable undergraduate
students destined for STEM research careers and those pursuing careers as high
school biology teachers to learn side-by-side as peers in the honors biology
program. In addition, a cohort of in-service biology teachers will be selected,
trained, and supported to successfully teach their students about gene editing
and the CRISPR-based technology. The project intends to emphasize recruitment of
teachers from under resourced high schools or school districts. The project will
develop a laboratory course, which will be integrated into the molecular
biosciences undergraduate curriculum. Over the three funding years, it is
anticipated that the course will serve 30 research career-oriented biology
majors, 30 high school teacher career-oriented biology majors, 15 in-service
biology teachers, and 5 Alabama Math, Science and Technology Initiative/Alabama
Science in Motion Biology Specialists. The latter specialists are participants
in the Alabama State Department of Educationâ€™s initiative to improve math and
science education in Alabama high schools. As a result, their participation will
provide networks for statewide dissemination of project findings, approaches,
and training associated with CRISPR technologies. The major outcome of the
project will be the development of a tested model to educate the next generation
in the most widely used gene editing technology and thus help prepare them for
the STEM workforce and to teach high level genetics in their STEM classrooms.
The project will investigate the results of project implementation and its
influences through educational research questions, including studies of how
pairing biology students with different career plans affects learning and the
impacts of inclusion of in-service teachers on the learning of all students.
This project is supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.