* 2013116
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Developing a Shared Vision for Supporting the Mathematics Identities of Underrepresented Individuals
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2023
* J. Brian Conrey, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,273.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to develop a shared vision to address the broadening participation challenge
that individuals from underrepresented groups do not have equitable access to
opportunities and experiences that support positive identities as mathematical
learners, doers, and professionals by bringing together formal and informal
mathematics education leaders to develop a shared vision for how to work
together to address this challenge. The creation this shared vision will
constitute a significant step toward attaining the NSF INCLUDES objective of
increasing the active participation of those who have been traditionally
underserved and underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes three primary activities: a workshop; working groups; and a
synthesis meeting. The three-day workshop will include forty formal and informal
education leaders representing the entire mathematics education ecosystem across
K-12 and higher education to begin building community, sharing best practices
and areas for improvement, and articulating a common agenda including key topics
that will need to be addressed in order to make progress on the broadening
participation challenge. Working groups composed of workshop participants will
meet monthly by videoconference throughout the six months following the
workshop. Each working group will focus on a key topic identified at the
workshop in order to develop recommendations for how their topic might be
addressed through the five INCLUDES design elements, including what technical
infrastructure and research might be needed. Each group will generate a report
providing an overview of their findings for use by the PI team in writing the
strategic plan. Finally, the PIs will meet in a two-day synthesis meeting to
integrate the recommendations of the working groups into a publicly disseminated
strategic plan for a collaborative network that will have the potential to
transform how underrepresented students and professionals view themselves in
relation to mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.