* 2013115
* Modification of Heavy Quarkonia Production in Nuclear Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anthony Frawley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

We now know that most visible matter is composed of nucleons (protons and
neutrons), which in turn are made up of more elementary constituents: quarks and
gluons. A new form of matter called the quark-gluon-plasma (QGP) can be created
through very energetic collisions of nucleons. This QGP is thought to replicate
the conditions in the early Universe a millionth of a second after the Big Bang.
This award supports the study of the production of quark-antiquark pairs
(mesons, called charmonium and bottomonium) made from heavy quarks in collisions
of protons with protons, of protons with gold nuclei, and of gold nuclei with
gold nuclei. This will further the understanding of the interactions of heavy
quark mesons with the QGP, with the ultimate goal of better understanding the
mechanisms that govern the evolution of the strongly interacting QGP, the most
strongly coupled liquid ever created. Understanding the QGP is critical to our
understanding of the interactions between quarks and gluons. The research will
be conducted in large part by graduate students. They will write doctoral
dissertations based on the results, under the mentorship of the principal
investigator. There will also be significant involvement of undergraduate
students in the research, providing them with a good introduction to physics
research methods and tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted
using data from collisions at the top Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC)
collision energy of root(sNN) = 200 GeV, and will focus in two areas. The first
area is the study of charmonium production in p+Au collisions using existing
data - recorded by the PHENIX experiment at RHIC from p+Au (and 3He+Au)
collisions. This research is aimed at better understanding the mechanisms by
which charmonium production is modified when it takes place in a nuclear target.
That modification is governed by the way that gluons interact inside a nucleus,
which is still imperfectly understood. Also, measuring the modification of
charmonium production in a target provides a baseline for measurements of
charmonium modification by the QGP in Au+Au collisions. The second area is the
study of bottomonium production in p+Au and Au+Au collisions using future
measurements by the sPHENIX experiment at RHIC. This will further the
understanding of bottomonium interactions with the QGP produced in heavy ion
collisions. Because charmonium and bottomonium mesons have very different
properties, they provide complementary information about interactions within the
QGP. The proposed research includes a significant contribution to the
development of tracking techniques and software that must be in place before the
sPHENIX detector, currently under construction, is commissioned in
2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.