* 2013410
* Advancing Undergraduate Engineering Education: Tools to Develop Engineering Design Skills that Consider Social, Economic, and Environmental Factors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Jin Woo Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,528,249.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by promoting engineering design
that considers social, economic, and environmental factors. It will do so by
supporting the distribution and adaptation of a Social Engagement Toolkit
developed by the principal investigators. This resource provides instructors
with teaching materials that help engineering undergraduates gain skills in
considering social aspects of engineering problems when designing solutions and
engaging clients and stakeholders. These skills align with the National Academy
of Engineering’s 21st Century Challenges and are foundational for today’s
engineers. However, these non-technical skills are often under-emphasized or
absent from engineering curricula. The impact of the Social Engagement Toolkit
on student learning will be examined across multiple courses and different
institutions, including Georgia Institute of Technology, University of
California, Fullerton, and University of Michigan, Dearborn. The results will
inform how to adapt the Social Engagement Toolkit for different institutional
contexts. A study of the instructors’ attitudes to adoption of the Social
Engagement Toolkit is also planned. The resulting adaptations of the Social
Engagement Toolkit can produce an important, transferable resource to support
socially engaged engineering education nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Social Engagement Toolkit uses a hybrid learning block approach to provide on-
demand virtual lessons combined with in-person coaching to help engineering
students learn to integrate contextual information (e.g., physical, personal,
social, cultural, and societal contexts) at every phase of their engineering
work. The research component will assess the impact of the Social Engagement
Toolkit on student learning and instructor adoption of the materials into their
courses across institutional contexts and program settings. The research
questions will be answered via a mixed methods study that includes surveys and
focus group interviews. The impact of the Toolkit on student learning will be
investigated via collection and analysis of pre- and post-assessment data. Both
engineering instructors who adopt and those who do not adopt the Social
Engagement Toolkit will be queried to understand barriers to adoption and to
assist the adaptation of resources to suit instructors’ needs. It is expected
that the Social Engagement Toolkit will be a vehicle for promoting greater
inclusiveness in engineering programs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.