* 2013940
* SBIR Phase I:  Single photon imaging by solid-state photon sensor array spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Masanobu Yamamoto, Miftek Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to facilitate more rapid diagnostics with
better accuracy. The project develops new optical technologies for medical and
biotechnology systems, with higher sensitivity to detect smaller and fewer
molecules. The target markets are companies in medical diagnostic instruments,
biological research instruments, microscopy, and high-resolution optical
instruments. The proposed device will consist of custom-designed arrays to
replace older technologies, as well as fully configured optical units offering
new capability to existing products. By increasing the speed of light detection
devices and creating a new generation of detection arrays, this technology will
enable a new generation of optical detection-based diagnostic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project develops a new light detection sensor array for spectroscopy
instrumentation applications. The project incorporates "Differential Geiger
Mode" techniques directly into the read-out circuitry, reducing the photon
detection dead time by over 2 orders of magnitude. These specialized integrated
circuits are placed within the sensor array itself to achieve high speed (GHz)
signal collection. A novel cooling arrangement will be implemented by applying
on-board thermoelectric cooling and integrating it with a specialized housing to
ensure the optimal environment for high performance sensor operation and
operational longevity. This project will advance a new generation of sensor
arrays capable of functioning at the single photon level with high speed signal
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.