* 2013779
* Socially Networked Autonomy: How Should Machines Interact With Society?
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Philip Brown, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,472.00

This project studies decision design methodologies for autonomous agents that
are networked with and interacting among human beings in societal systems. The
running application example is that of an urban highway network in which a
portion of the vehicles are autonomously operated. The core question is this:
how should a system planner design the routing policies of the autonomous
vehicles to have the greatest positive impact on overall network traffic
congestion, even if human drivers react in a self-interested way to the behavior
of the autonomous vehicles? Intuitively, it would appear beneficial to design
the autonomous vehicles to be altruistic; that is, to select highway routes that
cause the least congestion to other drivers. However, recent work shows that
this simple and intuitive routing design policy may backfire, leading to a
cascade of behaviors which inadvertently worsens congestion. This project will
investigate how a designer can circumvent these pathologies through the design
of smart routing policies. One of the key questions this project will address is
how selfish should autonomous vehicles be? This project includes public outreach
to help members of the public discern between good and bad modes of influence in
socially networked autonomous systems. In addition, it will provide a
theoretical framework for engineering practitioners to certify that the
interactive aspects of smart systems have been designed to provide broad
societal benefits in a principled way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental behavior design questions for socially-networked
multiagent systems; an intrinsic feature of this problem is that overall system
performance is governed not only by the designable behavior of the autonomous
agents, but also on the self-interested behavior of human participants. The
element of interactive optimization places this project squarely in the domain
of game theory, and the investigators adapt popular congestion game models to
study these questions in the context of smart autonomous vehicle routing in
highway networks. A fleet of autonomous vehicles is modeled as a discrete player
in a continuous-player-set network congestion game; the project studies how
routing policies for the autonomous vehicles impact the game-theoretic
equilibria of the overall system. This allows the investigators to model, in a
principled way, the interactions between designed agents (i.e., autonomous
vehicles) and selfish agents (i.e., human drivers). Ultimately, the
investigators seek a comprehensive understanding of how and when autonomous
vehicles should be endowed with various routing policies. This project advances
knowledge in two distinct dimensions: first, it provides an in-depth case study
examining the opportunities and limitations of the use of connected autonomous
vehicles for influencing traffic routing in transportation networks. Second, and
more broadly, it will provide the foundations for an underlying theory of social
influence in smart and connected cyber-physical systems. As smart cyber-physical
devices are increasingly integrated into public life, it is critical that these
smart devices are designed to interact with and influence human behavior in ways
that are effective, efficient, and principled – and this project represents a
central pillar of this endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.