* 2013545
* 2020 Vertically Integrated Projects (VIP) Consortium Meeting: Planning and Fostering Dissemination of the VIP Model
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Edward Coyle, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 12/31/2023
* USD 114,973.00

Vertically Integrated Projects (VIP) is a model for involving undergraduates in
research. VIP project teams are curricular (undergraduates earn academic credit
and are graded), largescale (about 20 students and 3 advisors), and long term.
The scale, longevity, disciplinary depth, and multidisciplinary breadth of the
VIP teams enables VIPs to make substantial contributions to the research efforts
of faculty and their graduate students, while also helping undergraduates learn
how to do scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM educators benefit from
professional development to learn about and implement evidence-based teaching
practices. To this end, this project will host a meeting that aims to enable
current and potential Vertically Integrated Projects (VIP) sites to: (1) engage
in peer-to-peer learning; (2) examine equity in VIP enrollment; and (3) guide
the launch of the non-profit VIP Consortium, Inc. The meeting will be held at
the Georgia Tech campus in Atlanta, Georgia on May 14-15, 2020, with an
anticipated attendance of 100 individuals. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.