* 2013613
* Improving Undergraduate Engineering Education by Integrating Sustainable and Resilient Engineering Design Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Amy Moll, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 598,269.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
students’ ability to create sustainable and resilient engineering designs.
Industry, government, the public, professional associations, and accreditation
organizations are increasingly demanding that engineers consider sustainability
and resiliency during the design process. Sustainable designs balance economic,
ecological, and societal needs by being responsive to community impact, public
health, and the environment. Resilient designs are durable: in adverse
situations, they continue to function, resist damage, and recover quickly. This
project is driven by the need for engineers who can design solutions that
maximize societal benefit while minimizing costs and environmental impacts. In
other words, the next generation of engineers needs the skills to produce
sustainable and resilient solutions to engineering design problems. To help
students develop these skills, the project plans to develop a set of active
learning modules that integrate sustainable and resilient design concepts. These
modules will be deployed in existing upper and lower division courses across
multiple engineering degree programs. This project has the potential to help
equip the next generation of engineering professionals with the ability to
create design solutions that benefit the economy, environment, and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to transform
undergraduate engineering education by instilling sustainable and resilient
design concepts in electrical, materials, mechanical, and civil engineering, and
in construction management curricula. A new junior-level interdisciplinary
engineering design course will be developed that emphasizes the importance of
these design concepts through project-based learning and that advances the used
of sustainable and resilient design in multiple disciplines. The project team
will develop and implement active learning modules for engineering design
courses. The project will address the following research questions: (1) How do
active learning modules focused on sustainable and resilient design affect
students’ knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors towards these topics and their
relevance to professional engineering practice? (2) How well do students
understand and manage the trade-offs associated with designing for
sustainability and resiliency in engineering? (3) How do approaches to
sustainable and resilient design vary by engineering discipline? Guided by the
Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors conceptual model, the study will use a mixed-
methods approach to collect and analyze qualitative and quantitative data to
address the research questions. The results of the project will be disseminated
through an online repository that will include active learning modules, a
strategic plan for implementation, and research results demonstrating the
modules’ effectiveness. In addition, a conference on sustainability and
resiliency will be hosted to provide a venue for colleagues from multiple
institutions to share their curricular activities and research. This project is
funded by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human
Resources program, which supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.