* 2013550
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Student Success in Community College Mathematics through Active Learning and Systemic Instructional Change
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Ann Sitomer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 319,739.00

This project aims to serve the national need for increasing the entry and
success of community college students in college-level mathematics courses. This
work is guided by instructional standards called IMPACT: Improving Mathematical
Prowess And College Teaching. The IMPACT standards were developed by the
American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges to guide transformation
of mathematics instruction at two-year colleges. The standards are intended to
promote outcomes such as improving students’ mathematical thinking and
increasing instructors’ attention to equitable and inclusive practices. This
project will convene IMPACT teams from eight community colleges. Each IMPACT
team will include faculty, administrators, and support services staff. These
teams will work toward transforming their departments and departmental culture,
with the overall goal of increasing active learning in college level
mathematics. This collaborative effort has the potential to increase
understanding about how sustained faculty development and participation in a
researcher-practitioner partnership affects student success rates and retention
in community college mathematics. The project can also contribute to
understanding how active learning improves students’ engagement, knowledge, and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project involves partnerships
between the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges, and
Chandler-Gilbert Community College, Clackamas Community College, and Oregon
State University. The five-year project aims to increase student success rates
in gateway and prerequisite mathematics courses through focus on three key
activities: (1) development of faculty content and pedagogical knowledge; (2)
building of community engagement through AMATYC’s community portal; and (3)
investigating the effects of project interventions on student success. Results
of these activities will contribute to the project's focus on students and
instruction, departments and institutions, and knowledge generation specifically
within the context of community college mathematics. Research findings are
expected to lead to a framework for systemic transformation of community college
mathematics departments. The project's research efforts will be guided by
design-based implementation research and will facilitate researcher-practitioner
partnerships that support faculty in developing a research perspective to inform
their teaching. The project aims to provide new knowledge about: 1) how
instructors’ enactment of active learning supports student learning; 2) and how
an IMPACT team’s participation in researcher-practitioner partnerships and in
communities of transformation lead to department-level change to support student
success; and (3) how a professional organization plays a role in convening a
community of transformation of mathematics departments and propagating a model
of this transformation. A retrospective analysis of data across the project's
participating colleges will result in a contextualized theory of change
framework for community college mathematics departments. The NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.