* 2013342
* A Inquiry-Based Pedagogy and Supporting Tool to Improve Student Learning of Software Testing Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Gursimran Walia, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 196,798.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
learning of software testing concepts. Software testing is a critical skill that
computer science students must acquire to be successful software designers.
Well-tested software has higher quality and is easier to use. This project aims
to improve teaching of software testing, using an approach that enables students
to construct and reconstruct their own knowledge. Rather than just providing
students with feedback about testing errors, the tool will use an inquiry-based
approach to guide student learning. It is expected that this approach will help
students learn fundamental concepts about testing in a way that enables them to
transfer their knowledge to future software development activities, including in
their professional careers. The overall goals of the project include to:
increase undergraduate computer science student learning regarding software
testing; improve the overall programming skills of computer science students;
and provide instructors with an approach that integrates well into existing
classroom structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the goals stated above,
the project will develop an online tool, the Software Testing Tutor, as well as
pedagogy to increase student learning about software testing. The tool will
analyze student solutions to identify the underlying concepts with which a
student needs more practice. It will then provide students with suggestions to
help them initiate their own learning process about those concepts. The Software
Testing Tutor will provide two interaction modes: Learning Mode and Development
Mode. In Learning Mode, it will coach a student on how to develop a complete
test suite for a reference program implementation. In Development Mode, it will
help a student develop a complete test suite for newly written code. The
Software Testing Tutor will use a combination of instructor test cases annotated
with the fundamental concepts exercised by the case and reference
implementations of the programs. Instructors can select resources to implement
in their course from the repository project-developed cases or develop their own
annotated test cases. The project will use surveys and interviews of students
and faculty to study improvements in student learning, explore the most
appropriate scaffolding for different class levels, and study how to integrate
the pedagogy into existing curricula. The expected contributions of this project
include: (1) an increase in student learning about software testing; (2)
improved student programming skills; (3) increased student engagement with the
inquiry-based learning embedded in the Testing Tutor pedagogy; and (4) positive
student and instructor experiences using Software Testing Tutor. This project is
supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human
Resources Program, which supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.