* 2013358
* Team Experiences and Mentoring Strategies for Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Heather Vance-Chalcraft, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,632,581.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in educating a STEM workforce
that can work effectively in diverse, collaborative teams. This type of work is
often called “team science,” an approach that engages the skills of individuals
from different fields to tackle a complex problem, such a modeling the spread of
infectious disease. The project will study the impact of embedding team science
training in multidisciplinary course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs). Over the course of the project, the investigation will include
approximately ~6000 undergraduate students across multiple STEM disciplines.
CUREs are known to be a high-impact STEM teaching practice, but there is limited
understanding about how CURES might help students develop team science
competencies. This project will investigate the impact of mentorship and team
science training in multidisciplinary CUREs across biology, chemistry,
engineering, and geological sciences. In these CUREs, students will receive
training in both research and in team science. They will apply both their team
science competencies and research skills to collaboratively solve research
problems. The project is designed to achieve two key outcomes. First, it is
expected to advance foundational knowledge about effective practices for and the
impacts of integrating team science training into CUREs. Second, it is expected
to prepare students for careers as STEM professionals who can work
collaboratively across disciplines to solve challenging national and global
problems. Because 35% of the undergraduates at Eastern Carolina are low-income
and/or first-generation college students, it is expected that this project will
help to broaden participation in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop empirical
evidence about how embedding team science training in undergraduate research
experiences affects the development of knowledge, skills, and attitudes as
transportable team science competencies and what factors contribute to
successful, inclusive, and scalable implementation of undergraduate team science
training across disciplines. Project activities designed to achieve this goal
include efforts to: 1) increase the number of available course-based STEM
research opportunities; 2) train mentors about how to build science teams and
how to foster a community of learners across the institution; 3) provide
research experiences that will build undergraduate students’ knowledge of both
STEM subjects and team coordination strategies; 4) improve communication skills
and productive assertiveness among team members; and 5) increase understanding
of disciplinary and interdisciplinary contributions to research. The project
builds on past work by the project team in developing and implementing Argument-
Driven Inquiry in biology, chemistry, and physics, as well as CUREs in biology
and chemistry. The project will extend these efforts to include geological
sciences and engineering, thus developing a collection of CUREs that span the
interest areas of many STEM students and faculty at the University. Evaluation
of the project will use a multidimensional, mixed-methods approach that includes
institutional and course data, observation of student and team behaviors,
assessment of tangible research products, collection of surveys, and interviews
with student and faculty participants. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources.
The IUSE: EHR program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the Engaged
Student Learning track, through which the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.