* 2013070
* Experimental Physics Research Program at Columbia University/Nevis Laboratories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Shaevitz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,240,000.00

The Columbia University High Energy Physics group covers activities in three
major programs: the ATLAS experiment at the LHC, MicroBooNE and the Short
Baseline Neutrino (SBN) program at Fermilab, and the Deep Underground Neutrino
Experiment (DUNE) at Fermilab and South Dakota. The group also participates in
the Coherent Captain Mills (CCM) experiment, has roles in DUNE construction, and
a major role in the ATLAS High Luminosity upgrades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle physics addresses fundamental questions at a
range from subatomic to cosmic scales. The Standard Model (SM) is believed to be
only an approximate theory, and new physics beyond the SM will hold the key to
making progress in understanding the underlying theory. Some of the most
important questions that are addressed by this work are: Is the observed Higgs
Boson the one predicted by the Standard Model? How does one explain the large
disparity between the weak scale and the Planck scale? What are the dark matter
and dark energy in the universe? Is there CP violation in the neutrino sector
and is it the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry in the Universe? Why are
neutrino masses so small? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will look beyond
the SM at the highest energies possible or through precision measurements.
Supersymmetry (SUSY), if it exists, could yield candidates for dark matter. The
mystery of dark energy may be related to the Higgs boson, which was discovered
at the LHC. If extra spacetime dimensions exist, they may be accessible at the
LHC. This Columbia research program will also tackle the question of the nature
of fundamental particles, such as the Higgs boson (ATLAS) and neutrinos
(MicroBooNE, SBN, DUNE, and CCM), and, through precision measurements, probe
higher energy scales. MicroBooNE and the future long and short-baseline neutrino
oscillation experiments will address unanswered questions related to the number
of neutrino species and fundamental symmetries between neutrinos and
antineutrinos. DUNE will furthermore probe for new physics which manifests
itself through rare processes, such as proton decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Columbia group will build on their existing education and outreach efforts,
engaging the full spectrum from high school students, high school teachers, and
undergraduates in understanding and doing high energy physics. The group will
also invest in efforts to bring the excitement of the science to the general
public through individual faculty outreach efforts (lectures, tours, etc.),
structured programs like Columbia’s Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Site, and their Science-on-Hudson series of public lectures. A goal of the
Columbia program is to engage under-represented groups to participate in these
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Columbia hardware development efforts
provide postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students with valuable
skills and hands-on experience with state-of-the-art instrumentation, an
increasingly rare opportunity. Furthermore, the group’s recent efforts in
readout and trigger for DUNE have enabled new, cross-disciplinary collaboration
between physics and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.