* 2013896
* A Proposal for Annual Doctoral Student Participatory Workshops on Climate and Energy Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2025
* M. Granger Morgan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2025
* USD 251,294.00

Developing effective solutions to problems in climate and energy decision making
often requires the convergence of deep natural science and engineering analysis
with the tools and insights of modern behavioral social science, and legal and
regulatory analysis. This grant supports an annual workshop open to PhD
students, Postdoctoral Fellows, and faculty who are working at such an
interface. The award provides a forum in which participants can present and
discuss their work, including early ideas, and receive constructive feedback
from senior investigators experienced in such interdisciplinary research and
education. There are few other forums that allow for such an exchange of ideas
and for this type of pedagogy, in which senior and junior researchers “roll up
their sleeves” and work collectively to solve some of the world’s most complex
problems. A key motivation for the forum is to assist doctoral students and
early career researchers in forming professional connections with others who
work at the interfaces between key disciplines. The workshops serve as an
incubator for professionals who are committed to an interdisciplinary approach
to solving some of the world's most pressing problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
annual workshops supported by this grant build on the foundation created over
the course of 25 years through a sequence of three NSF cooperative agreements
that have supported distributed research centers involving investigators across
North America and Europe working on issues of global change, energy and climate.
Those centers have run annual meetings that have been small enough to allow
meaningful interaction among the participants. Senior researchers—skilled at
applying knowledge from the physical and social sciences to sensibly deploy
technological solutions to wicked problems—have nurtured an inter-disciplinary
perspective in junior scholars in these meetings. Through an annual call, this
award continues those meetings, opening them up to a much wider group of
participants. Roughly a dozen senior advisors from academia, industry, and
environmental NGOs serve as an advisory board, vetting proposals to participate,
attending the workshop, and providing detailed feedback. Many faculty and PhD
students may secure resources to attend on their own, but support from the award
is used to offer modest travel funds for those who
cannot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.