* 2013791
* Global QCD Analysis and Precision Electroweak Physics in High Energy Collider Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chien-Peng Yuan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor C.-P. Yuan at Michigan
State University (MSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elementary-particle physics
addresses the question of determining the smallest building blocks of matter.
Our current understanding is that protons and neutrons, and all other strongly
interacting particles, are composed of fundamental particles called partons
(quarks and gluons). The strong interactions between the partons are described
by the theory of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). In his research, Professor Yuan
aims to develop theoretical methods to extract information from the QCD theory
--- information which is critical for interpreting experimental data around the
world, including data from recent experiments at the CERN Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). As a result, research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical law. This project is also envisioned
to have significant broader impacts. Professor Yuan will involve graduate
students and postdocs in his research, and thereby provide critical training for
junior physicists beginning research in this field. He also intends to give
public lectures on his research results and develop new course curricula based
on the results of his research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Yuan will extract the most updated CTEQ-TEA Parton Distribution Functions (PDFs)
from a global analysis of the experimental data. (CTEQ is an acronym for
"Coordinated Theoretical Experimental Project of QCD", and TEA for "Tung et
al".) Professor Yuan will expand the theoretical capabilities of the analysis to
include corrections from higher-order QCD interactions, heavy quark-mass
effects, next-to-leading-order quantum electrodynamic (QED) interactions, and
transverse momentum resummation. He will also refine the techniques for
analyzing the PDF uncertainties and the correlations among the predictions of
various physical observables, and investigate the implications of PDFs and their
associated uncertainties on the most important physical processes at colliders,
particularly at the LHC. Measurements of production rates for W, Z, top quark
pairs, single top quarks and Higgs bosons at the LHC --- including both
inclusive rates and relevant kinematical distributions --- will provide major
new input to the determination of PDFs during the next few years. At the same
time, refinements of the PDFs are crucial both for testing the Standard Model in
greater precision and for probing New Physics effects at high-energy
colliders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.