* 2013902
* Workshop on Rules of Life: Complexity in Algal Systems; Washington, D.C.; April 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The workshop entitled, "Rules of Life: Complexity in Algal Systems" will be held
in the Washington, D.C. area during the Spring of 2020. The workshop agenda
focuses on cellular engineering and synthetic biology approaches to better
understand algal biology. This event features world leaders in algal biology and
cultivation from premier U.S. universities and national laboratories. This
workshop is an excellent opportunity for the algal research community to
identify emerging research trends and needs related to algal systems. The
meeting will provide a venue for robust exploration of means to integrate the
engineering sciences with the life sciences, to encourage research and
development in multidisciplinary areas, to the next generation of young
scientists, and to support cutting edge science to answer current and future
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth of algae in mass culture for
bioproducts, whole food and supplements, and biofuels has enormous potential,
but the great diversity of algae and our lack of understanding of algal biology,
biochemistry, and pond ecology creates a considerable challenge. The workshop
discussion topics will focus on the development of foundational technologies for
creating useful algal strains for downstream applications. The workshop will
hold sessions on algal biology, microbiome dynamics, pathway engineering, and
the development of a genetic toolkit to advance the field. The workshop
proceedings will be published in a leading peer-reviewed algal biology research
journal as a means to disseminate the information widely to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.