* 2013010
* Building for Future Discoveries: Instrumentation, Algorithms, and Training for Physics with the ATLAS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Oreglia, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,127,977.00

The University of Chicago particle physics group will develop, commission, and
operate new instrumentation for the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron
Collider that will enable novel searches for new physics as well as key
measurements of Standard Model processes. By combining their expertise in
instrumentation, physics analysis, and data-intensive computation with novel
ideas in machine learning and electronics design, they will extend sensitivities
to groundbreaking discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will: (a) Conduct
searches for new physics and detailed measurements of the Standard Model (SM)
involving electroweak (EW) processes and hadronic final states; (b) Expand their
roles in commissioning and operating the Tile calorimeter and global Feature
Extractor (gFEX) calorimeter trigger system; (c) Undertake three detector
upgrades for the High Luminosity LHC Run 4: Tile Calorimeter Main Board
electronics, the calorimeter Global Event Processor (GEP), and the Hardware
Track Trigger (HTT) systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chicago groupâ€™s physics
analysis activities include exploration of the electroweak/Higgs sector;
exploration of the dark sector; and exploration of the hard QCD sector. Each has
the potential for transformative discoveries and insights in particle physics.
The group will expand its roles in several areas as the ATLAS physics program
and the HL-LHC upgrade program progress, including calibrating, operating, and
upgrading the Tile Calorimeter and commissioning the trigger system for Run 3,
as well as upgrading the Global Event Processor (GEP) and Hardware Track Trigger
(HTT) trigger systems, and the associated computing paradigms, for the HL-
LHC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrumentation efforts enable the group
to have a long-lasting impact on research in physics more broadly. The group
also aims to have an impact on workforce development, K-12 education, and
enhanced public scientific literacy. They will incorporate new programs and
activities based on group members' successful experiences and alignment with
best practices. These activities comprise a comprehensive approach to training,
educating, and increasing scientific literacy as they advance scientific
knowledge. At the same time, the group will train graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers in a broad range of methods, experimental design,
leadership, and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.