* 2013630
* Transforming STEM Education Using an Asset-Based Ecosystem Model
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Nancy Warter-Perez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,454,363.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by scaling up an effort to
transform STEM education so that it “meets students where they are.” To this
end, the project aims to establish a resilient teaching and learning ecosystem
that nurtures students, faculty, and staff. A key outcome of this STEM education
ecosystem will be students, staff, and faculty who achieve their individual
professional and personal goals. Currently, many STEM educators view the
educational process as a factory that requires students to first possess
standard knowledge and skills before they can function well. The “factory-like”
model does not serve students’ educational needs, particularly when the
strengths and knowledge expected for undergraduate student success are narrowly
defined. Guided by an ecosystem model, this project aims to shift the paradigm
of teaching and learning in STEM by shifting the mental model of STEM faculty to
a view of education as an ecosystem. In this STEM education ecosystem, all
students and the assets they bring are valuable and matter. This new mental
model will allow the faculty to intentionally establish a supportive and
resilient STEM education ecosystem that facilitates learning for all students
regardless of their backgrounds. The project will also simultaneously address
the mental model and capacity of department chairs/program coordinators, so they
can lead the cultural change needed to create a STEM education ecosystem at the
department level. Finally, the project intends to reform the teaching evaluation
system to promote a culture of reflection and self-improvement, thus helping
faculty develop their teaching skills in a sustained way that reflects the
assets they bring to teaching. Taken as a whole, achieving these goals is
expected to remove institutional barriers and create a structure that can
sustain a supportive and sustainable STEM education ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be led by California State University at
Los Angeles, a Hispanic Serving Institution, and is designed to implement the
proposed transformations using the Community of Practice (CoP) framework and
Kotter’s organizational change strategies. Both are evidence-based approaches to
achieve organizational and systemic change. The change of faculty members’
mental models and departmental cultures relating to STEM teaching and learning
will be cultivated through various communities including the Action Research
Teaching Fellows Faculty Learning Community, the Leadership Learning Community,
and the Facilitators Learning Community. The STEM education ecosystem
communities are intended to recognize, understand, and value the cultural wealth
of students, faculty, staff, and administrators, and leverage these assets to
create a supportive and culturally responsive environment. The STEM education
ecosystem communities will also help to form a powerful coalition of STEM
faculty and leaders who embrace the ecosystem model, thus extending the scope of
change. The reform of the teaching evaluation system will anchor the
institutional changes by aligning faculty recognition and advancement with their
assets, goals, and improvements over time. The project will use a mixed methods
research design to study the effectiveness of the proposed change process, the
impact of asset-based teaching and learning, and to develop more complete
metrics for measuring a healthy STEM education ecosystem. The research findings
may also lead to valuable guidelines for institutional change that can be used
at other institutions. The proposed project has the potential to create a model
of STEM education that leverages the assets of students, faculty and staff,
thereby leading to greater equity and inclusion in STEM education and the STEM
workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts
to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education
and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.