* 2013957
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic CRISPR-Cas6 endonucleases for dynamic control of cellular phenotypes in yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Nancy Da Silva, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to use the power of synthetic biology to
build microbial factories for the production of high value chemicals. The
collaborative research team will use an innovative enzyme
colocalization/assembly strategy to boost production of selected chemicals in
yeast. This project will also facilitate outreach activities to local high
school teachers and students through existing programs available at the
University of Delaware and University of California,
Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, dynamic interactions between proteins
play a crucial role in defining many cellular functions such as metabolism, cell
signaling, transcription regulation, apoptosis, cellular targeting, and protein
degradation. By controlling the spatial and temporal organization of these
supramolecular complexes using a protein scaffold, cellular functions can be
modulated in a highly dynamic manner for optimum efficiency. Understanding how
these proteins interact holds the key to deciphering their roles in native
cellular function and in creating new cellular functions for synthetic biology
applications. In this project, the researchers propose a new transformative
framework that combines the predictability of RNA hybridization and the ease of
RNA processing, while offering reversible protein assembly on demand, to create
dynamic enzyme cascades for proteasome-targeted protein degradation and for
metabolic pathway regulation in yeast. The proposed research relies on a new and
potent approach that enables specific processing and high-affinity binding to
RNA transcripts using the naturally occurring CRISPR/Cas6 system. While the
native function of Cas6 is to generate CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) to guide the
cleavage of DNA targets, the researchers will repurpose the Cas6 family proteins
as a generalizable platform for site-specific RNA binding/processing and will
demonstrate its utility to assemble dynamic enzyme cascades for synthetic
biology and metabolic engineering applications in yeast. The expertise of the
Chen and Da Silva labs will be combined to develop and implement the metabolons.
State of the art synthetic biology and genetic tools will be used to accomplish
four overall aims: (1) Dynamic protein assembly and disassembly by strand
displacement, (2) Dynamic protein degradation using orthogonal Cas6 proteins,
(3) Dynamic assembly of metabolons for substrate channeling, and (4) Combined
metabolon assembly and protein degradation for increased polyketide
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.