* 2013992
* SBIR Phase I:  High Resolution Terahertz Video Camera for People Screening and Medical Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2020
* John Hong, OBSIDIAN SENSORS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to advance a camera for applications including security and
medical screening. The security screening and medical imaging applications both
call for practical camera solutions that can offer both high resolution and
real-time video frame rates. The airport passenger screening market was
estimated at $2 B in 2017, and medical imaging technologies represents a $34 B
market. The proposed project will advance the development of an imaging
technology that is safer than other forms of radiation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to explore
translation of a Terahertz (THz) imaging sensor array, to be monolithically
produced on a large substrate using processes already available in the flat
panel industry. THz imaging offers extra safety as it is non-ionizing. The long
wavelengths translate to larger sensor pixels than those of visible or infrared
sensor arrays. Large arrays needed for high resolution will require physically
large sensor arrays that are ideally suited for the large plate sizes available
in display glass fabrication foundries. Making suitable THz sensor structures
using such a manufacturing technique will require process adaptation as well as
innovative device designs for THz applications. This project will advance the
design and development of a camera core consisting of a 256x256 pixel array that
can operate at a 10-30 Hz frame update rate. The project will also develop the
optics necessary for imaging associated with security and medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.