* 2013639
* STTR Phase I:  Implementation of an ultrasound technology for continuous in-situ monitoring of lubricant viscosity
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Nilesh Salvi, Infecho Scientific LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2022
* USD 224,770.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is to advance development of an innovation in lubricant
viscosity sensing to enable continuous oil condition monitoring. There are 285
million vehicles, aircrafts and vessels in the US, and more than one-half of the
lubricant changes based on mileage and time are estimated to be premature and
unnecessary. For the moving vehicles in the US alone, this technology could save
over $1.3 billion in oil cost and prevent the requirement to dispose over 70
million gallons of used oil every year, with additional savings from reduced
labor and vehicle downtime. The proposed technology will benefit consumers and
industrial users with prolonged vehicle/machine life and reduced maintenance
cost. Furthermore, it will reduce oil waste and the substantial cost of oil
recycling, enabling greater sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
project will advance a proposed ultrasound technology for in-situ oil viscosity
monitoring inside engines using ultrasound wave behavior. The proposed project
operates without delicate or motion-based sensing mechanisms, enabling use in a
harsh environment with strong vibrations and noise. This unique method gives
highly reliable measurement, making this technology advantageous for
applications in-situ. This project will design sensing probes suitable for
installation and use in engines; calibrate them under simulated conditions; and
test them for continuous measurement of oil viscosity in a running engine in-
situ. Data will be collected to refine new algorithms in anticipation of an
advanced prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.