* 2013697
* Data-Based System Reliability Design for Wind
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mircea Grigoriu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 464,750.00

Wind loads used in current design standards do not account for various sources
of uncertainties, such as wind tunnel records, climatological data, and surface
roughness length. This simplified characterization may yield inaccurate wind
effects and, as a result, unsatisfactory estimates of the performance of
buildings subjected to wind loads. This award will overcome limitations of
current standards by developing a practical computational framework for wind
design, based on climatological data, wind tunnel records, and rigorous
probabilistic/statistical concepts. The framework will quantify the
uncertainties in wind loads by probabilistic models, propagate these
uncertainties into wind effects by efficient computational methods, and develop
design conditions which view buildings as systems rather than collections of
independent components. The research will be complemented by an educational
program involving course development, graduate and undergraduate researchers,
and presentations at national and international conferences. The computational
framework will be shared with the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center, as a
module for wind design. This research will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a computational framework that constitutes a new paradigm in wind
engineering. The framework will map climatological and wind tunnel data into
system reliability estimates for buildings subjected to wind loads by accounting
for the mechanical and aerodynamic characteristics of these buildings. The
system reliability methodology for wind design will be based on: (1) novel
probabilistic models for wind loads whose samples and realizations, rather than
just their mean and correlation functions, will be statistically consistent with
wind tunnel time histories, (2) new efficient methods for calculating wind
effect samples from wind load samples in linear/nonlinear structures subjected
to stationary/nonstationary, Gaussian/non-Gaussian wind loads, and (3) system
reliability estimates of structural performance that, unlike current approaches
that check ultimate/serviceability limit states member-by-member, will consider
these limit states simultaneously at all structural members. The format of the
ultimate/serviceability criteria will be similar to that of current
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.