* 2013888
* Collaborative research:  Physiological signatures of variable weaning strategies in wild primates
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Noah Snyder-Mackler, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 63,156.00

Premature weaning can result in poor infant developmental outcomes and increased
infant mortality; however, the social conditions that lead to premature weaning
and its consequences are still poorly understood. The central goal of this
project is to examine how stressful social conditions linked to the immigration
of new adult males and/or poor maternal condition influence the likelihood of
premature weaning, and, in turn how premature weaning then influences infant
growth, gut microbial colonization, and the development of the immune system in
a nonhuman primate model. Given the importance of early weaning as a hallmark of
human evolution, developing comprehensive longitudinal models of this early life
transition are valuable. In addition, the findings may serve as an animal model
for understanding the costs and benefits of truncated or extended breastfeeding
in modern humans. The project will provide rigorous scientific training to at
least one post-doctoral fellow and several graduate and undergraduate students.
The PIs will also engage in public outreach at local and international levels,
contributing to scientific education and conservation efforts both domestically
and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the links between social
factors, variable weaning strategies, and infant growth and immune system
development in geladas. It draws on both cross-sectional and longitudinal data
collected from infants aged 0-2.5 years to address the following goals: (1)
Determine how social factors related to stressful demographic changes and/or
maternal condition influence the timing of nursing cessation; (2) Identify how
earlier weaning relative to infant size is related to stunted postnatal growth,
altered gut microbial diversity and composition, and the concentration of
urinary neopterin, a biomarker for cellular inflammation. Geladas are ideal for
this research because their social system is characterized by frequent and
stressful social upheavals that disrupt infant development and can even lead to
infant mortality. Further, gelada females form strong dominance hierarchies that
determine access to food, thus allowing researchers to address how social
factors linked to poor maternal nutrition are associated with variable weaning
strategies. Together, these attributes make geladas an excellent model system in
which to study premature weaning. This study will be one of the first to
integrate innovative methods in isotopic/elemental chemistry, genomics,
endocrinology, and digital photogrammetry to examine the causes and consequences
of premature weaning in wild primate infants, thus identifying some of the key
mechanisms bridging early life social adversity to long-term developmental and
health. Student trainees will have the opportunity to learn methods in
behavioral data collection as well as various wet lab methods to characterize
the composition of the gut microbiome and define weaning by the amount of milk
vs. plant-origin carbon and nitrogen found in noninvasively collected fecal
samples.