* 2013326
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Geoscience Research, Education, Success, and Equity Through Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Mica Estrada, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 702,387.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
geosciences education. It will do so by scaling up a successful mentoring
program in the geosciences. Many of the most urgent challenges facing society
are rooted in the geosciences, including issues related to energy, air quality,
climate, water availability, food security, and natural disasters. Women,
particularly those from minority racial and ethnic groups, continue to be
largely underrepresented in the geosciences. As a result, the talent pool
available to solve these challenges is limited. Female role models and mentors
can play an important role in the lives of female students, especially when
choosing and committing to a career path. This project aims to increase
diversity in the geoscience workforce by scaling-up a mentoring program called
PROGRESS (PROmoting Geoscience Research Education and SuccesS). PROGRESS
provides professional development workshops, access to female mentors and role
models, peer networks, and online discussions and resources. This award will
fund workshops in seven regions of the U.S. with the goal of providing
undergraduate women with the tools and skills needed to build successful
geoscience careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s major goal is to scale up
PROGRESS to include a larger number of regions, more diverse types of higher-
educational institutions, and broadened participation of women from
underrepresented and minoritized groups. The project team will build a U.S.
network of support that spans at least seven geographic regions and a diversity
of academic institutions. The project team will use a longitudinal experimental
research design to answer the following research questions: 1) Do the benefits
of PROGRESS scale up for multiple underrepresented groups and for women with
intersectional identities? 2) Are the benefits of PROGRESS consistent when male
mentors are included? 3) Can PROGRESS be effectively scaled-up using a train-
the-trainer development and implementation model? The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.