* 2013214
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at the University of Washington
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Radha Poovendran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2024
* USD 718,146.00

Quantum information science and technology can fundamentally impact the way we
live today: by leveraging the quantum properties of matter, quantum information
technology can enable new drug design, discovery of materials, solve problems
like traffic optimization and provide unconditional security for information
transfer. While physicists have been leading the initial research of quantum
phenomena and technology, to create practically impactful quantum technologies
and build quantum systems, engineers must play a dominant role. With the
realization of midscale quantum systems on the horizon, quantum technologies
seemingly have approached a system-level stage of computation and communication.
The challenges, however, are immense. The field still lacks the fundamental
engineering tools and expertise needed to control and integrate midscale (let
alone large-scale) quantum systems, such that there exists a ravine between
stand-alone quantum devices and full-scale integrated quantum systems.
Addressing these challenges lie squarely in the expertise of Electrical and
Computer Engineering - both in innovating new ideas as well as workforce
training for industry and national labs. With the support of the QCIS-FF
program, the University of Washington (UW) Electrical and Computer Engineering
(ECE) Department will recruit a tenure-track faculty member. This new-hire will
join a university-wide effort to build a broad talent pool in quantum
technologies, leveraging UWâ€™s existing experimental strength in quantum
information science and technology. This faculty fellow will also leverage UW's
proximity to local industry and national labs with quantum research efforts to
attract the needed expertise to bridge the device-system
ravine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the QCIS-FF program, the
University of Washington (UW) Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) will
recruit a tenure-track faculty member in quantum information science with
expertise in the theory of quantum control, quantum security, quantum networks,
and related fields. This theory hire will join a university-wide effort to build
a broad talent pool in quantum technologies, leveraging UW's existing
experimental strength in quantum materials, quantum devices (both electronic and
optical), and small-scale quantum systems, spanning across ECE, Physics, and
Material Science Departments. Additionally, this hire will work closely with
researchers in the ECE and Computer Science departments in the area of
interfacing quantum and classical computing systems and
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.