* 2013473
* A Collaborative, Team Science Approach to Transforming STEM Education into an Immersive Research Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Karl Miletti, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 591,628.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
teaching practices across four laboratory courses: chemistry, biology, food
science, and animal science. National reports have endorsed replacing standard
laboratory courses with inquiry-based research experiences that engage students
in doing authentic scientific work. Such opportunities are known to improve
student retention in STEM. For example, the value of early opportunities for
undergraduates to engage in course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs) is widely recognized. This project will support development and
implementation of specific CURE modules in introductory courses across the four
disciplines. Six faculty members will create interdisciplinary CURE modules that
will involve students in authentic research experiences and help them develop
quantitative skills needed to work with large data sets. Students will pursue a
primary research project and rotate between instructors and labs for short
modules, thus deepening their experiences within the broader interdisciplinary
CURE project. The innovative design of linking courses from different
disciplines through CUREs has the potential to help students develop broader
scientific perspectives about research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop, integrate, and test CURE modules that include interdisciplinary
collaborations and unique field-based research on plant cultivation,
purification of molecules from the plants, and examination of the molecules’
effects in laboratory studies. These CUREs will serve more than 200 diverse
students, with the potential to have significant positive impact on their
success and retention in STEM. The instructors will conduct educational research
to investigate the impact of the CUREs on student participants, outcomes of
students in CURE-enriched courses versus those in the control sections with
traditional labs, and the elements of the experience that had the most impact on
student outcomes. Four research questions will be used to measure the
effectiveness of CUREs on student academic outcomes and persistence in STEM: 1)
To what extent does participation in an interdisciplinary CURE affect academic
achievement and retention in STEM? 2) Do students who participate in a CURE have
greater improvements in scientific literacy and scientific reasoning skills
compared to students in traditional courses? 3) To what extent does
participation in an interdisciplinary CURE affect students’ science identity,
science motivation and attitudes, and understanding of scientific community
values? and 4) How do students’ perceptions of laboratory course design relate
to their overall performance? Answers to these questions will contribute to the
body of knowledge about the value of research experiences in undergraduate
education, and specifically about a CURE model that involves a research project
that spans disciplinary boundaries. The project intends to increase the
students’ academic success and graduation rates and serve as a model for
interdisciplinary approaches to active learning and course-based research. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.