* 2013633
* CREST-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Extrusion Printing of Biomimetic Scaffolds for In Vitro Investigation of Tissue Regeneration in Multicellular Environments
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Bobby Haney, Haney, Bobby Tyrell
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 07/31/2022
* USD 218,306.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Complex Materials Design for
Multidimensional Additive Processing (CoManD) at Florida Agricultural and
Mechanical University (FAMU). The goal of this research is to use 3D printed
matrixes to study cells in an environment that mimics a natural environment.
Using techniques at FAMU and Harvard University, the research will allow a study
of cells in a controlled environment. Research techniques and results will be
used to create course modules in engineering courses at FAMU. The work will
allow the researcher to build a foundation for an independent research career.
The larger community will be impacted through demonstrations at middle and high
schools to engage students in the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue
regeneration/repair can often involve the interaction of multiple cell types
with different characteristic extracellular matrices (ECM). Such is the case for
tendon repair where the tendon-to-bone interface is composed of a transition
from aligned fibers in the ligaments to randomly oriented in the bone. Extrusion
printing hydrogel scaffolds allows the implementation of pore size, modulus, and
even compositional gradients all in one scaffold to create complex cellular
environments seen in the body. Consequently, the goal of this work is to use the
versatility of extrusion printing to probe tissue regeneration at complex
multicellular interfaces. Using a 3D bio printer with a novel microfluidic
modified print head and mounted UV lamp, hydrogel scaffolds will be printed for
tissue regeneration. This work will focus on the tendon-to-bone multicellular
transition demonstrating tunable structural, mechanical, and biochemical
properties in a printed scaffold. Extrusion printing and cell studies will
present new insights into cell behavior in a complex matrix. By studying this
system in a 3D matrix we will be able to probe cell proliferation, migration,
and viability in an environment with a closer resemblance to the native
extracellular matrix. In addition, through the combination of confocal Raman
spectroscopy and the microfluidic technique, this work will investigate and
subsequently tune matrix stiffness, anisotropy, and permeability in order to
effectively study growth and migration of cells with controlled physical and
biochemical cues. The proposed work will serve as a model system for a variety
of tissues/organs that require the spatial regulation of cells, nutrients, or
growth factors for effective regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.