* 2013002
* Studies of Quark-Gluon Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Edward Kinney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

The research program supported by this NSF award will focus on the study of the
inner structure of the proton and neutron, or more generically, the nucleon.
These basic particles are the building blocks for all the visible matter around
us, making up the atomic nucleus. While it is well known that the proton and
neutron are composed of very light quarks held in a bound state by the very
strong color force, there is still little information available about the
detailed structure of this bound state. In particular, we know very little of
the distribution of the quark momentum in the three space dimensions we live in.
Our present knowledge is essentially limited to one dimension, similar to a
shadow profile picture of a person. This group will lead two experiments at
Jefferson Laboratory in which beams of high energy electrons or photons are
scattered from hydrogen and deuterium targets. In one experiment photons will
interact with the quarks inside the nucleus and produce a map of where the
quarks are relative to each other and their momentum. The other experiment will
map out the scattering over a wide range of angles and energies that produce
silhouette-like images of the nucleon. Beyond the scientific goals, the proposed
experiment setup, data acquisition and analysis activities will continue to
offer education and research experience to undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral research associates. Working in the environment of an
international collaboration based at a premier accelerator facility will broaden
the perspective and interests of the group members and help to train the future
STEM workforce of the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
research program will study the 3D momentum distribution of the quarks by
examining the momentum of the sub-atomic particles they produce when ejected
from the nucleon by a high-energy a photon, produced by the high intensity
accelerator at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. For the first
time, the nuclear physics community will study this quark ejection process using
photons with distinct polarization, allowing for the study of effects related to
the quark spin of Â½. Single spin asymmetry measurements from semi-inclusive
deep-inelastic-scattering (SIDIS) will be used to study the transverse momentum
dependent parton distribution (TMD) and fragmentation functions of the nucleon.
SIDIS measurements are becoming a flagship program both at the 12-GeV CEBAF at
Jefferson Lab, and also the newly announced electron-ion-collider to be built at
Brook Haven National Lab in the coming decade. The research activities will
center around JLab experiments using SIDIS to measure the cross section of
charged pions and kaons from hydrogen and deuterium targets. This work is
partially motivated as a test of the factorization framework used for SIDIS
processes where the TMD extraction from such measurements is based upon. Another
experiment focuses on performing L-T separations of SIDIS charged pion
production from hydrogen and deuterium targets to test whether R from SIDIS is
the same as R from inclusive DIS, where R is the longitudinal to transverse
cross section. The projected measurements will significantly improve the
existing scarce data from prior experiments and advance our knowledge about the
underlying production mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.