* 2013651
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: An intelligent Pervasive Augmented reaLity therapy (iPAL) for Opioid Use Disorder and Recovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* John Sheppard, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 727,615.00

Opioid use disorder and addiction are now characterized as a nationwide “opioid
epidemic,” with overdoses now the leading cause of injury deaths in the United
States. While opioid overdose deaths have increased greatly over the past two
decades as compared to other chronic diseases (e.g., heart disease) the
development of remote monitoring and management tools and techniques for opioid
cravings, recovery, and relapse have not kept pace. There is a critical need to
design therapy programs that are discreet, accessible, connected, and
personalized by supporting those recovering from Opioid Use Disorder (OUD),
beyond conventional therapies. This project develops intelligent Pervasive
Augmented reaLity therapies (iPAL) - a technology-enabled OUD intervention that
aims to help OUD sufferers manage their cravings to reduce their risk for
relapse or overdose. iPAL integrates complementary psychotherapies (cognitive
behavioral therapy and heart rate variability biofeedback) with immersive
technologies (augmented and mixed reality) to offer convenience, discretion in
use, in the moment/real-time through personalized strategies. This work is
poised to revolutionize how individuals learn, discover, create, and heal in the
broader context of developing treatment strategies for those with OUD. The
immediate benefit of the developed system will be iPAL, an appliance for helping
those with OUD to experience a better quality of life. The proposed framework
has translational potential beyond OUD: serving as a mental health support aid
for those suffering from other forms of addiction (e.g., smoking and alcohol),
suicidal ideation, post-traumatic stress disorder, and/or severe depression.
This work is especially relevant to rural areas where people with OUD often have
poor access to services. Even when services are available, stigma is a
significant barrier to accessing these traditional addiction
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel and potentially transformative nature
of this project lies in transcending the foundational theoretical understanding
and identification of key technological (e.g., augmented, mixed, and virtual
reality), neurophysiological (e.g., functional brain activity, heart rate
variability, electrodermal activity), and affective determinants (e.g., positive
or negative valence and arousal) of immersion that predict OUD patient
experience and subsequently intent (e.g., manage cravings). The team focuses on
unobtrusive means (e.g., mobile and wearable technology) to collect real-time
physiological parameters to discreetly deliver personalized and interactive
evidence-based complementary OUD psychotherapies utilizing Artificial
Intelligence (AI) algorithms and immersive technology formats. A series of
integrated research efforts is undertaken to advance spatial and affective
computing science (technology outcomes) and behavioral science (health outcomes)
that will contribute to the following intellectual merits: (1) developing an
intelligent system to deliver personalized and interactive evidence-based
psychotherapies, (2) fundamentally measuring, modeling, and comparing user
engagement using neural signatures and physiological and subjective responses
across the reality-virtuality continuum, (3) contributing to augmenting
traditional OUD interventions using smart and connected immersive reality
technologies, (4) determining the level of immersion most suitable as a mobile
and real-time personalized therapeutic intervention, and (5) advancing
understanding regarding the role that pervasive and personalized immersive
technology plays in at-risk populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.