* 2013952
* Eager: Biomanufacturing: Liposome mediated targeted expansion and stimulation of CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nitin Agrawal, Children's Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 117,897.00

1645195 - Agrawal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the presence of T-cell mediated
antitumor immune mechanism in our body, abnormal cells occasionally elude the
immune surveillance, resulting in the onset of cancer. A recently developed
antitumor approach, Adoptive Cell Transfer therapy (ACT), utilizes T-cells as
"living drugs" by expanding their population outside the body (in vitro) and by
enhancing their ability to specifically recognize and destroy tumor cells when
reinjected into the body. However, the associated technologies involving genetic
modifications and ex vivo proliferation are challenging and impractical for
large scale implementation. Furthermore, engineered T-cells often fail to
recognize the heterogeneous population of mutated tumor cells commonly found in
most cancers. To address these challenges, this project will use a novel
approach that bypasses the need for in vitro intervention and induces expansion
of cytotoxic T-cell population with enhanced homing capacity and the ability to
interact with multiple variants of antigens presented by tumor cells. This will
be accomplished by synthesizing specialized packets that will allow targeted
expansion and stimulation of the immune cell subpopulation that is cytotoxic to
tumor cells. The strategy will significantly simplify the production of T-cells
within the body while suppressing toxicity and side effects associated with
current immunotherapies. The approach has the potential to utilize the
individual's own immune system to treat multiple types of tumors, which will
have significant transformative impact. In addition to the medical advancements,
the project will serve as a fundamental platform to promote scientific education
and development of young scientists. The multidisciplinary nature of the project
will provide educational opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students in
the areas of micro- and nanotechnology, bioengineering, biochemistry, and cancer
biology. Findings from the project will be disseminated among students as well
as general population through implementation of results in the coursework and
publications in scientific as well as social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current adoptive cell transfer therapies
(ACTs) screen tumor cells and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) for specific
markers and genetically modify autologous T-cells to express the corresponding
receptors. While these biomanufactured chimeric antigen receptor presenting
T-cells (CAR T-cells) demonstrate high efficacy against a monoclonal population
of the antigen presenting tumor cells (APCs), introduction of a single type of
antigen specific receptor limits the ability of cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) to
interact with different mutated phenotypes commonly found in many tumors.
Another significant challenge is the inefficient trafficking of CTLs to the
tumor sites. The spiked peripheral CAR T-cells rely on successful infiltration
of the tumor lesion before they can be activated upon interaction with APCs,
diminishing their effectiveness against solid tumors. Ultimately, the ex vivo
expansion of immune cells requires substantial resources and specialized
facilities making the existing ACT technologies impractical to implement on a
large scale. The project addresses the existing limitations by utilizing
liposomes to selectively target the growth and stimulation of autologous CTLs
for efficient recognition and cytolysis of tumor cells. Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
plays a central role during homeostasis and lymphocyte mediated immune responses
and stimulates proliferation as well as functional activity of T-cells. IL-2
also upregulates expression of CXCR3, a unique receptor for tumor associates
chemoattractants (e.g. I-TAC), and mediates recruitment of lymphocytes to the
site of inflammation (homing) via enhanced endothelial adhesion and
transendothelial migration (TEM) across cytokine (TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma)
activated endothelial cells. The proposed technique will harness the immunogenic
potential of IL-2 providing multiple advantages including: 1) Encapsulation of
IL-2 within liposomes will keep the cytokine from degradation, significantly
improving its functional activity on T-cells, 2) Conjugation of liposomes with
anti-CD8 will allow targeting primarily the cytotoxic T-cell population (CD8+).
Thus, the undesired co-stimulation of regulatory T-cells, CD4+ cells and
endothelial cells will be suppressed, 3) Enhanced CXCR3 expression will lead to
improved infiltration of the tumor tissue by CTLs, 4) Stimulation of a large
effector CTL population in vivo with enhanced capability to infiltrate the tumor
tissue will reduce the biased surveillance of specific antigens and will likely
be more effective in destroying the heterogeneous population of tumor phenotypes
that are usually present. The utilization of both liposomes as well as IL-2 is
FDA approved and presented T-cell biomanufacturing approach will have a
considerable transformative impact on tumor therapies. Since the targeted CD8+
T-cell amplification can be induced in vivo, the technique has the potential for
a more universal approach against various tumors and infections, greatly
impacting the society. The multidisciplinary project, integrating
bioengineering, biochemistry, cell biology, and microfabrication, will support
the new Bioengineering PhD program at George Mason University offering an
excellent opportunity for training in STEM education by involving PhD and
undergraduate students. Particular emphasis will be given on the recruitment of
underrepresented groups including females and minority students. Findings from
the project will also be implemented in the coursework to stimulate student
awareness on current scientific developments. Additionally, project outcomes
will be disseminated within the scientific community and general population
through journal publications and postings in the social media platforms such as
YouTube videos as well as laboratory group webpage.