* 2013647
* Resolving Interphases in Solid Electrolyte Batteries through Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Marina Leite, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2023
* USD 326,659.00

Non-Technical Summary: In today's society, new rechargeable battery technologies
are urgently being developed to address the power and energy demands of the
rapidly growing number of wireless devices, ranging from mobile communication to
electric and hybrid vehicles. In particular, there is a pressing need for the
development of safe, high performance, stable components for all-solid-state
batteries. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, investigates Li10GeP2S12
(LGPS) and Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO), two promising electrolyte materials, which are
responsible for conducting the ions used to charge the batteries. The current
problem is that these materials can trap Li ions and significantly change during
battery operation, which, in turn, can severely limit their lifetime. Thus, this
research project visually maps where the Li ions preferentially accumulate while
the batteries are being used. To do this, Leite's and Wang's groups implement
complementary microscopy techniques and correlate the acquired information with
measurements of device performance. The outreach/education components of this
research encompass: (i) mentoring graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students, (ii) incorporating the scientific findings into lectures to enrich the
curriculum of the Departments of Materials Science and Engineering and Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering at the University of Maryland, and (iii) engaging
K-12 students in STEM by providing them with hands-on experiences on batteries
during the Maryland Day, an open house event that attracts more than 60,000
people to campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The understanding and
control of the relevant chemical reactions taking place during all-solid-state
batteries cycling will enable the design of game-changing materials for energy
storage based on Li, Na and Mg. This research elucidates the underlying
mechanisms for the formation of solid-electrolyte interphases (SEIs) in two all-
solid-state battery model systems with highly Li-ion conductive electrolytes:
Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) and Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO). This project, funded by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at
NSF, advances the understanding of the materials chemistry that currently limits
the performance of Li-ion all-solid-state batteries. The formation of SEIs is
probed in situ by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS),
combined with ex situ X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). A correlation between the electrochemical impedance
and the Li distribution maps reveals how the SEIs affect the interfacial
resistance and, thus, the performance of these energy storage model systems.
Determining Li preferential spatial distribution during cycling can potentially
transform the future design of all-solid-state batteries, with controlled SEIs.
While multiple in situ experiments have validated the formation of SEI in
nanoscale batteries, there are no demonstrations of the dynamics of the
mesoscale Li spatial distribution within all active layers of the batteries upon
lithiation/delithiation. Thus, this research has scientific impacts in the field
of materials chemistry and beyond. The outreach/education components of this
research encompass mentoring students at various levels; incorporating the
scientific findings into the curriculum of the Departments of Materials Science
and Engineering as well as Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the
University of Maryland; and engaging K-12 students in STEM by providing them
with hands-on experiences on batteries during the Maryland Day, an open house
event that attracts more than 60,000 people to campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.