* 2013692
* Innate immune system function in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nikki Traylor-Knowles, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,089,389.00

A central goal in evolutionary developmental biology is to understand how
diverse animal cell types have evolved. The innate immune system, which includes
immune cells and inflammatory molecules, represents the first line of defense
against invading pathogens. The emergence of immunity, the ability to recognize
self vs nonself, is integral to the evolution of multicellular life. This
project uses recently developed genetic techniques to characterize immune cells
and their responses to pathogens in a model ctenophore. The ctenophores, or
”comb jellies,” represent one of the most ancient branches of the animal tree of
life. The data produced by this project will shed light on the early evolution
of immunity in animals. Outreach components of this project include the
development of a hands-on cell biology based learning module for several Miami-
Dade County K-12 schools that serve underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged students. This project also includes a mentored research
internship for Miami-Dade Community College students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recognition of self vs nonself, or immunity, is
critical to the maintenance of multicellularity. A significant knowledge gap
exists regarding immune system biology in non-bilaterian animals. This project
seeks to improve our understanding of innate immunity evolution in animals by
characterizing both immune system response and immune cell specification in the
model ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi. The goals of this project include: 1)
defining immune cell types present in Mnemiopsis, 2) assessing transcriptional
responses to discrete immune challenges through both bulk and single-cell
transcriptomics, and 3) determining the functional role of the transcription
factor Interferon Regulatory Factor (IRF) in immune cell
development/specification using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. This project's
experimental results will inform several critical outstanding questions relating
to metazoan innate immunity. Q1) Does the range of cell types associated with
innate immunity in ctenophores reflect an early establishment and
diversification of immune cell type diversity in the animal stem lineage? Q2) Do
immune cells in ctenophores utilize conserved or divergent networks of gene
expression both during immune cell development and innate immunity responses to
microbial pathogens? Q3) Do novel traits associated with immune cells in
Mnemiopsis reflect unique adaptations to pathogens present in their preferred
estuary/coastal environments? This work will reveal conserved aspects of
pathogen defense mechanisms and immune cell specification associated with the
evolution of metazoan innate immunity and reveal potential novel ctenophore-
specific aspects of pathogen defense and immune cell type
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.