* 2013295
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Impact of Robotic Telescope-Based Observing Experiences on Students' Learning and Engagement in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Timothy Spuck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 641,171.00

Using scientific instruments to make discoveries and solve problems in STEM
classrooms enables undergraduates to experience how professional scientists
actually work. Such experiences increase studentsâ€™ engagement, learning, and
excitement about science. In many disciplines, instructors have redesigned
courses to embed authentic research experiences. For example, more that a decade
ago, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill introduced the Skynet
network of robotic (remote-controlled) telescopes into introductory astronomy
courses. Skynet allowed the students to use real telescopes to do the science
they were learning in class. Over five years, the Skynet-based laboratory
curriculum (Our Place in Space!) resulted in a doubling of enrollment in the
astronomy course and an approximately three-fold increase in astronomy majors
and minors. The curriculum has since been adopted by a dozen other colleges and
universities. A previous NSF award (DUE-1245383) funded a study across ten of
those adopting institutions, and showed that the Skynet-based labs led to a
statistically significant improvement in students' attitudes toward science. For
context, traditional telescope labs and non-telescope labs, as well as in-class
activities known to yield learning gains, did not have a similar effect on
student attitudes. This project will follow up on that first study by conducting
a large-scale case study that involves approximately 19,000 students at 35
institutions. This research will measure changes in students' attitudes toward
science, confidence in their abilities, conceptual understanding, and career
intentions in both traditional and Skynet-based introductory astronomy courses.
The research will include further development and assessment of student-outcome
metrics that are specific to astronomy. To support this research, the
investigators will also provide professional development to help approximately
40 astronomy instructors from the participating institutions learn how to
incorporate Skynet-based activities into their courses and will update the
curriculum and its supporting technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there
have been multiple reports of positive impacts of robotic telescope networks in
education at different levels, the studies have been limited in rigor and
generalizability. This project aims to assess reliably the common claim that the
use of research-grade robotic telescopes leads to improvements in students' STEM
attitudes and self-efficacy and changes in their career aspirations. The
investigators will also address key questions connected with the design of the
curriculum and the technology, such as: How is the effect of using research-
grade robotic telescope networks different from that of smaller, more local,
telescope experiences? Does student ownership of data affect student outcomes?
How does learning with archival data compare to learning with data that students
collect themselves? By the third year of the project, the curriculum-development
and technology-development aspects of the project are expected to impact around
5,000 introductory-level students per year, primarily non-STEM majors. The
investigators will also expand the reach of the curriculum by enhancing its
accessibility to students with disabilities and making it available to public
audiences without cost. This collaborative project includes investigators at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (Award DUE-2013300) and Associated
Universities, Inc. (Award DUE-2013295). The project is funded by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) program, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.