* 2013880
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Better Grid-Scale Energy Storage with Organic Additives
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Onas Bolton, Octet Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop a more economical, scalable and
sustainable type of battery for the renewable power grid. As wind and solar
power generation become more common, economical energy storage is needed to
supply power in the absence of wind or sun. Older battery technologies, such as
lithium ion and lead acid batteries, pose challenges with supply, safety,
longevity, and sustainability. This project will produce new chemical components
to enable new grid-scale batteries based on safe, abundant, and recyclable zinc
metal. The proposed batteries will last longer and run more efficiently to lower
energy prices, reduce end-of-life costs, and accelerate the use of renewable
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to produce
chemical additives to improve the lifetime and efficiency of zinc-bromine
batteries. These batteries pose challenges through unwanted side reactions
occurring during battery charging. This project will develop new additives to
prevent uneven zinc deposition and gas formation without sacrificing performance
or adding significant cost. The research objectives include modification of
currently available chemicals to achieve the desired performance, as well as to
develop a suite of design principles for further improvements to battery
additives. The proposed work is to validate the materials for long-term
stability in harsh battery electrolytes and validate performance in suitable
battery conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.