* 2013838
* SBIR Phase I:  Shape Memory Alloy Thermal Energy Harvesting System
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Kelly Rowles, LEGOV SYSTEMS GROUP LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address challenges with enduring low
operating margins and plant inefficiencies across many application areas.
Recovering low-grade waste heat is often a technically impractical and cost-
prohibitive process. The proposed technology is designed to offset operating
costs and increase overall plant efficiency. Target users for the thermal
energy-harvesting system are owners/operators of combined heat and power (CHP)
installations, metal manufacturers, chemical processors, industrial boilers, and
other industrial facilities currently unable to recover the substantial amounts
of low-grade waste heat that their facilities generate. The technology would
potentially offer these applications reduced operating costs, reduced energy
demands, and improved sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the translation of
porous Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) materials as actuators. The innovation will be
an SMA actuator comprised of a novel, porous SMA material operating in a compact
rotary form. The porous material's small feature size will allow for fast heat
transfer and phase transformation, compared to solid SMA actuators. This novel
actuator is expected to result in the recovery of substantially more power from
the same mass of SMA material. The proposed Phase I proof-of-concept work will
produce validated models of the overall SMA behavior and its coupled behavior in
a system, including heat transfer, thermo-mechanical behavior, and localized
stresses. In addition to the improved models, the proposed work will focus on
reliability for translation of porous SMA materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.