* 2013146
* Study of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays with the Pierre Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Lawrence Wiencke, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2024
* USD 885,948.00

The discoveries made by the Pierre Auger Observatory (Auger) have transformed
our understanding of ultra-high energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) and their sources.
This award supports the astro-particle groups at the Colorado School of Mines
and Case Western Reserve University, who are major contributors in Auger with
significant leadership roles. They will carry out innovative studies of detector
and energy systematics, atmospherics, and astrophysics. Unraveling how UHECRs
are accelerated has been the holy grail of multi-messenger astrophysics for a
long time and requires the statistical power of Auger, augmented by an improved
detector and by advanced data analysis methods. Continued work to understand the
relative and absolute energy scales of Auger will resolve existing
discrepancies, both internal and with other experiments. The research produces
data that relate to climate change and convective storms: work is included to
analyze those data, as well as data on aerosols, whose role in climate change is
not well understood. The groups will also continue their involvement with
undergraduate design projects based around the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While energy spectrum measurements have firmly
established the existence of flux suppression, composition studies suggest an
evolution from light to heavier primaries above the ‘ankle’ that is seemingly
incompatible with known effects. The current measurements of energy spectra,
anisotropy, particle composition, neutrino limits, photon limits, and p-air
cross section demonstrate that Auger has an unprecedented view of the high-
energy universe and access to particle physics at energies beyond the Large
Hadron Collider. Auger results will enable the groups to both use and understand
the more subtle manifestations of UHECR sources in the sky. In addition, this
research investigates poorly understood initiation processes coming from heated
electrons in the ionosphere, using the unique capabilities of the Auger
Fluorescence Detector stations to study the Transient Luminescence Events known
as elves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.