* 2013905
* Cluster Analysis for High-Dimensional and Multi-Source Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jia Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

Rapid technology advances in devices and computer systems continue to grow our
capacity to collect and store data. Clustering is often the first stage analysis
performed to discover patterns, gain insights, and extract knowledge from
massive amount of data routinely faced in science, engineering, and commercial
domains. For instance, in biomedical studies, clustering is used to reveal
pathological subgroups and help researchers form new hypothesis for in-depth
investigation. It is thus imperative to develop new clustering methods to meet
the ever-increasing challenges of data with high complexity, huge volume, and
from distributed sources. In this project, novel statistical and optimization-
based approaches and software packages will be developed to address these
challenges. Graduate students will be trained to conduct research at the
forefront of machine learning. The research results will be used to enrich
courses and outreach educational materials in data science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A prominent statistical paradigm for clustering is based on mixture
models, which is objective, parsimonious, not biased for known clusters, and has
a probabilistic framework that can be extended and interpreted in standard ways.
For high-dimensional large-scale data, existing mixture-model based methods have
fundamental limitations. Furthermore, a big data environment can require the
integration of clustering results at distributed sites, a problem called multi-
source clustering. This research will advance cluster analysis from multiple
aspects. First, hidden Markov model on variable blocks (HMM-VB), a special
Gaussian mixture model (GMM), is developed to tackle high dimensionality. The
estimation of HMM-VB will be enhanced by computationally efficient methods to
identify the latent variable block structure and by mixture factor analyzers.
Second, leveraging the latent states of HMM-VB, a new variable selection
approach will be developed for clustering high-dimensional data. Third, the
emerging topic of multi-source clustering will be studied. New methods based on
optimal transport and Wasserstein barycenter will be developed for aggregating
clustering results from multiple sources. Applications in biomedical areas will
be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.