* 2013662
* EAGER: Quantum Dynamics of Spin in Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Enrique del Barco, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 228,085.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to consolidate an
integrated experimental and educational framework for the study, understanding,
and dissemination of knowledge that details the quantum magnetic properties of
single-molecule magnets. The control of quantum properties of nanoscale
materials has led to the appearance of new emerging technologies, such as
quantum information and computation processes. Nanoscale molecular systems have
great potential for ultra-high density integration and quantum information
processing, which are technologies that base on the fundamental properties
studied in this project. Along these lines, this project will advance a
conjunction of experimental realizations to study the coupling between photons
and ensembles of molecular magnets, in view of application in quantum
information, molecular spintronics and related emerging quantum technologies.
This high risk/high reward project will open the door to explore the quantum
dynamics of spin in an energy and temperature range never explored before. The
proposed research is strongly integrated with a series of educational activities
ongoing in the group of the principal investigator. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained at the interface between inorganic chemistry and
fundamental and applied physics, and exposed to a large, interdisciplinary and
international net of collaborations that the principal investigator has
established over many years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to consolidate an integrated experimental
and educational framework for the study, understanding, and dissemination of
knowledge that details the magnetic properties of single-molecule magnets under
a broad range of experimental conditions. The main scientific goal of this
project is to study the nature of light-matter interaction in single-molecule
and single-ion magnets and achieve quantum coherent control over the molecular
spin. The main scientific goal of this proposal is to study the nature of light-
matter interaction in molecular nanomagnets and achieve quantum coherent control
over the molecular spin. In particular, the objective is to coherently control
the time evolution of the spin of molecules upon application of fast pulsed
microwave irradiation in the weak coupling regime at sub-Kelvin temperatures
(&gt;50 mK) for which dipolar dephasing will be suppressed due to polarization
of the spin bath without the need of large magnetic fields. This will open a
window into the fundamental sources of decoherence in single crystals of SMMs in
an energy range (frequencies &lt;10GHz, and magnetic fields &lt;1T) never before
explored. The technique has already been demonstrated by the PI under prior NSF-
DMR support. This milli-Kelvin time-resolved EPR capability is unique worldwide
and will allow exploring dynamical effects in SMMs and SIMs directly associated
to the intrinsic anisotropy of the system, placing the PI’s group in a leading
position within the field. This is a high risk-high reward project in that
proof-of-concept experimental results have only been obtained in standard
spectroscopic spin markers. The challenge resides in expanding these studies
into single crystals of molecular nanomagnets, which will require identification
of viable candidate samples and will rely on weak effects of dephasing sources
other than the one that can be eliminated with the PI’s new technique (dipolar
dephasing). However, if the technique works with molecular magnets, it will open
an exciting door to explore the quantum dynamics of spin in an energy and
temperature range never explored before (high reward), allowing exploring a
realm of low magnetic fields when the systems respond to the intrinsic and
complex anisotropy symmetries that make molecular nanomagnets
unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.