* 2013082
* RUI: Studying the Strong Nuclear Force at Augustana University
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nathan Grau, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award continues the scientific program to study the strong nuclear force at
Augustana University in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. The strong nuclear force is
carried by particles called gluons that bind protons and neutrons together to
form a nucleus at the core of every atom. Because atoms make up the majority of
the observable matter, knowing the number of gluons inside a nucleus and their
motion is necessary to understand matter at its fundamental level. The nuclear
physics group at Augustana studies the gluon content of the nucleus by analyzing
high energy nuclear collisions produced at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
(RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The group will analyze data from
deuterium + gold collisions measured with the PHENIX detector. The group will
also participate in the building and installing the new sPHENIX detector, a
next-generation detector that will measure results from collisions at RHIC
beginning in approximately 2023. This program in strong nuclear physics is the
only one of its kind in South Dakota. It provides those in the state and the
region opportunities to study and participate in this physics. The proposal will
support undergraduates studying physics or pre-engineering. The educational
benefits for the students are broad. Students will gain practical skills such as
computer programming, analysis of large data sets, electrical engineering
application, and mechanical engineering design. These skills are transferable to
other vocations of interest to the student, the state, and the nation. Students
will participate in weekly collaboration meetings, present at national
conferences, and visit collaborating institutions. Such opportunities will build
their communication skills, grow their professional network, put them in contact
with potential graduate schools, and prepare them for 21st-century technical
jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An outstanding experimental question in
strong-force physics is measuring the nuclear parton distribution function of
gluons at low momentum fraction x. This award continues work by the PI and
undergraduates to study this area in two ways. First, the measurement of
pi0-hadron azimuthal correlations in d + Au at midrapidity of 200 GeV recorded
by the PHENIX experiment at RHIC in 2016 will be completed and published. The
analysis will utilize the Muon Piston Calorimeter (MPC) and the Muon Piston
Calorimeter Extension (MPC-EX). The MPC is a PbWO4 crystal electromagnetic
calorimeter. The MPC-EX is a Si-W pre-shower detector with high segmentation
that can separate photons from pi-zero decays for E &lt; 80 GeV. Using pairs of
particles in different pseudorapidity, including the very forward MPC+MPC-EX
region, the pair rate and azimuthal correlation shapes will be measured as a
function of pair pseudorapidity. These measurements should yield insights to the
kinematics of low-x gluons in the nucleus and allow tests of saturation physics
or cold nuclear matter energy loss. Second, the group is transitioning from
PHENIX to sPHENIX, a next-generation heavy ion detector that will take advantage
of high-luminosity RHIC running to measure jets and heavy flavor physics. The
group will spend significant time during the summers of 2021 and 2022 helping to
build components and install the detector at the interaction region. First data
is expected in early 2023. The group will focus on measurements of low-energy
jets using two-particle correlations. In the future, the sPHENIX detector is
expected to transform into a Day-1 physics detector the Electron-Ion Collider
(EIC) that will be built at Brookhaven in the later 2020's. The main physics
driver for the EIC is to measure the gluon content of the
nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.