* 2013951
* Probing Dark Matter Physics throughout Cosmic History
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Vera Gluscevic, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Vera Gluscevic at the
University of Southern California (USC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles that
represent the building blocks of the visible universe account for merely 15% of
all matter known to exist. The rest is dark matter, invisible to telescopes, and
dominating virtually all galaxies. Dark matter cannot be explained by any known
particles; its physical nature is yet to be understood. At the same time, dark
matter has shaped the Universe throughout its history, leaving clues in
observational data. As part of her research, Professor Gluscevic will use a
combination of cosmological observations, computer simulations, and analytic
theory to probe how dark matter might interact with normal matter, and to
understand how these interactions might affect observational data. This research
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science, in
particular our understanding of the building blocks of the Universe in which we
live. This work also has significant broader societal impacts. Professor
Gluscevic will engage several students and a postdoc in research projects
related to this proposal, providing them with essential training in the field.
She will also start a dedicated lecture series within the Women in Physics
program at USC, to help promote diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM,
enhance networking opportunities, and strengthen the sense of belonging amongst
women in Physics and Astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the key
objective of Professor Gluscevic’s work is to develop, implement, and apply a
novel comprehensive theoretical framework for probing dark-matter particle
interactions with baryons, using a variety of observations. In particular, this
work will enable consistent computation of the effects of dark matter-baryon
interactions on various cosmological observables, improve treatment of
theoretical uncertainty in calculation of signals within interacting-dark-matter
cosmology, and provide new limits on dark-matter theory. Development of the
proposed framework at present is critical, in preparation for analyses of data
from the next generation of cosmological and astrophysical
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.