* 2013433
* Collaborative Research: Ground-Based Studies of High-Latitude Magnetospheric and Ionospheric Dynamics Using the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and Cleft Studies (MACCS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Mark Moldwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 425,563.00

Ground-based magnetic field observations continue to play a fundamental role in
magnetospheric and ionospheric research. The Magnetometer Array for Cusp and
Cleft Studies (MACCS) is an NSF-funded ground-based array that records and
disseminates important magnetic field measurements for scientific analyses.
MACCS is the only longitudinally-spaced cusp-latitude array in existence and
will continue to provide critical data for studies of geospace phenomena
including solar wind-magnetosphere and magnetosphere-ionosphere interactions,
the dynamics of the cusp/boundary layer/mantle/polar cap regions of the
magnetosphere, geomagnetic storms and substorms, and localized instabilities
that produce large geomagnetically induced currents which can cause power grid
blackouts on Earth. Therefore, MACCS supports understanding and preparation for
extreme space weather events which are a risk to national security.
Additionally, this project supports the training of undergraduate and graduate
student researchers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will continue operation of
MACCS, an important magnetometer array that has been funded by NSF since 1991
and continue dissemination of the MACCS dataset to the scientific community. A
new low-cost magneto-inductive magnetometer sensor will be deployed and tested
at MACCS sites. Additionally, scientific studies will focus on: (1) performing
detailed studies of high-latitude ULF waves, using multi-instrument ground-based
and satellite data including MMS, the Van Allen Probes, and SWARM, (2)
Continuing studies of nighttime impulsive magnetic perturbations relevant to
geomagnetically induced currents, (3) combining GPS data and magnetic field data
from MACCS and neighboring arrays to better understand the dynamics of the
ionospheric projections of dayside and nightside boundary domains, (4) using
machine learning techniques to study factors influencing relativistic electron
fluxes, (5) producing higher-level data products characterizing global ULF waves
and turbulence, and (6) carrying out theoretical studies and modeling studies
using the Space Weather Modeling Framework of the excitation and propagation of
ULF waves through the global magnetosphere-ionosphere
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.