* 2013199
* Galactic and Extragalactic Cosmic Rays, Neutrinos and Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Glennys Farrar, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 679,418.00

The highest energy particle-messengers in the Universe are Ultrahigh Energy
Cosmic Rays (UHECR) and Very High Energy (VHE) neutrinos and gamma rays.
Discovering their origin is arguably the most important current problem in high
energy astrophysics. This project is working towards that goal on four different
fronts: 1) constraining source properties from the observed UHECR spectra and
composition, and the astrophysical neutrino and VHE gamma ray spectra; 2)
density of UHECR sources and source of VHE Galactic cosmic rays, from
anisotropies; 3) deep machine learning to extract more information from UHECR
observations; and 4) improved multi-messenger arrival direction studies. The new
probabilistic methods of event reconstruction will have implications for pattern
recognition problems more broadly. The PI mentors students and junior
researchers, and runs a summer research collective for women high-school
students that meets in person in summer and virtually during the academic
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The details will only be known as the work
progresses, but the approaches are clear. 1)The combined multi-messenger
information from the observed UHECR spectra and composition, and the
astrophysical neutrino and VHE gamma ray spectra, powerfully constrains several
properties of the source environment, and likely excludes many candidate source
classes. 2)Improving the treatment of magnetic deflections and considering the
anisotropies will better test the Galactic transient hypothesis and address the
density of UHECR sources and the source of VHE Galactic cosmic rays. 3)Deep
machine learning will extract more information from UHECR observations, reducing
some of the difficulties and complexity of interpreting those data. For a
precious 10% of the events there are air fluorescence data, and training
Convolutional Neural Nets on this 10% will allow extraction of currently
inaccessible information embedded in the ground signals of the 90%. 4)Improved
multi-messenger arrival direction studies will use a new state-of-the-art
Galactic magnetic field model. The UHECR source directions will be combined with
the neutral neutrino and gamma ray messengers to produce a multi-messenger
astrophysics dataset, which will greatly enhance the source-finding-power
relative to using neutrinos and gamma-rays only.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.