* 2013953
* Investigating Fundamental Physics with Cosmological Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mark Hertzberg, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Mark Hertzberg at Tufts
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many branches of modern physics are built upon
the Standard Model of particle physics and cosmology. Future developments in
fundamental physics will arise from addressing several unexplained features of
our universe. Some of the most pressing questions arise in cosmology: What
physics lies beyond the Standard Model that might be relevant to the early
universe? What is the nature of dark matter? What is the underlying structure of
gravitation? As part of his research, Professor Hertzberg will investigate
specific aspects of these important questions by building theoretical models and
comparing to cosmological data. This research therefore advances the national
interest by pursuing basic scientific questions of high significance. This
project will also have broader impacts. It will involve mentees, who will play
an important role in developing models and in computational work, and help them
develop essential research skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this
project will explore new physics required for consistent dynamics of the
Standard Model after inflation, explore novel probes of light axion dark matter
and new dark-matter models, and investigate the origin of Poincare symmetry from
consistency of the gravitational sector. This work involves forming theoretical
models, requiring both internal consistency and agreement with observations, all
studied rigorously using the guiding principles of effective field theory. On
the front concerning physics beyond the Standard Model, the primary objectives
are to constrain features of the Standard Model, including the Higgs boson and
models of inflation, from consistency with early-universe dynamics. On the dark-
matter front, the primary objectives are to investigate astrophysical
consequences from dark-matter candidates, such as novel properties of axions,
and to explore natural models of dark matter. On the gravitational front, the
primary objectives are to determine the necessary and sufficient conditions to
build a local theory of gravitons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.