* 2013397
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Undergraduate Mathematics Teacher Preparation Programs using the Professional Development: Research, Implementation, and Evaluation Framework
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Margaret Mohr-Schroeder, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 756,242.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM education
by establishing practices to enhance secondary mathematics teacher preparation.
Teacher preparation programs are essential for long-term improvement in teacher
performance and retention of effective teachers. However, current research is
insufficient to support strong conclusions about the characteristics that define
effective teacher preparation programs. This project proposes to study the use
of a professional development framework to guide teacher preparation programs
and improve teacher candidates' classroom practice. The project’s professional
development framework will provide a common frame of reference for quality
teaching in secondary mathematics teacher preparation across the four
participating institutions. The project will support preservice teacher
development through coursework, network improvement communities, and plan-do-
study-act cycles. The project aims to impact more than 150 new secondary
mathematics teachers and produce transformative improvement in mathematics
teacher preparation programs. The participation of four institutions will
enhance the generalizability of the findings to other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project involves
partnerships with the University of Maryland Baltimore County (lead), Berea
College, the University of Central Florida, and the University of Kentucky. The
four-year project aims to structure undergraduate mathematics teacher
preparation programs at these four institutions and study the use of the
Professional Development: Research, Implementation, and Evaluation framework
(PrimeD) to improve teacher preparation programs and teacher candidates'
professional practice. Using design-based research, the project will follow a
multi-group treatment-only longitudinal, triangulation mixed methods design. The
study will position participants as researchers in their own classrooms to
investigate well-defined problems of practice and refine their classroom
innovations based on their findings. The use of network improvement communities
to cycle between classroom implementation and whole group engagement is a key
feature of PrimeD intended to help teacher candidates make stronger connections
between field experiences and theories learned in their coursework. The project
aims to explore research questions including: (i) How well does PrimeD improve
program development of undergraduate teacher candidates? (ii) How well does
PrimeD improve program development of undergraduate teacher candidates’
preparation to implement research-based teaching strategies? (iii) How well does
PrimeD reposition stakeholders (e.g., classroom teachers, field experience
supervisors, undergraduate teacher candidates, faculty) as partners, mentors,
and co-learners in the program? Results of this research may provide crucial
information for enhancing and transforming secondary mathematics teacher
preparation programs, especially reliability and validity across programs.
Results from this project are anticipated to provide a strong foundation for
subsequent studies of how such teaching practices affect secondary student
outcomes. The NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.