* 2013718
* RUI: The Non-Linear Universe: Precision Numerical Cosmology and Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Giblin, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 145,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Associate Professor John T. Giblin,
Jr. at Kenyon College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Universe is a complex and
constantly evolving system. Buried in this system are clues about physics at
extreme conditions such as temperatures and energies beyond the capacity of
terrestrial experiments. Our current understanding of the Universe includes a
number of mysteries: dark matter, dark energy, and the physics that describes
the very early Universe. Carefully studying this system is therefore one of the
most promising avenues we have for extending our understanding of the nature of
matter and energy. Professor Giblin and his students will study several
foundational questions in fundamental physics. If there was a period of rapid
expansion in the very early Universe, how do we describe it and how did it end?
How should dark matter be described? Are there any hints that there are more
particles in the Universe than we currently know? Professor Giblin will develop
new, cutting-edge, computational tools that will permit the study of the
evolution of the Universe with extreme accuracy. Six undergraduates will also
participate in this work. This work is therefore in the national interest as it
builds scientifically literate and numerically skillful human resources and
deepens our understanding of basic science. Additionally, this research project
includes outreach to high-school classrooms, thereby bringing new tools and new
scientific topics to high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
Professor Giblin will study realistic models of inflation and the observational
signatures of nonlinear processes at the end of inflation in order to test and
rule out inflationary scenarios through observations of the cosmic microwave
background. He will also study the implications of measurements of
gravitational-wave backgrounds and intergalactic magnetic fields. Professor
Giblin will also study the Schrodinger description of non-relativistic dark
matter as a possible description of ultra-light axion-like particles.
Additionally, he will probe whether the introduction of Early Dark Energy ---
extra degrees of freedom from beyond-the-standard-model physics --- can ease the
so-called "Hubble-Lemaitre" tension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.