* 2013496
* Collaborative Research: Writing Assignment Tutor Training in STEM, an Interdisciplinary Approach to Enhance Student Writing in STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ruth Pflueger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 127,246.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
engineering students’ ability to communicate effectively through writing.
Undergraduate engineering students need more help to develop high-quality
writing skills. However, addressing this need is challenging due to limited time
in engineering curricula and the limited emphasis engineering faculty members
place on writing. In addition, many engineering students devalue writing skills
and underestimate the amount of writing needed to be successful in engineering
careers. This project intends to improve engineering student writing in their
specific disciplines through distribution and testing of a previously developed
process for training peer STEM writing tutors. This process involves a
partnership between the supervisor of writing center tutors and the STEM
instructor. Together, they design a one-hour training experience during which
writing tutors learn about the STEM assignment content, vocabulary, and
expectations. With this knowledge, the tutors can better support students during
tutoring sessions to improve their specific writing assignment. This project
will undertake a multi-institutional study to identify the elements of the tutor
training process that have the most impact and the extent to which the process
can be used to increase collaboration between engineering instructors and campus
writing centers. It is expected that the training will lead to improvements in
both tutoring effectiveness and student attitudes toward writing, ultimately
supporting improvements in the writing skills of undergraduate engineering
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a collaboration
between Penn State Behrend, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indiana University Purdue University Columbus, and the University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley, a minority-serving institution. Evaluation of the Writing
Assignment Tutor Training process on these campuses will include examination of
impacts on students, peer tutors, engineering instructors, writing centers, and
writing tutor supervisors. Data collection methods will include pre- and post-
training surveys, interviews, and focus groups. In addition, student writing
samples from pre-and post-tutoring will be investigated. The investigators will
analyze these data and use the results to guide development of a replicable,
sustainable model for future expansion of the Writing Assignment Tutor Training
approach to other institutions and STEM fields. This approach may serve as a
model for other institutions to capitalize on existing infrastructure and
resources, such as writing centers and peer tutors, to achieve large-scale
improvements to undergraduate STEM writing while increasing collaboration
between STEM and other disciplines. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.