* 2013671
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Deconstructing and Neutralizing Search Rank Fraud
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Bogdan Carbunar, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 450,644.00

Search rank fraud, or posting large numbers of paid activities for products
hosted in online services, intends to give the illusion of grassroots engagement
and to boost financial gains, promote malware and even assist censorship
efforts. Search rank fraud continues to be a significant problem after years of
investment by service providers and the academic community. This lack of
progress is partly due to an incomplete and inaccurate understanding of the
diverse community of professional raters. This project builds on the thesis that
to be effective, fraud detection and prevention efforts need to involve the
organizations and individuals who contribute to search rank fraud. To this end,
this project is designing and developing techniques to validate professional
raters and to study their capabilities, behaviors and detection avoidance
strategies. The project introduces a new generation of solutions to address and
neutralize the effects of search rank fraud. This project will help protect
millions of online service users from misleading information, substandard
products and even malware and censorship-enabling
apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a novel approach to study,
detect and prevent fraud in online services, and to evaluate developed
solutions. The team is building a platform, techniques, and protocols to collect
data about the online and mobile device behaviors of professional raters and
honest users of peer-opinion services, and to evaluate developed solutions using
live raters. Also, the team is designing fraud generators to produce benchmark
datasets of synthetic but realistic timelines of fraudulent activities. The team
is using an adversarial learning approach to iteratively train neural networks
to disentangle different types of fraud from honest behaviors. Finally, the team
will leverage unique insights extracted from the collected data, along with
network representation learning and graph partitioning techniques, to develop
predictors that attribute fraud and identify user accounts controlled by the
same organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.