* 2013484
* An Interdisciplinary Team-based Framework to Engage Undergraduate Students in Biomedical Innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Tim Dallas, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2023
* USD 485,236.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the preparation of
biomedical engineers. It intends to do so by developing an interdisciplinary
team learning framework for biomedical innovation in undergraduate education. In
this framework, engineering students at Texas Tech University will engage in
biomedical research and innovation through collaboration with medical students
at Texas Tech University Health Science Center and entrepreneurship mentors at
Texas Tech University Innovation Hub. Solutions to today’s complex medical
problems require collaboration between engineers, scientists, and healthcare
professionals. Unfortunately, few college campuses provide structured
opportunities for such interdisciplinary collaboration. The project's novel
concept is to create a one-year cross-institutional course focused on solving
commonly encountered clinical problems. Through this work, student teams will
develop biomedical products that might be commercialized for the health care
market. The project will benefit society by arming young people with practical
STEM knowledge, tools for innovation, and teamwork skills to address critical
health care problems. The project may be scalable into a nation-wide program
that will promote strong linkages between STEM education and biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to generate new knowledge
about the impact of collaborations between medical students and undergraduate
engineering students on the undergraduate students’ learning outcomes,
creativity, and entrepreneurship. The project core is development of an
interdisciplinary learning environment in which undergraduate students and
medical students collaborate on research projects mentored by professionals from
academia, health clinics, and industry. Implementation of the course will
include flipped classroom pedagogy combined with project-based learning. The
work is undergirded by constructivist learning theory and includes evaluation of
both cognitive and non-cognitive impacts on students through pre- and post-
semester surveys, using appropriate survey instruments. Impact on faculty will
also be investigated. The learning environment is expected to be an incubator
for skill-based research training as well as entrepreneurship in biomedical
innovation. A cross-institutional faculty consultant team will provide knowledge
and skill scaffolding, as well as offer frequently encountered clinical
challenges that might be topics for innovative solutions. As part of the course,
venture investors, technology experts, and serial entrepreneurs will share their
insights and experiences in launching successful projects. This project is
funded by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human
Resources program, which supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.