* 2013819
* SBIR Phase I:  Zwitterion self-assembly during evaporation process correlated to thin film mechanical function
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Bradley Rodier, Rochal Industries LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2021
* USD 222,981.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to effectively treat skin tears, which when mismanaged, have a high
propensity to become complex and chronic wounds involving infection, pain and
delayed wound healing and impose health and financial burdens on individuals and
care agencies. Skin tear injury effects at least 1.9 million institutionalized
patients yearly and has a high probability to reoccur in high-risk categories,
elderly and neonates. Though frequently under-reported, the literature suggests
skin tears have a prevalence that is similar to pressure injuries. In USA long
term care settings, the prevalence rate is 20% with skin tears principally on
arms (60%) and legs (40%) occurring during daily routines. This research is to
provide a skin tear treatment that requires less nursing time, reduces pain, and
improves healing times resulting in improved patient quality of life and
treatment cost savings. The estimated USA market for skin tear treatment is $646
million/year with 44% ($285 million/year) coming from nursing homes, wound care
clinics and home health. The innovative chemistry developed through this
research could be applied to other medical devices, separation membranes, and
coatings/films to provide mechanical strength, anti-fouling, or size exclusion
separation.

The proposed project is to investigate the premise that zwitterion-containing
polymers can be created that retain epidermal-like membrane properties for wound
healing and demonstrate mechanical strength when evaporated as thin films (e.g.,
Saran™ wrap-like). Each of these intellectually challenging goals is a technical
hurdle to be addressed by the proposed R&D. The research findings are to direct
the research for and subsequent development of a skin tear treatment product.
The Phase I research focus is to synthesize and characterize this unique class
of film-forming copolymers that contain zwitterions - with specific objectives
to synthesize zwitterionic polymers, characterize polymers, determine mechanical
properties and correlate morphology to mechanical properties. This research is
to provide vital feasibility data for polymer synthesis, masking of zwitterion
self-assembly, and zwitterion self-assembly parameters during solvent
evaporation to form a strong polymer film. The resulting platform chemistry and
body of knowledge is anticipated to be translated into a wound care product for
skin tear treatment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.