* 2013695
* Collaborative Research: Modeling fault ruptures along bends and stepovers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Benchun Duan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,771.00

Earthquakes occur when faults rupture, and large earthquakes are produced when
ruptures propagate long distances along fault zones. Large earthquakes often
rupture across tens to hundreds of miles of faults, including stepovers (gaps)
between fault segments and bends in faults. These fault irregularities can also
stop rupture propagation. So, they play an important role in understanding
earthquake hazard assessment. Whether or not an earthquake rupture is able to
pass through a given stepover or a bend is very important. Previous studies have
suggested that stepovers more than about 5 km wide would stop rupture
propagation, but some recent large earthquakes have jumped wider gaps. The 2016
magnitude 7.8 New Zealand earthquake, for example, involved rupture jumping over
a gap more than 15 km wide between faults. This project will use tectonic fault
models to simulate the initial stress field, especially around stepovers and
bends, and then use the results to improve fault rupture models. Results of this
project will improve our understanding of large earthquakes and their hazards,
particularly within continents where fault systems are complex. This research
will train two graduate students in the emerging field of multiphysics in
faulting and earthquakes. Undergraduate students will be involved through senior
thesis research, and research results, including animations of fault ruptures,
will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum at Texas A&amp;M and the
University of Missouri, and be freely available to other educators. Computer
codes developed in this project will be freely shared with other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use numerical models to
simulate fault rupture and propagation along stepovers and bends, the fault
irregularities that often stop fault rupture, hence limiting the size of
earthquakes. Knowing whether or not a given stepover or bend can stop fault
rupture propagation is critical for hazard assessment, because large
earthquakes, especially those on intracontinental strike-slip faults, usually
rupture multiple fault segments by jumping over stepovers and propagating along
fault bends. Previous numerical modeling and some field observations have
suggested that stepovers more than ~5 km wide would stop fault rupturing;
however, ruptures in the 2016 Mw 7.8 Kaikoura earthquake in New Zealand jumped
more than 15 km between faults. Fault geometry and initial stress are among the
most important factors dictating rupture behavior, but initial stress is often
poorly constrained and simplified as homogeneous or ad hoc heterogeneous in
previous dynamic rupture models. On the other hand, it is well known that stress
tends to concentrate around stepovers, bends, and other fault irregularities.
This project will use fault tectonics models to simulate changes of regional
static stress around stepovers and bends, and quasi-static stress changes due to
previous slip events. The resulting stress fields will then be used in dynamic
rupture models to simulate spontaneous propagation of fault ruptures during
earthquakes. The research will use generic fault models to explore key
parameters controlling rupture along stepovers and bends, and then a model based
on the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake will be developed to gain insights into complex
ruptures involving multiple faults. Results of this project will improve our
understanding of large earthquakes and their hazards, particularly within
continents where fault systems are complex and large events often involve
rupture of multiple faults or segments. This research takes an important step
toward a fully integrated model of fault mechanics that simulates stress
evolution and rupture behaviors over multiple
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.