* 2013988
* Research in String Theory, Supergravity and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Timm Wrase, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Timm Wrase at Lehigh
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than a hundred years after Albert Einstein
discovered his theory of general relativity, we are still working on unifying it
with quantum mechanics, the theory that governs the subatomic world. String
theory, the leading candidate in this endeavor, has already provided deep
insights into what is and what is not possible in a theory of quantum gravity.
Some of these insights, like the requirement that the gravitational force be
weaker than the other forces in any theoretically consistent universe, are
widely accepted. However, there are also other much more speculative ideas. For
example, our universe is filled with a mysterious so-called dark energy that
counteracts gravity and pushes galaxies apart. It was recently conjectured that
such a dark energy has to become weaker over time. As part of his research,
Professor Wrase will study this and other related conjectures that make
interesting predictions for our own universe. The goal of these investigations
is to provide theoretical predictions that can be compared to on-going and
future cosmological observations of dark energy and a period of so-called
cosmological inflation that is believed to have taken place during the very
early universe. This project is also expected to have significant broader
impacts. Professor Wrase will involve graduate students and a postdoc in his
research, and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists beginning
research in this field. He also intends to give public lectures on the topics of
his research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Wrase will study
cosmological applications of string theory such as inflation and dS vacua. There
are a variety of related swampland conjectures that need to be better understood
and made more precise. For example, the status of dS vacua and large-field
inflation in string theory are highly debated. Improving our understanding of
existing constructions and/or deriving potential no-go theorems will help us in
either putting such conjectures on more solid footing or refuting them. This
should help in confronting future cosmological observations with improved
theoretical predictions for quantities such as the equation of state of dark
energy or the tensor-to-scalar ratio during inflation. Another goal of this
project is to improve our understanding of supersymmetry breaking in string
theory, in particular by studying non-supersymmetric Dp-branes and their
connections to non-linear and misaligned
supersymmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.