* 2013080
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Project Radial
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Angela Speck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 03/31/2023
* USD 99,957.00

This project will establish a collective impact initiative that will use radio
astronomy research to advance the development of a diverse US STEM workforce.
The National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) requires extensive high-
throughput computing infrastructure and a skilled workforce, to develop
innovative approaches in computing and data science, to manage and exploit the
large and complex datasets produced by its radio telescopes. In-depth academic
research has investigated the causes of the persistent under-representation of
minorities in the US STEM sector. The needs of the NRAO, and the findings of the
research, inspired initial meetings between the NRAO and minority-serving
institutions (MSIs). At these meetings, it was agreed that both astronomy and
diversity could benefit from a network of multi-institutional, cross-
disciplinary partners, to commit complementary expertise and resources. The
Radial Alliance, consisting of ten MSIs and NRAO, will seek to provide these ten
MSIs with high-throughput computing processing infrastructure and support; data
sets from the NRAO’s Very Large Array Sky Survey; and an open access,
interactive undergraduate and graduate curriculum, to train under-represented
minority students in astronomy, computing and data science. This innovative
approach will be supported by a “cradle to career” development program,
including an interactive K-12 curriculum for schools surrounding the MSIs;
undergraduate research experiences and a mentorship program for students; a
professional development program for students, educators and faculty;
affirmative spaces on the MSI campuses; and an outreach program targeted at
students’ families and communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
planning grant is to complete initiation and planning phases for the Radial
Alliance. The initiation phase will finalize a clear business case, shared
vision, mission and goals for the Radial Alliance and will consist of a front-
end evaluation, including a literature review, direct needs assessments, and
resources audit. This will inform a development lab during which Radial partner
MSIs, other partners, beneficiaries and invited subject experts will meet in-
person to finalize these elements and co-design the objectives, key activities,
and metrics of the Radial Alliance. The planning phase will build organizational
structure and a three-year plan for the Radial Alliance, including shared vision
and goals, and plans for communication, evaluation, and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is funded by NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.