* 2013661
* Workshop - Understanding accelerators as organizations that influence diversity and inclusion in entrepreneurship through practices; University Park, PA; Summer 2020
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Betsy Campbell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 01/31/2022
* USD 38,950.00

Despite the widespread availability of accelerators and other context for
entrepreneurship education, the high-tech, high-growth (HTHG) entrepreneurial
ecosystem remains mostly white and male. Accelerators are organizations with
specific practices and processes that inform their culture and structure.
Research that is devoted to the organizational science of accelerators and their
practical role in matters of diversity and inclusion in HTHG entrepreneurship is
needed. To prime the development of such a literature, this workshop –
Understanding Accelerators as Organizations that Influence Diversity and
Inclusion in Entrepreneurship – will convene faculty researchers and graduate
students in organization science and entrepreneurship as well as practitioners
who facilitate accelerators. Once assembled, participants will set forth an
agenda for future research that will advance theories of organization about
accelerators while attending to issues of relevance in practice. The output from
the gathering will be shared widely to stimulate awareness about the need for
greater diversity and inclusion in the entrepreneurial ecosystem and the means
by which scholars and practitioners can collaborate on rigorous and relevant
research. Moreover, the workshop aims to be the beginning of an ongoing
community of shared interest that can continue to move forward scholarship on
entrepreneurship and diversity over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
decades, studies of science education have shifted the expectations for
diversity and inclusion contexts for learning about Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM). Despite the overlap between STEM and HTHG
entrepreneurship, only limited insights have transferred from informal STEM
learning contexts to accelerators. Starting with these gaps, this workshop will
highlight what is known (and what needs to be known) about accelerators as
organizations and their impact on matters of diversity and inclusion in HTHG
entrepreneurship. The developed research agenda will encourage interdisciplinary
scholarship on matters of diversity and inclusion in contexts for
entrepreneurship education. New insights stand to be fostered in organizational
science regarding how to support greater diversity and inclusion in accelerators
as well as in adjacent activity settings such as universities with formal
entrepreneurship programs and businesses in the entrepreneurial ecosystem. These
insights will advance scientific knowledge on the role that the processes and
practices of accelerators have on the initial involvement and career
trajectories of entrepreneurs from non-dominant population groups (including
women, people of color, people from working class backgrounds, and people from
rural communities), thereby promoting greater equity in the innovation
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.