* 2013897
* SBIR Phase I:  An energy-based therapeutic to treat prostate cancer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Matthew Gdovin, Vitanova Biomedical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop nanoparticles designed to identify
and kill cancer cells upon activation by a beam of light. This project will
provide prostate cancer patients with an effective alternative therapy without
the side effects associated with surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. In 2018,
the total prevalence of men diagnosed and living with any stage of prostate
cancer was roughly 3.3 million patients. The project will conduct preliminary
studies regarding the idea behind the effectiveness and the safety of the
proposed treatment. The technology developed in this project represents a
platform cancer treatment, as the nanoparticle could be formulated to seek out
other cancers as well.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
unmet need for an effective prostate cancer treatment that does not cause the
unwanted side effects of current prostate cancer therapy. A novel prostate-
specific membrane antigen targeted nanoparticle causes intracellular acidosis
and prostate cancer cell death in response to activation by deep penetrating
near-infrared light. The goals of this project are to optimize light delivery
parameters to maximize the acidosis-driven cancer cell death. Studies will be
conducted using prostate cancer cells in vitro and in an animal model of mice
with prostate cancer tumors. Prostate cancer cells in the petri dish will be
used to determine the optimal intracellular bioaccumulation of the nanoparticle
and light delivery parameters. The mice with prostate cancer will receive either
near infrared light alone, or three escalating doses of the nanoparticle with
optimal light activation. It is anticipated that mice which receive light alone
will show increases in prostate tumor growth and decreases in survival. In
contrast, mice receiving the nanoparticle and light treatment should demonstrate
decreases in tumor growth rate and increases in survival in a dose-dependent
manner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.