* 2013102
* WoU-MMA:Astrophysics with a New Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Telescope
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Justin Vandenbroucke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2024
* USD 508,833.00

Gamma-ray astronomy is a vital part of multi-messenger astrophysics (MMA),
enabling robust identification or confirmation of MMA sources and strong
constraints on the nature, spectra, or distance of sources. The next-generation
gamma-ray observatory, the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), will provide a leap
forward in sensitivity. Meanwhile, an innovative high-performance telescope and
camera design, the Schwarzschild-Couder Telescope (SCT), is being tested with a
prototype SCT (pSCT), now in commissioning. The present project will develop
calibration and analysis routines for this new very-high-energy gamma-ray
telescope, the pSCT, and apply them for new measurements of the Crab Nebula,
characterization of the telescope (especially for MMA follow-up), and work to
measure the multi-TeV positron fraction. This group develops projects and
opportunities at the intersection of research, education, and outreach. They
launched and lead the Distributed Electronic Cosmic-ray Observatory (DECO),
which enables citizen scientists around the world to use the DECO app on their
smart phone to detect cosmic rays and other energetic particles. DECO users span
46 states, 74 countries, and seven continents. The present award supports
continued operations, maintenance, and development of the DECO
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the very-high-energy regime (&gt;20 GeV), the
current generation of imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes has proven the
scientific potential of the technique. The SCT promises excellent Cherenkov
shower imaging capability, as well as performance in moonlight, thanks to its
dual-mirror optics and high-resolution silicon-photomultiplier camera. With the
calibration, reconstruction, and analysis techniques to be developed under this
award, the camera will be capable of superb gamma-ray angular resolution and
hadronic background rejection, both of which translate directly into scientific
discovery potential. In addition, measurement of the multi-TeV positron fraction
will provide essential input to identify the origin of the currently unexplained
positron excess. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.