* 2013158
* The Yeast Chromosome Biology and Cell Cycle Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Mosur Raghuraman, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 02/28/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support graduate student and postdoctoral attendance at the
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) meeting at
Babson Park, Massachusetts on July 12 - 17, 2020. The meeting focuses on Yeast
Chromosome Biology and the Cell Cycle and is co-organized by Drs. Mosur
Raghuraman and Soni Lacefield, at the University of Washington and Indiana
University, respectively. The format of the meeting is a combination of 27
invited talks and 21 talks selected from submitted abstracts (both 25 minute
duration), several poster sessions and “flash talks” from 10-15 trainees on
their posters. A keynote lecture by Virginia Zakian (Princeton University) will
begin the meeting. There are also two dedicated 1-hour sessions for trainees to
interact with leading experts and three separate poster sessions held in the
evenings. A career-workshop will also be held for trainees. Nearly 50% of the
invited talks are by women and special emphasis has been placed on including
graduate students, postdocs and those underrepresented in science in every
aspect of the meeting. This meeting also affords many opportunities (both formal
and informal) for sharing recent research findings and exploring collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a premier meeting on yeast chromosome biology and
cell cycle regulation, now in its 30th year. Recent advances in chromosome
biology, DNA replication, repair and recombination, telomere maintenance, and
mitotic and meiotic processes will be highlighted in this conference, which will
bring together diverse scientists from across the country and internationally.
The session topics include: Chromatin and Nuclear Organization, Cell Cycle
Regulation, Genome Stability and Repair, DNA Replication, Telomeres and End
Maintenance, Kinetochores and Spindles, Mitosis and lastly, Meiosis and
Recombination. The conference primarily highlights unpublished research findings
and provides many experiences for young researchers to learn about the field and
devise future avenues for research. The meeting will encourage career
development of a new generation of researchers, including those who are
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.