* 2013868
* SBIR Phase I:  Thrivee vMAT-AI: AI Driven Platform to Drive Success in Opioid Addiction Programs
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Matthew Bemis, THRIVEE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,394.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the current opioid crisis impacting
healthcare, social welfare, and the US economy. Currently over 2 million
Americans suffer from an opioid use disorder (OUD), but less than 10 percent
receive effective treatment. Over 47,000 Americans died in 2017 from
prescription opioids, heroin, and illegally produced fentanyl, and the estimated
burden of prescription opioid misuse is $78.5 billion per year. Significant
logistics and patient burden associated with traditional medication-assisted
treatment create barriers that negatively impact outcomes and accessibility. A
major challenge in recovery programs is the workload of providers and therapists
and a lack of automated tools to monitor and improve patient engagement. This
proposal will develop software leveraging artificial intelligence (AI) and
predictive analytics to greatly improve success rates in opioid addition
programs to expand high quality, efficient treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project targets three
objectives. The technical challenge is to develop and validate targeted
artificial intelligence (AI) tools using data already captured in patient
workflow for early prediction of patient issues that may lead to program
dropout. The platform will be integrated with tools allowing low burden, complex
data collection across multiple domains and intervention points. For example,
metrics will store patient engagement, track compliance with prescribed events,
and linguistics/emotional state analytics during therapy sessions. A prototype
will be deployed in a field data collection study to determine usability and a
provide a rich set of data for algorithm development. Collected data will then
be used to train and test AI algorithms for early detection of patient dropout.
We will measure several quantities as potential data sets for training and
testing algorithms. We will evaluate several models including linear regression
for variable selection, as well as clustering, deep learning networks, and
recurrent neural network survival models for prediction. The objective is to
identify potential dropouts in advance, with high sensitivity and
specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.