* 2013696
* The Influence of Mechanical Loading on the Hydrolysis of Biodegradable Polymer Implants
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Anastasia Muliana, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 551,017.00

This grant will explore the time-dependent changes in the physical properties
and the size and shape of biodegradable polymers under combined fluid sorption,
mechanical loading, hydrolysis, and erosion, which are driven by changes in the
polymer macromolecular structures. Biodegradable polymers are promising
materials for temporary biomedical implants that can provide mechanical support
for damaged tissues until they heal. Using biodegradable polymers enables
tailoring the specific functionality of the implants to specific patients. These
materials also allow for tissue regeneration while avoiding the need for
subsequent surgery to remove the implants at the end of their functional life.
The degradation in biodegradable polymers is due to a hydrolytic process in
which fluid diffuses into the polymers, breaking the polymer chains and forming
monomers that eventually diffuse out of the polymer (erosion). A key obstacle in
the development of effective biodegradable polymer implants involves a knowledge
gap in understanding how mechanical loading and hydrolytic processes intertwine
and their resulting influence on the time-dependent structural integrity and
load-carrying ability of the implant. This project will implement a synergetic
experimental and modeling strategy to address this knowledge gap. The project
also provides students with technical training while promoting the retention of
underrepresented students and military veterans. Additionally, virtual reality
(VR)- and augmented reality (AR)-based learning modules aimed at understanding
the interplay among various stimuli on polymer degradation will be developed and
shared for the general public to use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project will investigate degradation in poly-lactic glycolic acid (PLGA)
polymers with different initial macromolecular structures, ranging from being
fully amorphous to highly crystalline, which will provide variations in the
physical properties and degradation behaviors. The PLGA specimens, of different
shapes and sizes, will be immersed in saline water at 37oC while being subjected
to various mechanical loading. Nonlinear time-dependent constitutive models that
incorporate changes in the macromolecular structures and mass of the polymers
will be formulated to describe the intertwining mechanisms in the mechano-
hydrolytic process and to predict the changes in the geometry and size of the
specimens during degradation. The goal is to address 1) whether the hydrolytic
scission is purely a chemical reaction between fluid and polymer molecules, or
whether the scission induced by mechanical loading leads to shorter polymer
chains and therefore accelerates the hydrolytic process; 2) how different
histories of mechanical loading alter the erosion process, thereby gradually
changing the shape and size of the implant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.