* 2013827
* RUI: Higher-Form 't Hooft Anomalies, Information Theory, and Continuity in Gauge Theories
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Mohamed Anber, Lewis and Clark College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 21,323.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Mohamed Anber at Lewis and
Clark College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been known for a long time that the
atomic nucleus consists of protons and neutrons which in turn are made of
quarks. The latter are glued together under the influence of a force associated
with elementary particles called gluons. This force is tremendously strong, and
hence this force is known as the strong nuclear force and the theory that
explains how it works is known as quantum chromodynamics (QCD). Unfortunately,
QCD remains poorly understood, thanks to its strong-binding nature. When nuclei
are heated, as in the early Universe or in terrestrial man-made experiments, the
quarks are liberated and form a new state of matter known as a quark-gluon
plasma. Again, this state of matter is poorly understood due to the strong
nature of the nuclear force. Recently, new methods have been developed which
will ultimately unlock some of the secrets of QCD. One promising direction
involves certain mathematical structures called higher-form 't Hooft anomalies,
and another direction borrows ideas from quantum information theory. A complete
understanding of these developments and the linkages between them in QCD,
however, is still far from complete. As part of this project, Professor Anber
will develop novel techniques that will shed light on these developments in QCD.
This research is of national interest as it advances our understanding of the
fundamental laws of nature. The project will also have significant broader
impacts for students and the broader community and have a direct impact on
curriculum development at Lewis and Clark College. Professor Anber will recruit
highly motivated students to collaborate with him, making special efforts to
reach out to women and underrepresented minorities. By participating in several
projects involving numerical simulations, students will be prepared for careers
in theoretical research as well as other STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, in this research project,
Professor Anber will use a deformed class of QCD-like theories in order to shed
light on higher-form 't Hooft anomalies and entanglement entropy. A novel
approach to deforming a gauge theory is to compactify it on a small circle,
apply twisted boundary conditions, and/or add matter in higher-dimensional
representations. This brings the original theory to a weakly coupled regime. The
deformed models may be adiabatically connected to full-fledged four-dimensional
theories. However, the general means of deformations and the class of
adiabatically-connected theories remain open questions. Since the deformed
theory is weakly coupled, the PI will use reliable semi-classical and
perturbation techniques to investigate how the higher-form anomalies are matched
in the infrared. The anomaly-matching conditions can also be used to search for
the class of deformed models that are adiabatically connected to the original
four-dimensional theories. The PI will also investigate entanglement entropy in
various deformed models, a calculation that is prohibitively difficult in the
strong-coupling regime. Finally, the PI will examine whether there are
nontrivial connections between entanglement entropy and 't Hooft anomalies in
this class of theories. The existence of one-form anomalies indicates that the
vacuum is nontrivial, which can lead to a complex structure in the entanglement
entropy of the ground state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.