* 2013934
* Flight Stability and Neural Feedback Control in Genetically Modified Flies
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Z. Jane Wang, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 419,558.00

There is a new momentum in efforts across many fields to understand animal
behavior, prompted by the new technology in acquiring large sets of behavioral
data and the advancement in neural-genetics. Much needed is the development of
sophisticated quantitive models that can explain behavior and can make testable
predictions. Finding out how we can start from basic physical laws to explain
parts of neural behavior of insect flight is the central theme of the proposed
work. Insects were the first that evolved to fly, and to fly is not to fall.
Understanding what insects must do so as not to fall provides a pathway to probe
the connection between physics of flight and the neural feedback control. This
project will test the PI's conjecture on the role of fly’s steering muscle on
flight stability, using genetically modified fruit flies. In addition to
experiments, the PI will construct computational models that can predict the
observed free flight behavior of both intact and genetically modified flies. The
proposed work will consist three core parts: 1) 3D tracking of free flight with
high resolution, 2) computational studies of control algorithms, and 3)
understanding the control and muscle activity by constructing effective models
that can explain the experiments. The field of biology is dominated by
experimental studies. This key contribution is the development of new methods
for analyzing complex biological systems. The work will raise new questions and
have a direct impact on research in physics of living organisms, mathematical
modeling, neural science, entomology, evolutionary biology, and robotics. The
proposed work offers an excellent opportunity for students to engage in
interdisciplinary work. The findings on how nature works will provide a
compelling case for sharing the value of basic science with the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is fundamentally about
integrating the physics of flight into our understanding of the neural
circuitries for control. Direct neural recordings of flight circuitries require
insects to be tethered. One challenge is to connect the internal control
algorithms to the free flight behavior. Another challenge is to disentangle
different control feedback schemes in intact flies. Using genetically modified
flies with specified motor-neurons silenced allows us to single out the function
of individual steering muscle. Analyses of the flight reflexes in intact and
genetically modified flies will further lead to new models for control schemes
that underlie the mechano-sensory feedback for flight equilibrium. This work
will be the first to combine computational modeling of free flight with the
progress in neuro-genetics to decipher a fly’s equilibrium reflex in free
flight. The work will offer a new pathway for flight behavior guided by
quantitive predictions, in addition to direct
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.