* 2013829
* NSF SpecEES PI Meeting and Workshop on Future Wireless Research Challenges. To Be Held In Fashion Island, Newport Beach, CA; February 3-4, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2020,10/31/2020
* Payam Heydari, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2020
* USD 92,779.00

Title: NSF Workshop on Future Wireless Research Challenges and SpecEES PI
Meeting &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Workshop on Future Wireless Research
Challenges and SpecEES PI Meeting will accomplish the following two integrated
functions: First, it will allow the awardees to attend the PI meeting required
by the NSF “Spectrum Efficiency, Energy Efficiency, and Security (SpecEES):
Enabling Spectrum for All” program during the award period. The awardees will
share and discuss their research discoveries and educational activities in the
meeting. Second, it will provide a forum for leading researchers from academia,
industry and government to discuss and identify emerging wireless research
challenges that are critical to ensure the nation’s future leadership in the
wireless research and development area, which is essential for our nation’s
prosperity and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, everything benefits from
wireless technologies, from business to healthcare to life style. While new
applications, such as, internet-of-things (IoT) and fifth-generation (5G)
communication systems, are poised to dramatically change our life and society,
the demands for more frequency spectrum is increasing exponentially, which
cannot be handled by today’s wireless systems. This workshop is timely and will
enable broader and in-depth discussions in the broad area of wireless research,
development, production and deployment. Students involved in the related
research activities will be given an opportunity to share their research
experiences and to interact with leading researchers and engineers in the
wireless area. The outcomes of the Workshop will be disseminated through a final
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.