* 2013400
* I-Corps:  Water separation using progressive freeze concentration
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Say Kee Ong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology, called freeze concentration, to produce potable water
from high-salt waters or seawater, and to recover water from or concentrate
valuable products in industrial process waters. The impact of this technology
includes making production of potable water or water recovery more sustainable,
energy-efficient and environmentally friendly. Utilities may recover water from
their waste streams and increase the volume of water produced and minimize waste
discharge. Reducing water use in food processing industries creates more
sustainable operations while reducing the cost of production. The overall
commercial impact of the technology is to maximize water recovery, reduce
discharge of waste streams and protect and maintain precious raw water
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of freeze concentration (FC) technology where ice is formed and
separates from aqueous waste streams with a high degree of salts or valuable
products exclusion. Ice formed is recovered, melted and reused or returned for
further treatment. Since the latent heat of fusion needed to freeze water is
less than the energy needed to evaporate water (thermal) or to pump seawater
through a semi-permeable membrane (RO), FC may be an energy-efficient process.
Laboratory results showed that about 70% of the brine waste stream (total
dissolved solids of 2600 mg/L) from an RO treatment plant water may be recovered
as potable water using the FC technology - increasing the overall water yield of
the RO treatment plant from 83% to 95%. The overall goal of the research is to
optimize the operating conditions of the FC technology to maximize the amount of
water produced (i.e., reduce the waste stream), lower the cost or energy needed
to produce a unit (liters or gallons) of water, and to explore optimization
parameters for technology translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.