* 2013812
* Quantum Field Theory Out-of-Equilibrium: Thermalization and Chaos
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Anatoly Dymarsky, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 209,997.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Anatoly Dymarsky at the
University of Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum field theory is the
theoretical framework for describing the fundamental forces and interactions
between the elementary building blocks of the natural world. However, a broad
goal of studies in this area is to develop new theoretical methods to describe
elementary particles in extreme regimes, when large numbers of particles
simultaneously interact with each other. This area of research is called quantum
field theory out-of-equilibrium, in contrast with the situation when quantum
field theory describes individual particles interacting in small groups. The
out-of-equilibrium processes --- i.e., those involving large numbers of
particles --- are at the heart of numerous phenomena at the frontier of
scientific exploration. This includes collisions of heavy ions in particle
accelerators, astrophysical processes concerning stars and black holes,
experimental settings with cold atoms, and many others. As such, this project
serves the national interest by extending our knowledge of fundamental science
in the area of quantum field theory, which has applications across these
different scientific disciplines. This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. One of the goals is to facilitate the participation
of undergraduate students --- specially from underrepresented groups --- in STEM
research. Another is to enhance the quality of graduate and post-graduate
physics education. Professor Dymarsky will be co-organizing the Conference for
Undergraduate Women in Physics (CUWiP), which will be held at the University of
Kentucky. He is also actively promoting theoretical physics through outreach
activities, social media, and online educational videos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this research project fall into
several broad categories. The first goal is to advance our current understanding
of the integrable KdV structure of two-dimensional conformal field theories
(CFTs). This includes studies of the CFT generalized partition function and its
properties. A second goal is to develop new quantitative methods to characterize
the chaotic behavior of quantum systems. A third goal is to study thermalization
dynamics in various field-theoretic models. As a part of this effort, Professor
Dymarsky will also study eigenstate thermalization in two-dimensional CFTs and
how it is affected by integrability. This project will then use these results to
elucidate quantum gravity in AdS space. These objectives will be achieved
through a combination of techniques including holographic correspondence,
integrability, and numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.