* 2013933
* SBIR Phase I:  Spherical Actuated Exploration Ballistic Legged System (Spaceballs)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Alexander Schepelmann, ZIN TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to create the Spherical, Actuated
Exploration Ballistic Legged System (“Spaceballs”) robotic system. It will be
able to roll and walk, serving as a novel, general purpose unmanned ground
vehicle (UGV). Its ability to operate in diverse, highly unstructured
environments enables it to support disaster recovery, humanitarian relief, and
first responder applications; agricultural monitoring; industrial inspection
tasks; and ultimately planetary exploration, such as surveying the lunar
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project focuses on the development of the key enabling technology to
realize Spaceballs -- the design, development, and characterization of a
compact, high-bandwidth, high-power linear electromagnetic actuator. Multi-body
physics simulations will be used to determine required actuator performance
characteristics for potential operational scenarios to inform the design of a
linear actuator prototype. The developed prototype will be characterized via
testbed experiments that evaluate actuator power and bandwidth, which will in
turn be used to develop actuator motion controls. To demonstrate the feasibility
of the developed prototype, the actuator will be installed in a single degree of
freedom testbed to experimentally characterize the system’s maximum jump height,
hopping bandwidth, and movements required for rolling
locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.