* 2013271
* Transforming Undergraduate Engineering Education through Adaptive Learning and Student Data Analytics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Andrew Scott, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,770.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
in STEM by integrating personalized pre-class experiences that adapt
individually to each student’s level of knowledge. Active learning in the
classroom has been proven effective for strengthening student engagement and
improving student learning outcomes. The flipped classroom is one popular active
learning approach. In flipped classrooms, students learn basic information from
resources such as online lecture videos and automated testing. This learning
takes place at each students’ own pace, prior to the regular class lecture.
Then, during the lecture period, students collaborate with their peers to solve
problems that apply the knowledge they learned outside of class. This project
aims to improve the flipped classroom approach by integrating personalized and
adaptive pre-class content into each student's learning experiences. The use of
adaptive lessons aligns well with "Advancing Personalized Learning," one of the
National Academy of Engineering's 21st Century Grand Challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most engineering problems are complex; they may take a
long time to solve and often do not have single solutions. To develop the
ability to solve such problems, most undergraduate STEM students take a course
in Numerical Methods. This project involves the development of adaptive lessons
for a course in Numerical Methods and the assessment of the cognitive and
affective learning outcomes of students in such courses at three diverse
institutions: the University of South Florida, Arizona State University, and
Alabama A&amp;M University. A significant part of the assessment effort will
focus on various demographic segments, including underrepresented minority,
female, and Pell Grant students, to ensure that all materials work well across
diverse student populations. Students' engagement with and performance in the
adaptive lessons will also be analyzed in real-time to support student success.
For example, proactive interventions and resources will be created that can be
implemented as soon as students show signs of struggling in the course. The
project restructures the Numerical Methods course as a flipped classroom with
personalized, adaptive learning. This project will also compare a flipped
classroom with and without the use of adaptive lessons relative to student
cognitive and affective learning outcomes, and through analytics of student
learning data. Metrics used in the investigation include both qualitative and
quantitative measures of multiple assessments to verify the consistency of
findings. The project will deliver instructional materials that facilitate best
practices for teaching STEM courses in flipped mode with adaptive learning
lessons, thereby contributing to the knowledge base for advancing personalized
learning. Dissemination avenues include workshops, manuscripts, open education
resource portals, and social media. This project is funded by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources program, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.