* 2013322
* Conference Proposal for NSF support of the Fall 2020 ACS Graduate Student Symposium entitled Pushing the Boundaries: Women Scientists Catalyzing Change; AUG 2020; San Francisco, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Tepora Su'a, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2021
* USD 15,000.00

The project supports travel and accommodation costs for speakers and graduate
student attendees at the Fall 2020 American Chemical Society (ACS) National
Meeting and Exposition, August 16-20, 2020 in San Francisco, CA. Specifically,
the funding will support a graduate student organized symposium entitled
'Pushing the Boundaries: Women Scientists Catalyzing Change.' The symposium will
focus on recognizing the high-impact research of women chemists and chemical
engineers all over the country in the field of molecular and nanoscale
catalysis. The symposium is conceived and organized by a committee of graduate
students from Wayne State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium is is
a continuation of a practice by the Graduate Student Symposium Planning
Committee (GSSPC) of the American Chemical Society (co-sponsored by the ACS
Division of Chemical Education) to allow a group of graduate students from a
particular institution to plan and orchestrate a symposium at a national ACS
meeting on a subject of their choosing. The graduate students have full
responsibility in selecting a theme, inviting distinguished speakers, securing
sponsorship, and selecting and mentoring the next GSSPC symposium. The
intellectual merit of the proposed symposium lies in efforts to invite speakers
that have significant presence in the field of molecular and nanoscale
catalysis. Catalytic materials research is a rich area of interest because of
the beneficial implications these materials have on the way we approach
synthetic processes imperative to our way of life. From alternative energy to
green house gas conversion, these processes need catalysts to drive their
reactions forward. Thus, one of the goals of the symposium is to exploit the
innovative research work being done in these areas by inviting distinguished
female researchers in these fields to come and share their science. From the
broader impacts perspective, the project will make a positive impact on the
retention and recruitment of women in science. In addition to promoting gender
equity, the symposium will promote diversity and inclusion in STEM fields in
three ways: 1) by inviting speakers from culturally and professionally diverse
backgrounds, 2) by providing travel grants to undergraduates from
underrepresented identity groups, and 3) by inviting all attendees to a
networking reception following the symposium. Scientific impacts include
exposing the scientific community to a broad range of catalytic materials and
engaging more scientists into the field of catalysis
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.