* 2013964
* SBIR Phase I: AI robotic archival and retrieval system
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Barb Yellowlees, ROBOPATH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will be to develop a robotic technology with artificial
intelligence (AI) to improve the practice of pathology. Pathology laboratories
generate 414 million slides and 200 million tissue blocks annually, representing
a market of $5.2 B. Those samples are legally required to be archived 10 years.
Recent innovations have focused on improvements in specimen collection,
automation of sample processing, reporting and transmission of pathology
information to medical records, but currently manual storage of pathology
specimens is prone to errors and inefficiencies. The proposed technology will
advance a robotic system to automate the storage and retrieval process of
pathology slides and tissue blocks, enabling faster, more accurate access to
important biological specimens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a robotic mechanism to pick
glass slides from slide trays and transport them to archival cabinets for
storage aligned with a digital library. The solution will have an interface that
integrates the robotic archival system with automated software and digital
imaging systems for microscopic slides. The archival and retrieval system has a
robotic motor attached to a conveyor to rotate through the slides and a software
component with two elements; the Graphical User Interface (GUI) and the
underlying architecture. The project has three goals: 1) A prototype robotic
system design; 2) User interface development and deployment strategy; and 3)
Simulation of integrated hardware/ software system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.