* 2013771
* NSF-BSF: Quantum Optical Machines Powered by Heat and Information from Ideas to Experiments on Performance Bounds
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Marlan Scully, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

The upsurge of interest in quantum thermodynamics (QTD) centers around the basic
questions: How are the laws of conventional thermodynamics potentially changed
by quantum effects? Does QTD feature uniquely advantageous quantum resources?
These issues will be researched by theory and experiment with mutual feedback to
grasp the fundamental operation principles and performance bounds of QTD
machines, e.g. laser-based quantum heat engines, quantum photocells, and
biomolecular motors. This broad, yet targeted, research will help advance future
technologies towards fast heat removal and dissipation control in nano-size
devices, as the miniaturization of a refrigerator is one of the most important
technological challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching aim of the
project is to bridge thermodynamics and quantum optics, both conceptually and
operationally, and initiate QTD machine technologies based on platforms
comprised of lasers, hot atomic (Rb) vapor, detectors, and cavities. The
insights gained will help resolve underlying issues such as deviations in the
performance bounds of quantum machines compared to classical heat machines. The
group will introduce a universal criterion for work and heat extraction
depending on the non-passivity (ergotropy) of the system state and the bath,
unaccounted for by the second law. This criterion will allow the team to explore
(by theory and experiment) the work-information, work-heat, and heat-information
tradeoffs achievable in quantum systems. Anticipated are conceptually novel
designs and experimental implementations of heat- and information-powered lasers
without inversion, optical parametric amplifiers, and refrigerators without
coherence, yet with advantageous performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.