* 2013234
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Idaho STEM Ecosystem
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Dee Mooney, IDAHO, STATE OF
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,500.00

Idaho citizens are entering STEM pathways at a rate lower than current and
projected STEM workforce needs in this country. Opportunity gaps, especially
among some demographics, significantly limit participation in STEM pathways and
careers. A cross-sector effort is needed to address these challenges and improve
STEM outcomes for historically underrepresented and economically disadvantaged
groups. The Idaho STEM Ecosystem was recently established to serve this need. It
endeavors to broaden participation in STEM by facilitating access to, and
success in, STEM educational programs to prepare a more robust and diverse STEM
workforce. With over a dozen partnering organizations throughout the state, the
Idaho STEM Ecosystem brings together a large contingency of stakeholders poised
to advance systemic change in STEM education practices and workforce development
and training. The goal of this planning grant is to support the Idaho STEM
Ecosystem in developing a statewide strategic plan for STEM education in Idaho
focused on broadening participation in STEM. It will build on its established
shared vision and partnerships to further develop its collaborative
infrastructure to support a scaled network through regional hubs. It will also
draw upon resources and expertise gleaned through existing connections with
EPSCoR jurisdictions and the NSF INCLUDES Intermountain STEM Design and
Development Launch Pilot. If successful, this planning grant will lay the
foundation for a large-scale network with broader impacts that extend beyond the
state of Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the yearlong project duration, the
catalytic activities will focus on two of the five NSF INCLUDES design elements
of collaborative infrastructure: Goals &amp; Metrics and Leadership &amp;
Communication. These activities will primarily be to conduct regional STEM
education needs assessments and convene two working retreats in areas of need
with partners from the education, business, government, and nonprofit sectors.
The targeted underrepresented and economically disadvantaged communities in
Idaho will play a salient role in this work, as their participation and input
are critical to understanding and addressing the broadening participation
challenges. Systemic change will be central to all activities and products
including: (1) STEM education needs assessments for the three main regions of
the state, (2) a state STEM education strategic plan with goals, objectives,
outcomes and metrics, (3) a communication plan for the Idaho STEM Ecosystem, and
(4) a leadership plan for the Idaho STEM Ecosystem. This work will be guided by
a backbone organization, the Idaho STEM Action Center. The Idaho STEM Ecosystem
will leverage the experiences and gained knowledge on developing state STEM
education plans, state STEM networks, measuring broadening participation in
STEM, and state level data collection plans and will partner with organizations
in the NSF INCLUDES National Network to accomplish mutual goals in broadening
participation. As a result of this planning grant, the Idaho STEM Ecosystem
anticipates having a clear path forward to reach its vision of an equitable,
STEM-literate citizenry that supports a strong workforce and economy, by closing
demographic gaps and increasing the STEM and economic
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is funded by NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.