* 2013222
* RUI: Probing QCD with Magnetic Fields in the Multimessenger Astronomy Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Vivian Incera, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

There are astrophysical objects named neutron stars (NS) so dense that a single
thimbleful of its inner matter would have a mass of about 100 million tons.
Quite often, these stellar objects are also permeated by very large magnetic
fields. A special class of neutron stars, known as magnetars, can have surface
magnetic fields fifteen orders of magnitude stronger than the sun’s, and even
much stronger fields in their inner cores are expected to exist. A very
important goal of the nuclear theory community is to model and investigate the
properties of matter under these extreme conditions. The recent observations of
gravitational waves generated by neutron star mergers and the subsequent
detection of gamma-ray bursts and other electromagnetic signals from the same
source opened a new, very promising era of multimessenger astronomy – one that
is pushing the boundaries of knowledge and understanding about the star’s
composition, elements formation, and the evolution of our universe. In this
multi-messenger era, observations including pulsar timing, gamma-ray bursts, and
gravitational waves detection are booming, so the pressure to identify models of
star composition that can explain those observations is intensifying. This
project is aligned with these efforts, trying to explore the matter phases that
can exist at extreme conditions like high matter density and extremely strong
magnetic fields. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit through their
participation in related research tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, the
Advanced LIGO and Advanced Virgo observatories opened a new window to observe
the universe through gravitational waves (GW). On August 17th, 2017, a new type
of astrophysical source of GW was detected that signalized the sources as NS. NS
are unique natural laboratories for investigating the physics of cold and highly
dense nuclear matter beyond the capability of terrestrial experiments.
Macroscopic characteristics of NS, such as masses, radii, tidal deformability,
cooling, and other properties that can be measured from GW and electromagnetic
observations, are related, through the star equation of state and its heat
transport, to the inner matter phase of the star. In this project, the PIs will
use the insight gained in previous work regarding the connection between
topological condensed matter systems and cold-dense quark matter to explore some
transformative ideas like a possible connection between NS and dark matter, as
well as to continue expanding the understanding of quark-matter under extreme
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of
"Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the
10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.