* 2013359
* Developing a Next Generation Concept Inventory to Help Environmental Programs Evaluate Student Knowledge of Complex Food-Energy-Water Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kevin Haudek, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2024
* USD 145,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving teaching practices
in undergraduate environmental programs. To do so, the project will develop and
test a written response concept inventory to measure undergraduate students’
knowledge of complex Food-Energy-Water systems. Traditional concept inventories
are widely used in many disciplines to measure student understanding of key
ideas in the discipline. These concept inventories use answers to multiple
choice questions to measure student knowledge. However, greater insight into
student thinking can be gained from questions that require students to use their
own words to demonstrate their knowledge. This project plans to develop a “Next
Generation Concept Inventory” that will use short answer questions and automated
scoring of student responses to questions about interdisciplinary, systems-level
concepts. The availability of this concept inventory is expected to help faculty
evaluate their students’ understanding of complex environmental concepts, as
well as evaluate and compare learning within and between programs. This
information, in turn, can be used to improve teaching effectiveness within
environmental programs and may serve as a model for similar approaches in other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better inform those who teach, make
curricular decisions, and manage college-level environmental programs, the
project will develop an assessment tool to measure environmental students’
foundational knowledge and understanding of complex systems-level concepts.
Specifically, the project will apply an established machine learning method of
evaluating constructed response (short answer) questions to create a Next
Generation Concept Inventory. This approach to concept inventory construction
will create a new set of constructed-response items and associated automated
scoring models focused on complex Food-Energy-Water Nexus systems, a topic
typically addressed in environmental programs. The project will evaluate the
concept inventory’s validity and reliability to ensure that it will provide
high-quality information that can be used by environmental educators and program
administrators, as well as for research on STEM education and assessment. The
project team will first determine common Food-Energy-Water Nexus concepts and
learning outcomes through examination of introductory course materials from
environmental programs across the nation. Development of the Next Generation
Concept Inventory targeting these concepts/outcomes will follow established
methods for concept inventory construction, including the use of interviews with
introductory environmental program students to reveal student preconceptions and
to develop the constructed response questions. The information gleaned from
reviewing environmental curricula across the United States, combined with
measurements of student learning from the Next Generation Concept Inventory, can
inform curricular and staffing decisions regarding college environmental science
and studies programs. Thus, the project has the potential to benefit faculty and
students in environmental programs by providing a valid and reliable instrument
for evaluating student learning, course outcomes, and program effectiveness. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.