* 2013332
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Undergraduate Student Learning in Upper-Level Courses in Thermal and Statistical Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bethany Wilcox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 283,182.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
physics education. Thermal and statistical physics is a core component of the
undergraduate physics major and includes the study of fluids, heat flow, energy
transfer, and the connection between atomic-level interactions and macroscopic
behavior. These topics are central not only to physics, but also to chemistry,
biology, and engineering. Ensuring that physics majors and other students who
take thermal and statistical physics understand this subject area is important
for producing graduates who can meet the expectations of employers for the STEM
workforce. Because of the broad importance of thermal and statistical physics
across STEM fields, it is crucial to understand the effectiveness of courses
targeting this content area. However, no standardized tool exists to measure
student learning in upper-level courses in thermal and statistical physics. To
address this gap, the investigators intend to develop and pilot-test an
assessment tool that will measure studentsâ€™ knowledge as well as their ability
to "do" physics. It will help instructors identify effective teaching approaches
by comparing student learning across courses, instructional strategies,
institutions, and student populations. This assessment tool should have long-
term impact on the quality of physics students' education as well as their
preparedness to enter the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Thermal and
Statistical Physics Assessment (TaSPA) will include items targeting both
students' conceptual understanding and their ability to engage in scientific
practices (e.g., modeling). To accommodate both the variation in content
coverage in different thermal physics courses and the importance of assessing
practices, the TaSPA will feature a flexible format in which instructors will be
able to select a subset of items that best aligns with the specific learning
goals of their course. Development of the TaSPA will be guided by: 1) Evidence-
Centered Design, which has been highlighted as an approach to developing
assessments that include scientific practices and core ideas; and 2) Item
Response Theory, which has historically been used to develop assessments with
this type of flexible content coverage. Use of Item Response Theory will also
allow explicit attention to assessment tasks that perform differently for
different subpopulations, a possibility that is particularly important for
identifying and reducing the potential for bias in the TaSPA. Detailed
documentation and dissemination of the development process will allow other
educators to replicate the process in the development of future assessments for
other content areas. This collaborative project involves investigators at the
University of Colorado at Boulder (Award DUE-2013332) and Kansas State
University (Award DUE-2013339). The project is funded by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) program, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.