* 2013632
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an interferometer-based Coordinate Measuring Machine
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Clayton Williams, LIGHTWORKS METROLOGY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project is to advance high-accuracy, rapid, on‐shop floor or in‐machine
dimensional measurements of precision machined parts. These measurements are
conducted with Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMM), representing a $4 B market.
The proposed project will develop a new portable CMM instrument for precision
machine shops, bottlenecked by their high‐cost stationary CMMs or limited by
low-accuracy portable CMMs. In‐machine part inspection will reduce waste for
one‐off or prototyping shops. It will further improve CNC machining process
control of large batch jobs by allowing rapid statistical sampling of the
accuracy of CNC-machined parts mid‐process. The new technology will improve
efficiency and accuracy in machine shops, lowering the cost of manufactured
parts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to
surmount two primary technical hurdles needed to complete a working prototype of
the new interferometer‐based Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM). These hurdles
include the development of an absolute distance interferometer measurement
system, tuned specifically for the novel CMM, and the development of the custom
mechanical, optical, and data acquisition/processing systems required for its
function. The new interferometer‐based CMM will have multiple inherent
advantages over existing portable CMMs, including sensitivity, absolute accuracy
(tied directly to the wavelength of light) and long‐term reliability. The novel
approach addresses many challenges in the 3D metrology domain. Research tasks
include diode laser frequency locking with high absolute accuracy, merging of
multiple absolute distance interferometry methods, construction and optimization
of the mechanical and optical systems, and integration of software and
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.