* 2013315
* Coordinating a Teaching Excellence Network to Engage STEM Faculty in Teaching Reform
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Mary Emenike, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,251,309.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by supporting STEM faculty
members implementation of evidence-based teaching practices. Such practices have
been shown to benefit all students and have a particularly strong impact on
under-represented groups in STEM. However, the culture of academia often impedes
faculty in adopting these practices and the pace of making the needed changes
has been slow. This project seeks to facilitate faculty adoption of evidence-
based teaching practices by approaching course transformation as an issue of
institutional structure and faculty action. This project will operate from the
premise that organizational and structural factors must be systematically
addressed to increase faculty support for and efforts to improve undergraduate
STEM education at research universities. This project will create a Teaching
Excellence Network to provide professional development activities that approach
the challenge of institutional change through multiple facets of faculty
support. It employs an assets-based approach to target faculty motivation and
initiative, and to catalyze lasting institutional and cultural change around
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop faculty agency to
transform their courses by implementing evidence-based pedagogies. Project
activities will include (1) formally coordinating existing institutional
resources for teaching through the Teaching Excellence Network, (2) designing
and implementing resources to decrease faculty barriers to course
transformation, and (3) engaging institutional leadership in promoting and
valuing teaching reform. This work will draw from theories of structure, agency,
and motivation to produce knowledge about how faculty approach the reform
process and will use current research on institutional barriers to educational
reform to develop, assess, and disseminate an assets-based model of teaching
professional development. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.