* 2013590
* Collaborative Research: Mathematics Graduate Teaching Assistant Professional Development Focused on Implementation of Evidence-based Teaching Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Mary Pilgrim, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2025
* USD 239,728.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing mathematics
graduate teaching assistants (MGTAs) to implement teaching practices designed to
improve the success of students in undergraduate mathematics courses. To this
end, the project will provide MGTAs with a multi-year professional development
program to help them implement evidence based teaching practices, including
active learning. The professional development program will include an intensive
teaching seminar and two courses focused on active learning and inclusive
teaching. This approach, which provides MGTAs with extended professional
development over multiple years, contrasts with the conventional practice of
providing MGTA training only in their first year of graduate school. To help
develop their leadership skills, experienced MGTAs will have the opportunity to
serve as teaching mentors for newer peers. Over the five-year span of the
project, more than 35,000 undergraduates will be taught by MGTAs who have
received this multi-year professional development. It is expected that thousands
more students will be served in the years that follow, as many of the MGTAs move
into academic careers. The project will be implemented at Oregon State
University, Virginia Commonwealth University, and San Diego State University. As
a result, the project will have multiple contexts for examining the impact of
the professional development on MGTA teaching attitudes and practices, as well
as on the success of the undergraduates in the MGTAs’ classes. The project will
compare outcomes at the three institutions to generate new knowledge about MGTA
professional development, to explore what works in which contexts, and to
develop an explicit theory of change related to MGTAs’ teaching practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to equip MGTAs with evidence-
based teaching practices, such as the use of multiple representations, small
group management, and reflective teaching, through a professional development
program built on findings from research about both undergraduate mathematics
education and MGTA professional development. The project will study the efficacy
of this approach through data collected from surveys, classroom observations,
and interviews with MGTAs, their students, and faculty in the impacted
departments. These data will enable the project team to explore changes in
MGTAs’ teaching practices and their commitment to evidence-based teaching
practices, to understand how undergraduate students experience the participating
MGTA’s classrooms, and to examine if and how the professional development
program becomes formalized and sustained within the departments. Using
individual and organizational theories of change, this project will generate new
knowledge about whether, how, and why the professional development program
results in instructional change. This work will include determining individual
factors that impact MGTAs as they transform their teaching and exploring
departmental and institutional characteristics that inhibit or support
sustainable change. A multi-level mixed methods analysis of data from multiple
institutions will allow for rich comparisons to inform MGTA professional
development more broadly. This project was supported by the NSF IUSE:EHR and
IUSE:HSI programs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities. The IUSE: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education
and build capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.