* 2013780
* I-Corps:  Smart Light-Emitting Diodes for Micro-Displays
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Hieu Nguyen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on new
displays and AR/VR device applications based on nanowire microLEDs (μLEDs).
Financial and environmental benefits include lower electricity costs and reduced
emissions from decreased consumption. LEDs in micron- or sub-micron size with
high efficiency and low power consuming are desirable for applications such as
micro-displays for cell phones and wearable electronics. The high efficiency,
high color-rendering properties, and low power consumption μLEDs are perfectly
suitable as an alternative replacement of current display
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores translation of
μLEDs for display and AR/VR device applications. Among different approaches of
generating RGB and white color μLEDs for LED displays, the monolithic display
based on III-nitride nanowire heterostructure μLEDs is promising since it allows
more direct control of emission wavelengths of the LEDs. Our solution, full-
color and white-color nanowire μLEDs, offer several improvements over current
LED technologies. The color emissions of our μLEDs can be readily varied from
blue to red with highly stable light emission. Compared to conventional planar
structures, our nanowire μLEDs exhibit several distinct advantages, including
reduced strain-induced polarization fields and dislocation densities. The
nanowire μLEDs can be more efficient in heat dissipation due to reduced current
spreading resistance, and resulting in increased injection current levels.
Improved efficiency and thermal management allow the integration of μLEDs onto
flexible substrates, typically less thermally and electrically conductive. These
nanowire μLEDs are expected to perform better than their thin-film counterparts
for micro-display applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.