* 2013942
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast and scalable printing of high-resolution microfluidic devices using HLP technology.
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Zheng Xiong, 3D MICROFLUIDICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,606.00

The broadder impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the development of microfluidic
devices for life sciences research. Currently, devices with high-resolution
microchannels are typically manufactured using sophisticated cleanroom
microfabrication facilities, requiring technical expertise, high costs, and long
turnaround times; these factors inhibit their use. This project will enable
rapid manufacturing of customized microfluidics devices with substantially lower
costs and turnaround times. This technology will impact research in applications
including fundamental cell biology, drug screening, cellular therapy, toxicity
testing, and tissue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
will advance the translation of hybrid laser printing (HLP), combining the quick
and large-scale printing capability of Continuous Liquid Interface Production
(CLIP) with precision processing of additive multiphoton polymerization (MPP)
and subtractive multiphoton ablation (MPA) into a single versatile machine.
Technical challenges in material discovery and scalability will be addressed in
this work: 1) Discover new materials not only compatible with HLP process but
also showing the necessary durability, transparency, biocompatibility, and
impermeability to fluids; and characterize key HLP parameters, such as ablation
z-range used in MPA mode and dead-zone thickness used in CLIP mode; and 2) Scale
the maximum printable size of HLP process using a novel multiscale CLIP strategy
combined with a step-stitch projection printing method. The project will develop
a prototype for life sciences applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.