* 2013814
* Mid-infrared molecular tags: a new palette for IR microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Eric Potma, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This project develops a portfolio of molecular tags that emit strong signals
when stimulated by mid-infrared (MIR) light. These molecular MIR tags are
designed to light up selected parts in the cell when illuminated with an MIR
microscope. The MIR tags developed by the investigators enable the visualization
of molecular diffusion and chemical conversion, including numerous metabolic
processes in cells and tissues, processes that have hitherto remained out of
reach for MIR microscopy. This development transforms the MIR microscope from an
instrument for inspecting static images of cells and tissue to a technology for
studying dynamic processes such as cellular cholesterol uptake, protein
synthesis and lipogenesis. This capability opens up new opportunities for
investigating cellular processes that are difficult to study with standard
optical microscopy methods. The investigators are committed to broaden the
participation of a diverse pool of students by providing summer research
training to students from HBCUs through the Access to Careers in Engineering and
Sciences (ACES) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIR imaging, typically in the
form of Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) microscopy, is a label-free imaging
tool based on molecular vibrational contrast. MIR labels or tags can
significantly improve the specificity of MIR imaging, yet MIR labels have so far
not been used for imaging purposes. The use of MIR labels would expand the
complementary vibrational palette in IR microscopy, opening up a new catalogue
of biorthogonal molecular probes based on IR transitions, and offering
strategies for super-multiplex imaging. In this project, the PI and co-PI
develop a portfolio of chemical motifs that exhibit an exceptionally strong IR-
response. They will use these motifs as vibrational tags of small molecules,
including cholesterol, glucose, nucleic acids, amino acids and other
metabolites. In addition, the team will design probes suitable for fluorescence
encoded infrared (FEIR) excitation and detection, enabling multiplex labeling
studies in the MIR microscope with sensitivities that reach the single molecule
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.