* 2013338
* Enabling Future Teachers to Experience Science Investigation and Engineering Design in Introductory Undergraduate STEM Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Anthony Carpi, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,757,548.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate STEM
learning experiences for future elementary school teachers. How future teachers
learn science has a critical influence on how they teach science. As recommended
in Science and Engineering for Grades 6-12 (NASEM, 2018), “Undergraduate …
experiences need to serve as models for prospective teachers, in which they
experience science investigation and engineering design as learners.” Access to
these experiences must be in introductory undergraduate STEM courses, since
these courses are likely the only ones that future elementary teachers take to
learn the concepts and approaches of science. The STEM faculty who teach these
courses may not identify explicitly with their role as “teacher educators” and
often have little preparation in how to serve this role well. This project
focuses on these faculty at institutions that prepare teachers across the
country, together with the introductory courses they teach in life science,
earth and space science, and physical science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to engage and support faculty who teach introductory undergraduate
STEM courses that serve future elementary teachers. It will help these faculty
develop, test, and implement high-quality instructional materials that put
investigation and design at the center of their course design. The materials
will promote student discourse and support equitable practices in the classroom.
In addition, the materials developed will be freely available online in a
flexible, modular format in collaboration with the Science Education Resource
Center at Carleton College. These teaching materials will be modeled after the
Interdisciplinary Teaching about Earth for a Sustainable Future approach. To
achieve this goal, the project will create a rubric to guide the design of
instructional materials. It will then recruit and support three teams of five
faculty members with professional development through a three-year process.
Free, open textbooks will be developed for use in the undergraduate classes.
These textbooks will include functionality that highlights relationships between
the concepts and science education standards. These materials will be publicly
available at no cost through the Visionlearning website. To further facilitate
and support adoption of this approach across disciplines and institutional
settings, the project aims to recruit and provide professional development for
20-40 additional instructors to implement the new materials. The second goal of
the project is to assess the development process and impacts of use of the
materials and. The project will investigate the influence of engaging pre-
service teachers in science and engineering learning that includes content
knowledge, classroom practices, and beliefs about student learning. The project
will also study characteristics of teacher preparation programs that aim to
provide pre-service teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to
effectively engage elementary students in science investigation and engineering
design. To achieve this goal, the project will use direct and self-reported
measures to assess future teachers’ knowledge and beliefs about investigation
and design in the classroom. It will also assess the progress of faculty in
facilitating investigation and design, and in supporting learning for all
students. Achieving project goals is expected to result in a suite of
rigorously-developed instructional materials and texts aligned to science
standards, a community of faculty who are well-prepared to engage students in
investigation and design in their undergraduate science courses, a better
understanding of how undergraduate science instruction influences future
teachers’ preparedness to teach using investigation and design, and a new
understanding of how professional development can support faculty who teach
future teachers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.