* 2013131
* Geometry, Genetics and Development
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Eric Siggia, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2025
* USD 539,583.00

Developmental biology has been immensely successful in reducing the seeming
miraculous self-organization of a fertilized egg to a fetus and adult to a list
of genes and the instructions for their regulation in the noncoding genome. But
knowing the parts (essentially all genes) is not commensurate with understanding
their capacity to self-organize. Thus, we need to move from reductionism to
integration, and physics, particularly condensed matter and statistical physics,
has a long and successful history in phenomenological but still quantitative
descriptions of Nature. Stem cell technologies allow one to build embryos from
cells and thus test one's understanding. New imaging modalities and genetic
interventions provide the means to reprogram the earliest steps of development
in simple model organisms and quantify the outcomes. Development is about
morphogenesis and the progressive specialization of cells as a function of time.
The natural mathematical language for dynamics is geometric and the key ideas
were formulated in the 20th century. Elements of that work provide a
mathematically rigorous landscape analogy to development that enables a very
compact phenomenological description that can be fit to data. Prior work by the
PI has shown how simply confining stem cells in two dimensions elicits their
potential for self-organization, which is surprisingly complex and employs the
same cellular communications systems as in the embryo. This project will use the
simplicity of synthetic systems and geometrical methods to quantify the genetic
systems responsible for self-organization in mammals. Similar mathematical
machinery is required to understand recent experiments in the nematode C.
elegans that uses RNA interference to reprogram the founder cells in the embryo
to new fates. How these new fates accommodate to their ectopic environment
provide a strong quantifiable constraint on how the embryo self-organizes and
are amenable to phenomenological treatments. The PI will continue to study the
exact mutation that leads to Huntington disease in humans, which has a dramatic
phenotype in stem cells differentiated on
micropatterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Waddington landscape is an oft-cited
metaphor for development, particularly when discussing stem cells. A theorem of
Smale, plausibly applies to the gene regulatory networks as imagined by
Waddington and proves that such systems can be represented by potential flow on
a Riemannian manifold. The PI will show the utility of this representation in
several examples. It is the only general way to implement our intuition that
developmental ‘decisions’ take place in a low dimensional space, and it provides
a compact functional form with which to challenge that intuition with data, thus
reducing the number of dimensions in which the essential degrees of freedom
reside, compared to the standard Michaelis-Menten representations of gene
regulatory networks, which typically have many more variables than the dimension
of the attractor they describe. The PI's experimental collaborations in stem
cells and C.elegans development will provide the means to apply these
theoretical representations to data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.