* 2013858
* Interactions of Particles, Fields, and Strings
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Cumrun Vafa, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Cumrun Vafa at Harvard
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gravitational force is a key cornerstone
of physics. Yet, when combined with quantum mechanics (the theory that governs
the physics of the subatomic world), gravitational interactions lead to many
puzzles. These puzzles are ultimately resolved within string theory, as a result
of which string theory is perhaps the leading candidate for unifying gravity
with quantum physics. One consequence of this resolution is that many possible
particles and forces that could have existed in principle (and thus be part of
the string-theory "landscape" of self-consistent theories) actually turn out to
be forbidden (and thus are considered to belong to the so-called "swampland").
As part of this research, Professor Vafa will attempt to demystify the reasons
why some theories belong to the swampland and not the landscape. The results of
this research will therefore lead to a deeper understanding of how gravity
works. As such, research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting progress in fundamental aspects of science. This research is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor Vafa plans to continue
his freshman seminar course, "Physics, Math and Puzzles", by teaching it once a
year. This course aims to showcase deep principles of physics through simple
mathematical puzzles. Professor Vafa also plans to give public lectures on these
topics (based on a book he has just published). Moreover, Professor Vafa plans
to continue running the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics summer workshops
at Stony Brook University. These workshops will therefore continue to have a
deep impact in educating some of the best young minds interested in theoretical
physics, especially in questions related to string theory and the nearby areas
of condensed-matter physics and mathematics. Professor Vafa also plans to
continue delivering and participating in public forums to inform the public of
progress being made in string theory and how it impacts our understanding of our
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Vafa will focus on
elaborating the principles of the swampland and their connection to basic
principles of quantum gravity, such as black-hole physics and unitarity. He will
focus on drawing lessons from the supersymmetric examples of string
compactifications, such as Calabi-Yau manifolds, where the most analytic control
exists. A central aim for this research will be to explain why there is an upper
bound on the number of massless particles we can get in supergravity theories,
as well as the types of gauge forces and matter content we can obtain in a
consistent theory of quantum gravity. These lessons will shed light on the case
which is most relevant to our universe, namely the non-supersymmetric
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.