* 2013736
* Flexible Statistical Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Trevor Hastie, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This project develops new statistical methodology for solving important applied
problems in medicine and science. In personalized medicine, the PI will focus on
the prediction of whether particular treatments are suitable for a patient based
on their demographics and clinical history, using vast troves of past patient
experiences. Biologists seek to understand the folding patterns of chromosomes
in cells, a key ingredient in understanding their function. In a second project,
the PI will develop novel curve-fitting methods to learn these folding patterns
from indirect and noisy measurements of this three dimensional structure.
Ecologists try to learn the characteristics of environments that attract certain
species, as well as shared aspects of species that coinhabit environments, as a
critical component in species survival, pest control and disease prevention. In
a third project, the PI will develop methods that can scale to extremely large
species populations (such as bacteria and insects) based on site-specific
surveys. The project also provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project develops validation methods to
select from a collection of models for estimating heterogenous treatment
effects, despite the fact that in observational data there are no direct
measurements of the treatment effect. The project develops adaptive nearest-
neighbor matching techniques to construct a comparison set for each validation
point. With high-dimensional chromosomal contact maps, the PI plans to draw on
his early work on principal curves to model the three-dimensional folding
structure of chromosomes. This amounts to metric scaling with side information
on the local structure of the three-dimensional solution. Generalized linear
latent-variable models are popular for modeling species distributions (usually
Poisson models for counts, and binomial models for presence/absence), but they
grind&lt;br/&gt;to a halt when the number of species and/or locations is very
large. The PI plans to adapt earlier work on matrix completion to develop
alternating maximum-likelihood fitting algorithms to scale these methods to
extremely large populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.