* 2013874
* Spindle Self-Organization and Bioenergetics in Vivo
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Daniel Needleman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2025
* USD 609,916.00

There is no established framework capable of understanding the structure and
behaviors of organelles, specialized structures within a cell that can contain
millions of dynamic, energy-transducing molecules. Similarly, cellular
metabolism is extremely complex, involving hundreds of proteins, intricate
networks, and numerous intermediate metabolic compounds, and we currently lack
the ability to predict the flux through different pathways. This project employs
the paradigm used to study complex systems in physics of integrating
quantitative experiments with phenomenological theories, but applies these
methods to study the spindle, oocyte bioenergetics, and the interactions between
the two. This work will provide fundamental insight into cell division and
energy metabolism, and will help pave the way towards an understanding of the
nonequilibrium thermodynamics of living matter. The goal of the project is to
develop a quantitative understanding of the spindle, energy metabolism, and the
interaction between the two. The knowledge gained will help explain how
metabolic defects disrupt cell division and cytoskeletal organization, which is
believed to cause diverse pathologies, including cancer, neurological diseases,
and infertility. Furthermore, if the nonequilibrium thermodynamics of living,
active matter become sufficiently well understood, it will eventually become
possible to engineer manmade active materials with lifelike properties. Graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school students will be trained in
interdisciplinary research, both through working on the project, and in classes,
summer courses, and tutorials. A strong effort will be taken to enhance the
involvement of women and underrepresented minorities in these activities. The
results obtained, will be disseminated in research journals, on the lab web
site, and at conferences (including new, interdisciplinary conferences). The PI
will create a monthly series of events on scientific communication that will
help give graduate students and postdocs valuable skills and enhance their
engagement with public outreach. These will include collaborations with high
school teachers, writers, entrepreneurs and artists, and will help create a
community of people who are passionate about scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life is a nonequilibrium phenomenon.
Metabolism provides a continuous flux of energy that dictates the form and
function of many subcellular structures. These subcellular structures are active
materials, composed of molecules which use chemical energy to perform mechanical
work and locally violate detailed balance. One of the most dramatic examples of
such a self-organizing structure is the spindle, which segregates chromosomes
during cell division. Despite its central role, very little is known about the
nonequilibrium thermodynamics of active subcellular matter, such as the spindle.
In this project the PI will study the interplay between spindle behaviors and
bioenergetics in mouse oocytes using a combination of quantitative experiments
and theory. The goal of this project is to provide a systematic basis to
understand and predict the behaviors of the spindle and energy metabolism in
vivo, and how perturbing one impacts the other. This work also aims to
contribute to physics through the quantitative study of the nonequilibrium
thermodynamics of living, active matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.