* 2013059
* Development of the US Extremely Large Telescope Program
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Patrick McCarthy, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 23,340,004.00

The United States Extremely Large Telescope Program (U.S. ELT Program) will
coordinate the activities of three organizations, the Giant Magellan Telescope
(GMT), the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT), and NSF’s National Optical-infrared
Astronomy Research Laboratory (NSF’s NOIRLab). Together these three
organizations aim to provide access to two new and very large telescopes, the
GMT and TMT, for all U.S. astronomers. This award will fund planning for this
activity; it will not fund any construction activities. It will also support
important development work for the GMT (no funding is being provided to the
TMT). The award will help the GMT advance state-of-the-art technologies that
will make sure the telescope, once built, produces the sharpest images possible.
Important components of a prototype for one of the seven secondary mirrors and a
system to support and maintain the shape of each of the seven 8-meter primary
mirrors will be developed; a new “adaptive optics” systems will also be tested.
At the same time, NSF’s NOIRLab will develop plans that would allow astronomers
to easily use both telescopes and quickly access their observations. Young
scientists and engineers will be involved in this work. Together, the GMT and
TMT will allow scientists from diverse backgrounds to observe the entire sky as
never before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TMT and GMT are targeted to be built in
the mid-to-late 2020s, provided that all approvals are in place. Under this
Award, NSF’s NOIRLab will develop a plan to collaborate with both the GMT and
TMT to secure observing time on both telescopes for the broader US community if
the telescopes are ultimately constructed. The plan would enable
transformational research using these two next-generation, ground-based,
optical-infrared observing platforms. If constructed, GMT and TMT would be two
of only three 20 to 40-meter class Extremely Large Telescopes in existence in
the 2030s. The collaboration, dubbed the “US ELT Program,” would permit
scientists anywhere in the US to lead projects that require large allocations of
observing time on the GMT and TMT, taking advantage of their full sky coverage
and diverse instrumentation and observing capabilities. The TMT and GMT would
open a new discovery space in astronomy and astrophysics, enabling forefront
research in fields ranging from the search for biomarkers in the atmosphere of
planets around other stars to studies of the first light in the universe. The US
ELT Program Office, which would, if approved, be based at NSF’s NOIRLab in
Tucson, would be responsible for the scientific and programmatic coordination of
this joint endeavor and for representation and advocacy of US community
interests in the GMT and TMT. The US ELT Program would, thus, give a voice to US
astronomers early in the development of these two very complex telescope
systems. The award will also support development work on a number of important
projects key to the success of the GMT. Deliverables for the GMT component of
this proposal specifically target a reduction in cost and schedule risks
associated with telescope system image quality. These include the development of
laboratory testbeds for adaptive optics and the prototyping and testing of
active and adaptive optics components and subsystems. These activities will
ensure immediate and high scientific impact if GMT were commissioned later this
decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US ELT Program presents an outstanding
opportunity to engage diverse scientific and educational communities. Early
career scientists and engineers from institutions distributed throughout the US
would participate in this work. The experience would help them further develop
and strengthen technical skills that would make them more valuable members of
the Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) workforce. In the longer
term, the US-ELT Program partnership has the potential to foster large
scientific collaborations that would lead to increased involvement by a more
diverse community of scientists from a broad range of institutions and
demographic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.