* 2013047
* Quantum Many-Body Theories and Methods for Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Scott Bogner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 01/31/2024
* USD 654,000.00

Nuclear Physics plays a key role in our quest to understand the Universe,
addressing fundamental questions like: 1) How did visible matter come into being
and how does it evolve? 2) How does subatomic matter organize itself and what
phenomena emerge? 3) Are the fundamental interactions that are basic to the
structure of matter fully understood?, and 4) How can the knowledge and
technological progress provided by nuclear physics best be used to benefit
society? In recent years, researchers have made remarkable progress in our
fundamental understanding of the complex and fascinating system that is the
nucleus. This progress has been driven by new theoretical insights, increased
computational power, and experimental access to new exotic isotopes with a large
excess of neutrons or protons. As the frontiers of experimental nuclear physics
increasingly move towards the study of exotic nuclei, there is an urgent need
for theorists to develop controlled, ab-initio (i.e., “first principles” or
microscopic) many-body theories of the nucleus. This is because time honored
phenomenological models of nuclear theory, such as the nuclear shell model and
mean-field/density functional theory, are “data driven” approaches that require
the presence of nearby data to fix parameters. The exploration of previously
uncharted regions of the nuclear landscape therefore poses severe challenges for
such models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, the present NSF
award will work to develop new ab-initio or microscopic many-body theories and
methods that are capable of reaching medium-mass nuclei and beyond. Such
approaches start directly from the fundamental forces between nucleons and
attempt to solve the quantum many-body equations of motion without introducing
additional parameters that need to be fit to the nuclei of interest. This is
computationally much more challenging than the phenomenological approaches, and
requires significant computational and conceptual advances to cover the same
regions of nuclei. Under the present award, the team will develop a nuclear
many-body modeling infrastructure based on state-of-the-art Coupled-Cluster (CC)
Theory and In-Medium Similarity Renormalization Group (IMSRG) methods, leveraged
to exploit powerful techniques and algorithms from the fields of Machine
Learning (ML) and Quantum Computing. The goal is to develop a comprehensive
framework that is capable of providing controlled and predictive calculations
for static and dynamic properties over a wide range of conditions, from nuclei
to dense matter and neutron stars. These activities will be closely linked with
ongoing experimental programs in low-energy nuclear physics nationally and
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.