* 2013230
* Using Virtual Reality Mathematics and Science Simulations to Prepare Elementary Teachers to Create Successful Learning Experiences for Students in High-Need Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Cheryl Ney, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 586,111.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of improving teaching and
learning of mathematics and science. Specifically, it will investigate the use
of mixed reality classroom simulations in the preparation of K-8 teachers in
urban schools. Mixed-reality virtual simulations combine real people and
physical environments with virtual people and places. Pilots spend long hours
using virtual simulators before flying a plane carrying real passengers. It is
now possible to provide K-8 pre-service teachers with opportunities to virtually
practice teaching strategies that can enhance learning before serving students
in real classrooms. California State Los Angeles University Charter College of
Education faculty will modify scenario scripts and develop new ones specifically
focused on science and mathematics concepts in the context of high-poverty,
urban schools with large ethnically diverse student populations. The project, in
partnership with elementary and middle schools in the Los Angeles Unified School
District in East Los Angeles and other smaller area districts, intends to
investigate three research questions associated with the impact of mixed-reality
virtual classroom simulations in K-8 teacher preparation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will modify and develop scripts using
Mursion-TeachLivE software, based on work originally developed at the University
of Central Florida. The project’s modified curriculum using mixed reality
classroom simulation experiences integrated into several courses uses scenarios
directed by faculty-developed scripts for teaching science and mathematics
concepts to avatars that simulate elementary and middle school students. Through
these simulations, pre-service teachers can present science and mathematics
content, review content, practice behavior management skills, practice specific
instructional techniques such as scaffolding, or perform many other daily tasks
that a teacher would experience in an in-person classroom. The overarching
intent of this project is to improve pre-service teachers’ ability to teach
mathematics and science in urban schools. This goal will be achieved by studying
the implementation by pre-service teachers of a virtual simulated classroom. The
project’s research study intends to use participants from two cohorts of
elementary pre-service teachers in a credentialing program. It aims to follow
each cohort through three semesters in three courses and their student teaching,
a fourth course. Data to be collected consists of: 1) course assignments,
including science and mathematics lesson plans and a COVID classroom management
plan, completed by pre-service teachers in experimental and control groups; 2)
video recordings of the experimental group enrolled in courses using the virtual
classroom simulations to practice lesson delivery and classroom management; 3)
midterm and final assessments of pre-service teachers teaching by faculty
supervisors; 4) focus groups of both the experimental and control group pre-
service teachers; 5) virtual simulated classroom scripts prepared by the College
faculty; and 6) a faculty focus group. Quantitative (statistical) and
qualitative (content and discourse analyses) methods will be employed for data
analysis. Project success has the potential to better prepare hundreds of future
K-8 teachers to provide their elementary students with learning success in
mathematics and science by meeting the challenges and opportunities they will
find in ethnically diverse, high-poverty, urban classrooms. The dissemination of
project findings, as well as sustaining and institutionalizing the project
through continued collaboration with school partners has the potential for
significant and measurable future broader impacts for the targeted K-8 students,
for their families, and for their communities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.