* 2013562
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at the University of California-Davis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Farrens, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum computing is the study of quantum computers, which are a new type of
computer that can process information using the laws of quantum mechanics. Once
serious quantum computers can be built, they will be able to run new algorithms
for selected problems that are faster than anything possible with classical
computers - in some cases, exponentially faster. They will represent a new
chapter in the computer and information revolution, the quantum chapter. Since
the unexpected discovery of quantum computing in the 1980s and 1990s, research
has made steady and exciting progress. This award will help the University of
California, Davis join the growing and extremely important wave of research in
quantum computing, by funding a new faculty position in the Department of
Computer Science. The new position will complement existing research strength in
quantum computing and quantum information (QCQI) at UC Davis in the Departments
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mathematics, and Physics. It will help
UC Davis reach a critical mass to sustain and expand quantum computing research
and training indefinitely into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
begin with a flexible search across all research areas and topics within QCQI
that are suitable for a computer science department. These topics include:
mathematically rigorous quantum algorithms, quantum complexity theory, heuristic
quantum algorithms, quantum error correction, quantum communication, quantum
software, quantum communication, quantum information bounds, quantum circuit
optimization, design of quantum devices, and post-quantum cryptography. The
ideal candidate would interact with both non-quantum researchers in Computer
Science and quantum researchers in other departments at UC Davis. As UC Davis
achieves a critical mass of QCQI faculty, existing topics courses will expand
into cohesive graduate training. Existing topical seminars will expand into an
interdepartmental QCQI research network at UC Davis, and quantum computing
related topics will begin to tunnel down into our undergraduate curriculum in
order to ensure we have a sufficiently trained workforce in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.