* 2013064
* Lattice Gauge Theory at the Intensity Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Carleton DeTar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Carleton DeTar at the
University of Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current understanding of the most
fundamental elementary particles and interactions in Nature is encapsulated in
the so-called "Standard Model". Unfortunately, it is incomplete. For example, it
can't explain the dark matter that permeates the Universe. Thus physicists
almost universally believe that still more fundamental particles and
interactions are yet to be discovered. A large experimental search is underway
at accelerators, such as the European Large Hadron Collider, to find new
particles. Even if the accelerator energy is not high enough to find them, such
new particles will reveal their existence through discrepancies between careful
measurements and precise theoretical predictions based on the Standard Model.
Such comparisons are effective only if the residual uncertainties in the
predicted quantities are reduced in tandem with improvements in the accuracy of
experimental measurements. Professor DeTar and collaborators are using the most
powerful computers and codes to make precise predictions that can be compared
with results of experimental measurements, with particular attention to those
cases where some tantalizing discrepancies have already been found. This work is
in the national interest in that it furthers our understanding of the most
fundamental laws of Nature. Its broader impacts include the training of students
and postdoctoral research associates in programming and utilizing the highest-
performance computers, in the management of large data sets, and in the
statistical analysis and extraction of physically important information. Many of
Professor DeTar's students and postdoctoral research associates have found jobs
that utilize those skills in industrial as well as academic
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project will use methods
of lattice quantum chromodynamics in a precision study of the hadronic
environment of heavy-quark decays. The resulting hadronic decay constants and
form factors are then combined with measurements of the decays of mesons
containing those heavy quarks. The project will also involve the calculation of
the strong-interaction contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment of the
muon. The resulting value for the hadronic vacuum polarization will be compared
with results of ongoing high-precision experimental measurements of the magnetic
moment. Both comparisons provide stringent tests of the consistency of the
Standard Model and constraints on theoretical models of new physics. These
calculations are intended to be sufficiently precise that it is now necessary to
include the effects of virtual photons. This project will therefore advance our
ability to include them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.