* 2013653
* Icosahedral Virion Assembly and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Bentley Fane, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2025
* USD 799,186.00

Viruses have protein shells, or capsids, that protect their genomes. During an
infection, genomes must be organized, or packaged, into capsids. Genome
organization is a hurdle common to all organisms. For example, the human genome
is approximately 5 feet long, yet it is organized to fit within a comparatively
tiny cell. A similar situation exists with viruses. The project investigates
genome organization in single-stranded DNA microviruses. In this virus family,
four components ensure proper packaging: the capsid, a small DNA binding
protein, a gate keeper protein, and specific genome sequences. The research
endeavors to identify how these components operate. In the future, this
knowledge could be translated into beneficial applications, such as therapeutic
viral vectors. The research contributes to the education of undergraduate,
graduate and high-school students. High-school students and teachers conduct 4
to 9-month, data-generating projects, which elicit enthusiasm for science
research at an earlier age. Some of the participating schools serve large
populations of under-represented groups in science, which further benefits
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-stranded viral DNA packaging combines
mechanisms found in single-stranded RNA and double-stranded DNA systems. Like
double-stranded DNA, single-stranded DNA is packaged into preformed shells but
like RNA genomes, they interact extensively with capsids. øX174 packaging is a
four-component system: 1) the capsid’s DNA binding pockets, 2) the J protein
that guides DNA between pockets, 3) specific DNA sequences, and 4) the A*(star)
protein. Structural data suggest that specific coat and J protein residues order
the genome into icosahedral symmetry: a hypothesis to be genetically and
biochemically tested. To further elucidate protein A* function, the effects of
altered protein levels and mutated A* target sites will be determined. Moreover,
60 degenerate, genomic consensus sequences may facilitate genome organization.
The consensus sequences will be “de-optimized” and the resulting effects will be
characterized. If “de-optimization” affects packaging, it may indicate an
additional selective pressure operating a single-stranded genomes. The research
outcomes will advance our understanding of the basic principles by which single-
stranded DNA viruses assemble into infectious
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.