* 2013392
* Developing Validated Instruments to Measure Student/Faculty Attitudes in Undergraduate Statistics and Data Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Douglas Whitaker, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
teaching and learning of statistics and data science. It will do so by
developing better ways to measure and improve student and faculty attitudes
toward statistics and data science. Statistics is the science of collection,
analysis, interpretation, and presentation of numerical data. Data science is
ability to extract actionable insights from data of all types. Using these tools
to use and manipulate data sets is a critical skill for today's STEM workforce,
as well as for a data-savvy citizenry. However, engaging faculty to successfully
teach and students to successfully learn these skills continues to be
challenging. The proposed project expects to make progress toward better
teaching and learning of statistics and data science by developing a deeper
understanding about student and instructor attitudes toward these topics. This
understanding, in turn, can help in developing effective ways to teach and learn
statistics and data science and to identify what works best for educating
skilled and motivated statisticians and data
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Positive attitudes have been shown to be
essential to student learning of all types. Currently, few instruments exist for
assessing attitudes toward statistics and data science, and these have critical
flaws. This project will collect data from a nationally representative sample of
undergraduate students and their instructors to develop and statistically
validate new instruments for these purposes. The final data set will be analyzed
for trends that may indicate best practices in statistics and data science
education and be made publicly available. A sustainable infrastructure will be
created to facilitate ongoing data collection and dissemination of results. A
diversity of student populations will be included in all phases to identify
challenges, opportunities, and pedagogical practices that are particularly
effective for specific groups of learners. The NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR) Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.