* 2013483
* Collaborative Research: Expanding and Evaluating Ecological Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences Supported by a National Network of Scientists and Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hayley Lanier, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,524.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by evaluating evidence-based
practices for engaging students in authentic ecological research across the
undergraduate curriculum. Research opportunities enable students to engage in
the scientific process, as well as help them to develop workforce readiness and
to evaluate potential careers. By embedding research within instruction, Course-
based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) provide research opportunities
to large numbers of students. This project will evaluate a set of community-
based CURE modules intended to help students build scientific skills throughout
their undergraduate experience. The modules provide students with repeated
opportunities to conduct authentic research on the behavioral ecology of
squirrels. These animals are intrinsically interesting to many people and can be
studied across a wide range of environments. These CURES are supported by a
national network (Squirrel-Net) that provides tools and training for instructors
who seek to increase CURE adoption. The Network also provides opportunities for
students and faculty to communicate and collaborate across courses and
institutions. This project seeks to enhance understanding of evidence-based
approaches to STEM instruction and to improve the education of a diverse
scientific workforce through broad implementation of the CURE
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to assess the impacts of
scaffolding CURE modules within curricula and supporting students and
instructors through a network. The project goals are twofold: (1) disseminate
and support a set of broadly transferable teaching modules and toolkits to allow
instructors to easily embed field-based, behavioral ecology CUREs within
courses; and (2) assess how networked CURE modules impact student gains in
content knowledge, skills, and self-identification as a scientist across
multiple and varied institutions. Participating instructors will be trained in
the use of open-access teaching modules and supported through digital resources
(e.g., instructional materials; an online database of student-collected data)
and field equipment loans. By scaffolding modules among multiple courses at
diverse institutions, this project will examine how specific features of CURE
module implementation affect student outcomes across a variety of contexts and
student demographics. Student outcomes will be evaluated with assessments
derived from validated survey instruments focused on scientific skills, sense of
belonging to a community, and self-identity as a scientist. Structural equation
modeling will be used to evaluate the impacts of CURE participation on student
content knowledge, analytical skills, and engagement following a theory of
change framework. This project will guide the implementation and improvement of
evidence-based practices in STEM teaching and learning by empirically testing
whether repeated CUREs and belonging to a nationwide research network improves
student outcomes. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.