* 2013186
* Promoting Mathematical Reasoning and Transforming Instruction in College Algebra
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Bikai Nie, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,599,774.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by transforming instructional
practices in college algebra to improve students’ mathematical reasoning. This
project will establish a partnership between the University of Colorado Denver
and three Hispanic serving institutions: Metropolitan State University of
Denver, Santa Fe Community College, and Texas State University. The project's
institutional partners have a range of size and focus, and serve large
populations of students of color and first-generation-in-college students. The
project aims to address a significant problem in U.S. undergraduate mathematics
education: the overemphasis on finding the right answer. Specifically, it
intends to decrease the emphasis on answer finding, and increase the emphasis on
mathematical reasoning in high enrollment lower division mathematics courses.
The project will accomplish these goals by developing and refining
“Techtivities” for college algebra students. Techtivities are free, interactive,
online problems based on video scenarios, such as the movement of a Ferris
wheel. They engage students in creating multiple graphs to represent numerical
relationships between objects in the scenario. In addition to creating more
Techtivities and embedding them in more courses, the project intends help
instructors use them effectively. It will do so by developing an instructor
professional development program and instructor Communities of Transformation.
The project will complete a research study on the effectiveness of these
activities in increasing mathematical reasoning in college algebra courses. By
transforming instructional practices in gatekeeper introductory college math
courses, the project may increase student persistence in STEM majors and help
the U.S. prepare an increasingly diverse population for STEM professions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and implement a new, potentially
transformative approach to institutional change called DEEP, which includes four
interconnected elements: Develop innovative digital tasks (Techtivities) that
foster covariational reasoning; Embed tasks within existing courses, connecting
to key content; Extend opportunities to instructors to examine how they
determine which student voices get counted or marginalized; and Provide support
for instructors to implement tasks that promote students’ reasoning. At the
institutional level, the project will provide support for instructors to
implement tasks to promote students’ reasoning and create Communities of
Transformation to sustain evidence-based practices across institutions. The
project includes a research project designed to draw connections between
instructional practices, instructor beliefs, and students’ covariational
reasoning, math attitudes, and course success. It will include graduate research
assistants in all aspects of the project to contribute to the societal need of
developing novice STEM researchers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.