* 2013644
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Study of Environmentally Stable and Lead-Free Chalcogenide Perovskites for Optoelectronic Device Engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Letian Dou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 05/31/2023
* USD 90,452.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar energy is one of the most promising
green technologies and could enable humankind to meet its future energy needs in
a sustainable manner. The development of high performance, low cost and
environmentally friendly solar cells is therefore critical for our energy
security. One of the most promising new class of materials for solar energy is
metal halide perovskites. The power conversion efficiency of solar cells made
from such perovskites has witnessed an unprecedented rate of increase. Despite
their outstanding performance, perovskites have poor stability and are prone to
photo-decomposition due to ion migration. There are also serious issues with
their environmental compatibility as the highest performing perovskite solar
cells contain lead, a highly poisonous metal. Furthermore, lead iodide, a common
decomposition product of these materials, is carcinogenic. In the face of these
challenges, it is necessary to identify and develop high performing and lead
free perovskites that are intrinsically stable under light irradiation and when
exposed to the environment. This project will investigate solar cells based on
chalcogenide perovskitesâ€”an alternative to metal halide perovskites typically
used in solar cells. These materials are free of lead and use a chalcogen such
as sulfur, which could result in superior stability. This project could lead to
a new class of high performance and environmentally stable solar cells and
photodetectors with transformative
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of
fundamental science and device engineering issues will be addressed in this
project in order to enable the successful deployment of chalcogenide perovskite
based materials in high performing optoelectronic devices such as photo-
detectors and solar cells. These include: (1) understanding the nature of
defects in these materials, and how they affect the dark current, band
structure, mid gap states, and carrier lifetimes. The chalcogenide perovskite
material growth conditions will be carefully controlled, to minimize such
defects; (2) Alloying strategies to optimize the band gap of chalcogenide
perovskite based materials will be theoretically predicted using first-
principles density functional theory calculations. Such alloying will also be
experimentally realized to demonstrate chalcogenide perovskite materials with
optimized bandgaps; (3) State of the art machine learning tools (guided by ab
initio calculations and experiments) will be used to systematically screen the
entire family of chalcogenide perovskite materials in order to find the optimal
material and alloying combination; (4) Photo-detector and solar cell devices
constructed using the optimized chalcogenide perovskite material will be
developed and systematically characterized to demonstrate the proof of concept.
The above tasks will together provide the fundamental knowledge that is needed
to demonstrate high performing, environmentally stable and lead free
optoelectronic devices using the family of chalcogenide perovskite
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.