* 2013899
* STTR Phase I:  Remote patient monitoring of medication fall risk in the elderly
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Norman Reeves, SUMAQ LIFE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 42,747.00

The broader impact/commerical potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be a potentially significant reduction in
medication-related falls, injuries, and deaths, as well as a reduction in fall-
related medical costs. The number of older adults dying from falls increased by
a factor of three between 2000 and 2016, with increased medication use possibly
contributing to this alarming trend. Polypharmacy (i.e., taking 4 or more drugs)
is growing with a 3-fold increase from 1992 to 2002. Since drugs are a
modifiable risk factor, periodic medication reviews are recommended for fall
prevention. This project will explore a new balance test involving target
tracking to remotely monitor medication fall risk and allowing for timelier,
personalized assessment of the risk of getting hurt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance a new
balance test using target tracking. Technical work includes: 1) Confirm that the
new test is sensitive to medication effects and is safe to perform; 2)
Discriminate between fallers and non-fallers, thus demonstrating test validity;
and 3) Compare test results with those of other tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.