* 2013303
* QCIS-FF: Quantum Computing &amp; Information Science Faculty Fellow at Harvard University
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Edward Kohler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

The construction and control of quantum systems holds great promise for society,
from faster algorithms for fundamental problems to the construction of new
materials and drugs. This is a field that is currently limited mostly by the
availability of talent. This award funds a quantum computing and information
science faculty fellow at Harvard University to address this shortfall. Through
research and educational activities, the new faculty fellow will be able to tap
the talent in the Harvard student population toward these goals. Specifically,
the fellow will develop and teach new courses in both the undergraduate and
Ph.D. levels. The educational materials developed will be widely accessible
outside of Harvard, and the courses will also participate in the "Embedded
EthiCS" initiative to integrate ethics into the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent theoretical and experimental progress in
quantum computation and information has opened up a great many avenues for
research in computer science and adjacent disciplines. Designing algorithms,
protocols, and programs for new quantum devices, understanding their fundamental
powers and limitations, and designing experiments to probe them, are all deep
questions that will require collaborations between computer scientists,
physicists, electrical engineers and researchers from many other disciplines.
The QCIS faculty fellow will join an environment where such collaboration is
encouraged and facilitated, and be given the tools and opportunities to explore
some of these deep intellectual questions, including: (a) collaborate with
researchers in computer science, pure and applied physics, electrical
engineering, statistics, and pure and applied mathematics; (b) be a full member
of the Harvard Quantum Initiative (HQI) and participate in cross-disciplinary
seminars and activities. The initiative spans across several departments and
schools at Harvard, including Physics, Applied Physics, Chemistry, Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science; (c) be involved in the selection of HQI
graduate student and postdoctoral fellows; and (d) Design new courses on the
undergraduate and graduate levels that cross between computer science and
physics (e.g., quantum computation), computer science and electrical engineering
(e.g., quantum error correcting codes), or computer science and mathematics
(e.g., quantum information theory).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.