* 2013065
* CTEQ Schools on QCD Analysis and Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides funding for the 2021 and 2022 CTEQ Summer Schools, under the
direction of Professor Joey Huston at Michigan State University. CTEQ refers to
the "Coordinated Theoretical-Experimental Project on QCD", which is the
scientific collaboration that organizes these Schools each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of elementary particles probes the
deepest structure of matter. Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory that
governs the strong interactions between elementary particles, and its study at
high energies is increasingly necessary in order to understand both elementary-
particle and nuclear physics. The recent discovery of the Higgs particle and the
intense search for new physics beyond this highlight the need to better
understand the tools of QCD. Since 1992, 26 CTEQ Summer Schools have played an
important role in elementary-particle and nuclear physics by promoting the
knowledge of QCD and its applications to electroweak precision measurements and
to new physics searches. These Schools provide training and education for
graduate students and post-doctoral research associates beyond what is typically
available at their home institutions. These Schools have proved to be extremely
useful for participants working at different colliders such as the Tevatron in
the US and at HERA in Germany, and are now even more important for students
working at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in Switzerland. Over 1700
participants have attended the CTEQ Schools to date, and NSF support has enabled
US-based participants to attend. The broader impact of these Schools is felt
though the participants' strengthened awareness of the context of their research
within the overall enterprise of fundamental physics. The interactive nature of
the Schools encourages the skills necessary for communicating the excitement and
the results of this research to the wider public. Although open to participants
from around the world, the primary audience consists of participants from
institutions in the United States, and it is these participants who are
partially supported by the funding from NSF. Partial NSF support for these
Schools is thus in the national interest by assisting in the development of a
skilled and scientifically trained US-based workforce, whether in academic
physics or beyond. Indeed, many of the participants go on to careers in
academia, and in fact have ended up sending their own students to a subsequent
CTEQ School. Other participants have gone into industry or into defense, but all
have benefitted from the training they have received at the CTEQ Schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, each CTEQ School typically consists of
eight to nine days of lectures and discussion during which participants closely
interact with distinguished experts, both experimentalists and theorists. This
close interaction is one of the hallmarks of the CTEQ Schools. The Schools
alternate each year between the University of Pittsburgh and a site typically
outside the United States. Each day of the School consists of four one-hour
lectures, with long breaks between each lecture for discussion. Each day also
includes a 1.5-hour recitation session during which the participants ask the
lecturers to amplify on particular aspects of their presentations. This is
followed by an informal gathering that allows the participants to interact with
the lecturers (and each other) on a one-to-one basis. In this way the
participants are brought to the forefront of cutting-edge research in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.