* 2013078
* WoU-MMA: Thermodynamics of Nuclei and Nuclear Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Joaquin Drut, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 310,335.00

The origin of the heavy elements in our Universe remains a mystery. At least
half of those elements are believed to be generated in violent collisions
between neutron stars, and whether this is true is a central question in nuclear
astrophysics. To answer that question, neutron-star collisions are studied in
astrophysics simulations, which in turn need input data from nuclear physics.
Specifically, simulations require information about neutrons and protons at very
high temperatures and densities. This project aims to calculate such thermal
properties from first principles: starting from neutrons and protons and their
interactions, and implementing the computational machinery of lattice quantum
field theory. Using the same tools, the PI will also study simpler, related
systems in ultracold atomic physics that are currently realized in many
laboratories worldwide. The PI will mentor graduate students engaged in this
research in a teaching-and-training collaboration with UNC-Pembroke, and in
research collaborations with Michigan State University, the University of
Washington, and TU Darmstadt. Outreach activities will also include the
organization of the 21st International Conference on Recent Progress in Many-
Body Theories at UNC-CH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent gravitational- and
electromagnetic-wave detection of neutron star mergers has given new impetus to
the ab initio characterization of the thermodynamics of nuclei and nuclear
matter. The latter are required as input to dynamical astrophysics simulations
but pose a challenging quantum many-body problem. The overarching objective of
this project is to face that challenge, starting with the finite-temperature
thermodynamics of neutron matter, using the ab initio non-perturbative tools of
non-relativistic lattice field theory combined with chiral effective theory
interactions. The research program will focus on the thermal equation of state
of nuclear matter, beginning with dilute pure neutron matter, with plans to
include protons at a later stage. Calculations of the pairing, superfluidity,
and clustering properties of neutron matter are also planned, as they impact the
structure and thermal evolution of neutron stars. This project will also pursue
studies of nucleon clustering and the density of states of finite nuclei, and ab
initio calculations of the neutron skin, all of which are relevant to nuclear
astrophysics and the physics of neutron-rich nuclei to be realized in heavy-ion
facilities around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the
objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.