* 2013984
* RUI: Discovering New Sources of CP Violation in Flavor Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Bhubanjyoti Bhattacharya, Lawrence Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Bhubanjyoti Bhattacharya
at Lawrence Technological University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Where is all the
antimatter? Although established theories of particle physics predict that our
universe should have roughly similar amounts of matter and antimatter, we see
much more matter around us than antimatter. Matter and antimatter behave
similarly under a fundamental symmetry called Charge-Parity, or "CP". However,
processes involving elementary particles may not respect this symmetry.
Discovery of new-physics theories that violate CP will lead to a better
understanding of our universe, as they will be able to explain why there is more
matter than antimatter. Physicists expect to find CP-violating new physics in
data collected at ongoing worldwide experiments that study elementary-particle
collisions. As part of this research, Professor Bhattacharya will develop new
methods of understanding the properties of different types of new physics, with
an emphasis on hypothetical particles called "ALPs". These new particles are
important because they can affect CP-violation measurements currently being made
at collider experiments. As such, research in this area advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science, creating a deeper understanding
of elementary particles, their properties, and how they interact. This project
is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Working at Lawrence
Technological University, a predominantly undergraduate institution, Professor
Bhattacharya will actively engage undergraduate students in his research. By
prioritizing recruitment of students from diverse backgrounds, he will promote
an environment that fosters inclusion. Professor Bhattacharya's students will
apply newly-developed theoretical methods to analyze data and test new
hypotheses about CP violation. Students conducting research with Professor
Bhattacharya will also receive training in computational thinking and acquire
transferable skills that will make them successful in future academic or
industrial careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Bhattacharya’s research will reveal complex phases of proposed new couplings in
a variety of new-physics models. For example, focusing on data from flavor
factories such as the ongoing LHCb and Belle II experiments, Professor
Bhattacharya’s research will identify processes affected by ALPs and calculate
their effects on CP-violating observables. Flavor-factory data provide
information on the phenomenology of heavy mesons and quarkonia. Professor
Bhattacharya’s research will overcome challenges in understanding this data by
using approximate flavor symmetries and by quantifying the extent of flavor-
symmetry breaking. His research will also develop new methods for the precise
determination of CP-violating parameters within the Standard Model of particle
physics, such as the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa angle gamma. Using computation-
driven methods, Professor Bhattacharya and his students will identify how the
data deviate from Standard-Model predictions. By explaining these deviations
using new-physics models, Professor Bhattacharya's research will illuminate a
path for the discovery of new sources of CP violation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.