* 2014104
* RUI: New Directions in Dark Matter and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Brooks Thomas, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 135,000.00

Recent advances in particle physics and astronomy, including the discovery of
gravitational waves, have provided a trove of new observational data about the
universe we inhabit and the matter it contains. The research supported by this
grant focuses on developing novel methods of extracting information about the
history of our universe from this data and applying these results in order to
address fundamental unanswered questions such as how the spatial distribution of
matter within our universe came to be the way it is and why our universe
contains so much more matter than antimatter. One particular aim of this
research is to better understand the origin and properties of the "dark matter"
in our universe - an as-yet mysterious form of matter that neither emits nor
absorbs light, but nevertheless makes its presence felt via its gravitational
pull on normal, visible matter. A significant portion of this award will support
undergraduate involvement in these research topics, thereby cultivating interest
among the next generation of scientists and honing their computational
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program of research supported by this award is
organized around two main themes. One of these themes is to investigate novel
methods for uncovering information about the dark sector of our universe and
distinguishing between different dark-matter scenarios. Scenarios involving non-
minimal dark-sectors are of particular interest, since the characteristic
experimental signatures of dark matter in such scenarios are often qualitatively
different from those typically associated with minimal dark sectors, and less
thoroughly studied. The other theme is to investigate how departures from the
minimal picture of early-universe cosmology - departures involving, for example,
additional cosmological phase transitions, additional unstable degrees of
freedom, or additional dynamics related to cosmic inflation or reheating - can
be probed or constrained by observation. This research theme involves
identifying novel ways in which observational data - concerning, for example,
the matter power spectrum or the properties of the cosmic microwave background -
can be used to reveal information about early-universe
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.