* 2014221
* Efficient Estimation of Treatment Effects via Nonparametric Machine Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Shujie Ma, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 154,390.00

Advances in technology have created numerous large-scale datasets in
observational studies, which bring unprecedented opportunities for evaluating
the effectiveness of various treatments. The complex nature of large-scale
observational data, such as its massive volume and high dimensions in
confounders, pose great challenges to the existing conventional methods for
causal analysis. The corresponding statistical implication is that even a small
amount of bias can easily lead to erroneous conclusions. Thanks to the rapid
development of scalable computing techniques, nonparametric machine learning
methods have a strong potential for bias reduction via employing data-driven
strategies for dimensionality reduction. However, careful consideration must be
given in order to realize the potential for studying the underlying causal
mechanisms. This project aims to develop cutting-edge statistical methods with
theoretical insights for causality analysis using deep neural networks. The new
statistical tools meet the immediate needs from various scientific areas for
exploring causal relationships from large-scale observational data. The research
will facilitate the causality analysis of modern complex data with important
applications. This project will integrate research and education through course
development, open-source software development, and undergraduate and graduate
student training. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a new unified
approach with thorough theoretical justifications for efficient estimation of
causal effects using deep neural networks. The method will then be applied to
large-scale datasets with binary, multi-valued, or continuous-valued treatment
variables. Three interconnected topics will be pursued. Specifically, the PI
will offer a new perspective on learning treatment effects through a generalized
optimization estimation. As a result, two convenient and efficient estimators of
treatment effects will be developed, respectively, in the second and third
topics. The estimators involve one nuisance model that will be approximated by
deep neural networks, which will be investigated in the first topic. The general
optimization framework includes the average, quantile and asymmetric least
squares treatment effects as special cases. The methods take full advantage of
the large sample size of large-scale data and provide effective protection
against model mis-specification bias. The project involves devising new machine
learning methods and algorithms for causal studies, establishing the theoretical
validity, and developing valid inference procedures. It will promote machine
learning methods for causality analysis, and will break new ground in drawing
causal inference from large-scale observational
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.