* 2014921
* Workshop on Heavy Mineral Analysis in Solving Tectonic Problems at the University of Iowa; November 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Emily Finzel, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 43,000.00

This project provides funds for meeting costs, childcare, and travel support for
students, early-career faculty, and scientists to attend the Heavy Mineral
Analysis in Solving Tectonic Problems workshop. The workshop will be held at the
Department of Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences at the University of Iowa on
November 21-24, 2020. This workshop is important to the community through
providing an interactive venue to present focused, cutting-edge research. The
workshop will present an opportunity for U.S.-based researchers interested in
solving tectonic problems through provenance analysis to gain new skillsets that
represent departures from, as well as complementing, traditional provenance
approaches, such as detrital zircon geochronology. Workshop themes will include
the effects of source rock lithologies, climate, hydraulic sorting, weathering,
and lithification on detrital signatures, and future directions of research in
this field. The workshop will provide opportunities to discuss ideas and build
networks in symposia and during laboratory time in afternoons, and opportunities
for interactions during and after conference hours. The workshop will foster
development of new research directions in solving tectonic problems through
provenance analysis and will contribute to the development of a diverse and
globally competitive STEM workforce. Workshop participants will receive funding
based on criteria such as membership of underrepresented groups, financial need,
diversity of type of institutions, and geographic distribution. Conference
organizers will submit a conference report to AGUâ€™s EOS publication and possibly
also to GSA Today. The conference program will include topics of broad community
relevance, which could be of benefit to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Tectonics and Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology
programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.