* 2014801
* SBIR Phase I:  Durable Omni-Phobic Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Md Sarwar, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTIVE COATINGS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to advance the development of a self-
cleaning coating technology for applications in household products, automotive,
sensors and aerospace. Fluorinated materials have been widely used in self-
cleaning applications due to their excellent wear characteristics, and super-
hydrophobicity, but their environmental impact motivates new solutions. Attempts
to date have typically resulted in materials that are cloudy, non-durable and/or
too expensive for commercial relevance. This project will advance a new coating
that adheres well to substrates, offers high abrasion resistance similar to
glass, and exceptional weather resistance.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will allow the
advancement of a durable, non-fluorinated, super omniphobic, optically clear
coatings for industrial applications. The proposed work is focused on enhancing
the performance of nonfluorinated omniphobic coatings in three specific ways.
First, the adhesion of omniphobic coatings will be improved such that they will
be able to withstand submersion in water for months without showing
swelling/delamination. This will be achieved by using water stable urethane
polymers and/or prior surface treatment of the substrate. Second, the abrasion
resistance of the coating will be enhanced by using a combination of urethane
precursors and fillers. Finally, the weatherability will be increased by using
UV stabilizers along with UV stable urethane polymers such that the coatings
will have improved performance in outdoor applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.