* 2014165
* Probing Dark Sector Physics in Collider and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Yuhsin Tsai, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 69,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Yuhsin Tsai at the
University of Notre Dame.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine the possibility that
there is another "hidden" world that coexists with ours in the same space and
time, but which is practically invisible to us because the interactions between
the hidden world and ours are very weak. While this may sound like science
fiction, recent developments in particle physics and cosmology have shown that
an invisible sector of the universe might actually exist. Indeed, the existence
of such a hidden sector would help explain several long-standing theoretical and
observational puzzles. Professor Tsaiâ€™s research is aimed at using gravitational
waves, early-time cosmology, and high-energy particle colliders (such as the
Large Hadron Collider) to uncover such hidden worlds. As such, this research
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in the
discovery of new physical laws and new components of the natural world. This
work will also have several broader impacts. The results of this work will not
only guide future experiments and technology development, but also involve
graduate students and postdocs, thereby providing critical training for junior
physicists beginning research in this field. Professor Tsai also intends to give
public lectures on his research results and help to develop outreach programs
for high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Tsai
will study energy perturbations in the stochastic gravitational-wave background.
He will also study the size of non-Gaussian signatures of the gravitational-wave
signal produced by the hidden particles in the early universe. The result of
this analysis will help in the identification of the gravitational-wave
detectors that can observe the energy fluctuations from the hidden world that
interacts with us solely through gravity. Professor Tsai will also study the
cosmological signatures of models that address the Higgs hierarchy problem, such
as the Mirror Twin Higgs model and the N-Naturalness model. Based on the idea
that these scenarios can produce acoustic oscillations between hidden particles,
we can study these model through the changes they induce for gravity
perturbations in the early universe. Exploiting the current and the expected
future sensitivity of the LHCb experiment, Prof. Tsai will also develop new ways
to study the signature of long-lived particles that couple not only to regular
matter but also to particles in the hidden world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.