* 2014150
* Lattice QCD and Higgs Models
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Hetrick, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors James Hetrick and Kieran
Holland at the University of the Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard
Model (SM) is the name given to our current understanding of what matter is and
how it behaves at the most fundamental level that can currently be probed by
experiments. This theoretical framework describes the forces between different
types of quarks, electrons, and neutrinos, fundamental entities that are at the
heart of the model, and further predicts a rather mysterious Higgs particle that
pervades the universe and is responsible for profound intricacies of the SM.
This Higgs particle was observed at the Large Hadron Collider in 2012, opening
the door to understanding the SM at a deeper level. The research of Professors
Hetrick and Holland uses supercomputer modeling to explore different scenarios
to explain the origin of Higgs particle and thereby advance our understanding of
matter beyond the SM. This work is in the national interest because it furthers
the development of fundamental science in the United States and develops
expertise in high-performance computing for scientific modeling in undergraduate
students. Working at a predominantly undergraduate institution, Professors
Hetrick and Holland will involve undergraduates in their research, thereby
exposing them to advanced research methods very early in their careers. This
research program also involves the creation and maintainence of a large-scale
publicly available data archive for researchers in this field, thereby
leveraging the work of other groups in the US and multiplying the impact of
their research. Professors Hetrick and Holland will also continue to deliver
public lectures and engage in other community outreach efforts to enhance the
public's understanding of particle physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, the activities supported by this grant involve theoretical particle
physics models that could dynamically explain the properties of the Higgs boson
and the underlying cause of electroweak symmetry breaking. One such model
involves four-dimensional strongly-interacting gauge theories, similar to the
theory of Quantum Chromodynamics of quarks and gluons. In this scenario, the
Higgs boson emerges as a composite scalar state, and the fundamental theory
reveals itself through Higgs dynamics and a rich spectrum of additional
composite states. Another model explored in this research program involves five-
dimensional gauge theory with fermions in the adjoint representation of the
gauge group. The compactification of the fifth dimension with periodic fermion
boundary conditions leads to an emergent Higgs state. In both models, lattice
simulations using Monte-Carlo techniques on medium- to large-scale computer
clusters are the state-of-the-art tools to probe such theories. An additional
aspect of these activities is the continuing development of "The Gauge
Connection", a big data archive developed to share large ensembles of valuable
and costly data produced by research groups across the US. These data sets can
be repurposed for new projects with much reduced cost. This is an important
activity which benefits many researchers in the particle-physics community.
Professors Hetrick and Holland will also continue to mentor undergraduate
students who will develop important technical and analytical
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.