* 2014506
* SCH: INT: Personalized Wearable Metabolic Rate Monitors and Learning Social Networks-A Synergy for Smart Connected Health
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Lisa Klein, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,115,253.00

Obesity is a lifestyle-related illness that has become a major social problem
nationally and worldwide. The significant prevalence of obesity and overweight
poses a major social and public health challenge; particularly as obesity is a
root cause for increasing the risk of illnesses from hypertension, to diabetes
and stroke, and even cancer. Our objective is to transform health and medical
practices through non-invasive, personalized, affordable and continuous
diagnostics, allowing users to monitor their fat metabolism and control their
weight loss, thereby helping manage obesity or metabolic disorders. This
objective will be realized by novel engineering approaches and scientific
advancements that relate the monitoring of skin gases to metabolic rates and fat
burning. This work aims to validate empirically the new concept of skin-based
diagnostics via wearable and wireless device prototypes that are non-intrusive
(no microneedles) and not dependent on sweat and can be used continuously and
without effort. Major innovations with broad applicability to become enabled by
this work include chemo- actuating devices, wearable antennas, RF power
harvesting, gas-proof packaging technology, physiological models for metabolic
rate, and testing skin acetone as a metabolic biomarker. Novel diagnostics that
are affordable, non-invasive, non-intrusive, proving real-time assessment of the
metabolic state of the individual. A new workforce will be trained in cross-
disciplinary practices. Outreach events and interactive games will target
education of local community and students interested in continuous health
monitoring and weight management. In summary, this project is expected to
revolutionize inexpensive, ubiquitous, non-invasive, non-intrusive, medical
diagnostics based on skin-gas detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
involves novel engineering approaches (skin-gas sensing, battery-less wearable
devices) together with innovations in computer/information science
(physiological predictive models) and social cybernetics. At the core of this
new wearable monitoring technology sits a novel proposed smart material designed
to exhibit reversible actuating behavior when exposed to skin acetone, a
chemical known to directly relate to fat metabolism. This material will be
integrated with a novel electromagnetic transducer realized on conductive
threads to convert shape deformations into voltage changes. Through the
integration of circuitry and wireless transmission capabilities all components
will be embedded into a wearable skin strip that will be isolated from the
environment via advanced water and gas-proof glassy materials. Human subject
experiments will be performed to obtain an accurate dynamical relationship
between acetone and fat-metabolism and for calibrating and testing the novel
monitoring technology. Finally, open source groupware tools harnessing advances
in social cybernetics will be employed to process skin acetone measurements from
individuals in a group and provide useful feedback on behavioral modifications
towards improving health and weight control through the use of social networks.
All aspects of the system will be improved iteratively via sample-efficient
multi-level optimization algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.