* 2014629
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of point-of-care diagnostics to direct the appropriate use of antibiotics for the treatment of high-risk urinary tract infections
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Angel Resendez, BioAmp Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will provide critical
development of a rapid diagnostic test capable of delivering the antibiotic
resistance profile of a sample collected from patients suspected of suffering
from urinary tract infections (UTIs). In the US there are approximately 8
million UTIs, and an increasing number of are caused by drug-resistant bacteria
that significantly complicate the treatment of these infections. In general,
patients suffering from a drug resistant UTI take longer to receive appropriate
treatment, resulting in a greater risk of disease progression and onset of
secondary comorbidities. Diagnostic tests that can rapidly identify drug-
resistant UTIs will have a strong and positive impact on the treatment of these
infections. The proposed work aims to optimize and expand the diagnostic
capacity of a first-generation diagnostic assay to create a fully comprehensive
test that can detect a drug-resistant UTI in minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed SBIR Phase I project will advance the development of a dual-enzyme
trigger-enabled cascade technology (DETECT), developed to detect low-abundant
beta-lactamases produced by uropathogens to hydrolyze beta-lactamase
antibiotics, rendering them ineffective. The presence of beta-lactamase-
producing uropathogens can greatly complicate clinical decision-making because
these pathogens are regularly resistant to the first-line antibiotics considered
for treatment of urinary tract infections (UTIs). DETECT, applied as a
diagnostic system, holds the potential to significantly improve the care of UTIs
because it enables rapid identification of beta-lactamase-producing uropathogens
directly from urine samples. The clinical feasibility of the technology has been
demonstrated previously using clinical urine samples, first targeting a subset
of beta-lactamases known as CTX-Ms. The proposed work aims to tune and optimize
the first-generation system to offer a comprehensive diagnostic test that can
accurately identify all of the clinically important beta-lactamases. This
technology provides a simple, low-tech, and cost-effective way to inform patient
treatment without the need of processing, urine sedimentation or centrifugation,
or sophisticated instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.