* 2014547
* SCH: INT: Surveillance and Control of Mosquito-Borne Diseases through Automated Species Identification and Spatiotemporal Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sriram Chellappan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2024
* USD 932,000.00

The spread of mosquito-borne diseases poses an urgent threat to the Nation's and
the world's health and welfare. Many of these diseases (West Nile disease,
dengue fever, malaria, Zika) have become endemic, and outbreaks have been
estimated to result annually in 2.7 million deaths worldwide. The state of
Florida is a domestic epicenter for mosquito-borne diseases, with a devastating
Zika outbreak in 2018 and locally transmitted cases of dengue fever in 2019 and
2020. The majority of known mosquito-borne diseases are transmitted by three
common mosquito genera, namely Aedes, Anopheles, and Culex. Because there are no
vaccines or cures available for many of these diseases, real-time surveillance
is critical in deploying countermeasures, such as more targeted insecticide
treatment and public information campaigns, to eliminate breeding habitats and
mitigate disease outbreaks. This award supports research to develop a platform
for large-scale automated identification of mosquito genera and species via
smartphone images. The platform will enable citizens to upload smartphone images
to contribute to real-time data data on mosquito populations
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate deep learning
techniques for automated classification of mosquito species from smartphone
images. Mosquito identification is a challenging problem, as species differences
are not obvious to the untrained eye. Identification techniques will be based on
segmentation of different anatomical features of mosquitoes. The project will
result in validated algorithms for automated classification of species at scale.
The algorithms will be embedded in a platform for crowd-sourced input of
geographically-tagged images of mosquitoes and dead birds. These data will be
leveraged to detect introductions of invasive mosquitoes, generate mosquito
distribution maps, and produce real-time risk maps to enable early detection of
disease outbreaks. The identification methods are expected to be useful for the
classification of other insect species and to further investigations in mosquito
ecology and evolutionary biology with the goal of improving public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.