* 2014838
* SBIR Phase I:  On demand Plasma Production of Hydrogen Peroxide Solution
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Yuriy Mirochnik, LDS TECHNOLOGY CONSULTANTS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the development of new
disinfection devices that will reduce the number of food- and water-related
illnesses. This project will reduce spreading of infectious diseases,
particularly in hospitals, nursing homes, farms, and veterinary clinics. The
devices will be used to generate locally on-demand hydrogen-peroxide-based food-
grade disinfectant using only water and electricity. The disinfectant will be
used during the washing of fresh produce and ready-to-eat food, food packaging,
and commercial ice-makers, where conventional disinfectants are not applicable
in reasonable concentrations because they would leave residuals, including
harmful byproducts and a strong unpleasant odor. The devices will also be used
for the direct disinfection of drinking water, ice-makers, and recycled water.
The devices will be especially useful for water disinfection in remote
locations, where electricity can be generated using local and/or renewable
energy sources. On-demand decentralized water disinfection can be useful in
remote locations and disasters affecting centralized clean water
supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project utilizes properties of
low-energy electric discharge in water for efficient generation and
recombination of hydroxyl radicals that result in the production of hydrogen
peroxide with low energy consumption. The technology development includes: 1)
Positioning of electrodes in a controlled water stream; 2) Optimization of the
power supply; 3) Development of a water circulation system with appropriate
local pressure control; 4) Development of an efficient use of the treated water
to minimize total consumption of electricity. Verification and validation will
take place through standard methods to optimize the system’s disinfection
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.