* 2014094
* Local Dynamics and Control of Noisy Two-Level Systems Coupled to a Central Qubit
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Alexander Sushkov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Quantum coherence is the fundamental resource that gives quantum devices (such
as quantum sensors and quantum computers) their advantage over the corresponding
classical devices. Hence, loss of coherence (or “decoherence”) ultimately limits
the performance of any quantum device. This loss of coherence is always due to
the interaction of the device with its environment, and although the details of
the process can be very different for different systems, in many cases the main
source of decoherence turns out to be the noise produced by nearby quantum
entities known as “two-level systems”. This experimental project will focus on
the development of methods and strategies to mitigate the decoherence due to
such systems. The ultimate goal is to enable implementation of quantum sensors
and quantum heat machines operating near maximum sensitivity and efficiency, and
to improve the performance of other promising quantum architectures, such as
some superconducting quantum devices. This work will advance knowledge in the
field of quantum science, with impact on both fundamental science and on quantum
device engineering. The benefits of this project will be expanded by
incorporating an outreach effort designed to spark interest in science among
under-represented high-school students and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common mitigation strategy for the decoherence due to
ensembles of two-level systems (such as tunneling defects, paramagnetic
adsorbants, or near-surface states) focuses on materials and surface engineering
to try to minimize the density of these ensembles. This experimental project
will pursue a different approach: investigate with nanoscale resolution the
fundamental dynamical properties of a two-dimensional ensemble of paramagnetic
two-level systems, and develop methods to engineer the quantum state of the
ensemble, in order to extend the coherence time of a nearby qubit. The proposed
work will focus on single nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center qubits in diamond,
coupled to localized electronic spins on the diamond surface. NV centers will be
used as quantum sensors, enabling the study of surface spin dynamics at the
single-spin level. In parallel, NV centers will also be used as single-qubit
cold reservoirs, enabling local cross-polarization of the surface spin ensemble.
The objectives are to advance the fundamental understanding of the microscopic
dynamical properties of disordered many-body quantum systems with long-range
interactions, and to develop techniques for local quantum control of ensembles
of interacting spin systems coupled to a central qubit. This project is being
co-funded by the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.