* 2014942
* SBIR Phase I:  Power-Optimized Beamforming Front-End Technology for High-Capacity Millimeter-Wave Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Avish Kosari, SKYGIG, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project can positively impact a wide range of data-
intensive wireless communication applications. An order of magnitude increase in
bandwidth can enable much faster connection speeds for various communication
applications, including 5G cellular, wireless infrastructure, and satellite
communications. This project will enable network operators to rapidly roll-out
advanced 5G wireless telecommunication networks. This technology will enable
service providers to deploy cost-effective broadband connectivity to millions of
underserved users and bridge the digital divide. Multiple industry sectors
ranging from smart transportation, online healthcare, education, manufacturing,
and smart city initiatives will be positively impacted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project creates the core of a novel MMW front-end system architecture and RF
Integrated Circuits system technology for the next generation of high-capacity
MMW wireless communications. This project offers a unique MMW front-end
technology, with a fundamentally different architecture compared to the existing
state-of-the-art MMW wireless modules, that provides an ultra-high gain beam-
forming wireless technology. In addition, the proposed technology significantly
reduces the power consumption and RF losses compared to the conventional MMW
front-end technologies. This project will investigate and demonstrate the
performance of the proposed MMW beamforming front-end architecture, along with
beamformer key building blocks for adaptation in highly efficient and high-
capacity wireless networks. This technology supports an order of magnitude
improvement in communication speeds compared to the existing MMW wireless
solutions and enables many high-speed communication
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.