* 2014603
* SBIR Phase I:  Viability of Low-Cost Cell Components for XL Batteries' Mild Aqueous Flow Battery
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Paul Evans, XL BATTERIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,156.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a grid-scale battery to enable
large-scale energy storage. Such a battery would improve the performance and
reliability of existing power infrastructure, and it would ultimately enable
storing backup power from intermittent renewable sources, such as wind and
solar. US grid storage capacity today is less than 0.01% of daily generation,
95% of which is geographically-limited pumped hydroelectric storage technology
that is already installed where possible. The demand for new grid-level energy
storage is seen in the growing use of portable lithium ion technology as a
stopgap measure, with storage deployments in 2019 nearly doubling compared to
2018. Specifically, this project will enable a new battery with instant response
that is inexpensive, has a 20+ year stability, and is non-flammable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to validate the use of
inexpensive and easy-to-manufacture materials in the fabrication of the cell
components of a pH-neutral aqueous, organic redox flow battery (RFB). Current
commercial RFBs, such as vanadium systems, utilize expensive materials to
withstand their corrosive electrolytes and extreme pH levels. This leads to high
component and fabrication costs for the electrochemical cell, inhibiting
translation of the technology. Using mild chemistry in pH-neutral conditions is
likely to enable the use of inexpensive cell materials. This research project
will work to ensure that ubiquitous, inexpensive, and easy-to-manufacture
fabrication materials do not impact the stability of a novel 20+ year lifetime
pH-neutral aqueous organic flow battery. These materials, such as polyethylene,
polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride and other common rubbers and plastics, will be
systematically exposed to both the charged and neutral electrolyte for
subsequent analysis by NMR, LC/MS, mass spectrometry, surface characterization,
stress tests, and various other techniques to ensure that no degradation of
their chemical or physical properties occurs. Additional performance tests will
be conducted and a prototype will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.