* 2014552
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Privacy-Preserving Federated Transfer Learning for Early Acute Kidney Injury Risk Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Bo Luo, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 579,941.00

Federated learning enables hospitals to collaboratively learn a shared global
model while ensuring patient privacy; however, there is a big statistical
challenge for our application owing to EHR heterogeneities, i.e. difference in
patient characteristics and clinical observations made or feature space. Thus,
real-world EHR data from different hospitals are never independently and
identically distributed (IID). The proposed research is to overcome this
statistical challenge while improving security for federated learning
by&lt;br/&gt;leveraging a large integrated EHR dataset with medical records for
more than 21 million patients from 12 healthcare systems spanning across 9 US
states. A novel privacy-preserving federated transfer learning framework is
proposed for building a robust and accurate AKI prediction model that require
learning on real-world EHR data from siloed healthcare systems. This project
will (1) develop novel transfer learning solutions to address three distinct
non-IID EHR data analytic scenarios, (2) develop a novel federated learning
framework with a dynamic weighting aggregation mechanism to build a robust and
accurate Acute kidney injury (AKI) prediction model; and (3) develop a
comprehensive privacy-preserving federated transfer learning framework with
novel privacy-preserving solutions to address the unique privacy challenges in
the proposed transfer learning applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project proposes new transfer learning solutions to combat the non-IID challenge
in federated learning and new security building blocks tailored for homogeneous
and heterogeneous transfer learning tasks. Together the project will develop a
privacy-preserving federated transfer learning framework to provide a first
practical solution for non-IID clinical data scenarios. Our research methods and
findings will provide promising new directions to machine learning for
healthcare and will contribute to both academic research and potential
commercialized products. More importantly, the interpretable nature of the base
gradient boosting machine model in the proposed federated transfer learning
framework will provide better understanding of the predictors from which
clinicians can use to design prevention and management strategies for high-risk
patients.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Smart and Connected Health
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.