* 2014266
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel drug delivery system using engineered exosomes
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Souvenir Tachado, SOUVIE BIODELIVERY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

he broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project entails developing an novel drug delivery
platform to deliver drug into poorly accessible druggable targets. Drugs
targeting inflammation are encapsulated in an new way for treatment of chronic
inflammatory diseases such as psoriasis, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis. Biological
therapies remain the standard for autoimmune diseases, but patients can have
immune system problems due to the production of autoantibodies. This project
addresses this challenge with a novel encapsulation technology that delivers
biological therapies to hard-to-reach inflammation sites. This technology could
be advantageous because it reduces immunosuppression and anti-drug antibodies
production. This project will improve patient treatment outcomes and reduce
treatment reduce cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will test a proof-of-concept that entails
demonstrating that an exosome-based delivery vehicle for biologics will
potentially inhibit inappropriate TLR-driven inflammation. Induction of
autoimmune diseases including psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis and lupus strongly
correlate with chronic inflammation driven by inflammatory signaling pathways
mediated by endosomal TLRs. Our goal is to develop an exosome-based therapy that
can inhibit poorly accessible endosomal TLR7-driven inflammation. To test this
concept, our plan involves genetically modifying human cell lines to produce
engineered exosomes that contain anti-TLR7 antibody to inhibit endosomal
TLR7-driven inflammation. We will develop a drug encapsulation platform in which
engineered exosomes bear an anti-TLR7 antibody fused with an exosome
transmembrane protein called tetraspanin. This complex delivers an antibody
payload to TLR7 targets located in on endosomal membrane inner surface. This
anti-TLR7 antibody will bind to dimer-interfaces of TLR7 monomer and thereby
block TLR7 receptor dimerization, which in turn blocks proinflammatory
signaling. This work is important because blocking TLR7 receptor activation,
which is situated upstream in the signaling cascade, will presumably diminish
immunosuppression and lead to a better outcome that current anti-TNF therapies
that are more broad spectrum because their site of action is downstream in a
signaling pathway axis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.