* 2014648
* SBIR Phase I:  A study of the electromechanical failure modes in HASEL actuators
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Timothy Morrissey, ARTIMUS ROBOTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2021
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the development of mechanical
devices used in robotics systems. Despite advancements in AI and computer
vision, robots and machines are still limited by the actuators used: Motors are
heavy, expensive, and not adaptable for variable tasks, while pneumatics are
plagued by trade-offs between speed and portability, low efficiency, and
controllability. This Phase I project focuses on the development of
Hydraulically Amplified Self-Healing ELectrostatic (HASEL) actuators - a new
class of self-sensing, high-speed, soft electrohydraulic actuators with benefits
in high performance, low cost, and versatility. Phase I will address the failure
mechanisms of HASEL actuators in order to improve reliability and robustness for
applications including industrial automation, consumer robotics, and defense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to investigate and enhance the electromechanical performance of
HASEL actuators to evaluate their long-term commercial viability. The three key
objectives of this project are: 1) Studying the dielectric characteristics of
the HASEL actuators using material science approaches to enhance the breakdown
strength of actuators, (2) Investigating the influence of inhomogeneous electric
field concentration on HASEL actuators using electromechanical testing to
further mitigate the influence of such effects, and, 3) Translating the results
from objectives 1 and 2 to develop and characterize HASEL actuators using
industrially-relevant metrics such as force output, lifetime, and specific
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.