* 2014264
* SCH: INT: Pediatric motor rehabilitation via socially interacting robot swarms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* James Galloway, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,099,340.00

Each year, 10,000 infants in the U.S. alone develop cerebral palsy and 4,000
infants have birth defects of the spine and the brain. The motor delays for
these infants have lifelong social and economic consequences, not only for the
families, but also for the society as a whole. Currently, infants with mobility
impairments do not have access to the type of adaptive, dynamic, and autonomous
play-based activity that mobile robots can provide. Our current scientific
understanding of the significant neuroplastic and neuromuscular changes in
developing children is not at pace with the state-of-the-art in pediatric
rehabilitation, which still cannot meet the needs of millions of school-aged
children with special needs. By the age of 4 or 5, most of these children have
permanently lost the daily rich motor and cognitive stimulation of the early
years. In addition, the vast majority of therapy activities are initiated and
directed by adult caregivers; yet exclusive and continuous adult control can be
exhausting and deprive the child from the chance to freely explore her dynamic
environment. This project’s research activities will introduce the scientific
innovations necessary for robotic toy swarm-enabled high-dosage pediatric
rehabilitation. The robotic toy swarms will be designed to be responsive to
children’s brain activity so they can be both physically and intellectually
engaged. The envisioned innovations will not only disrupt the status quo in
infant motor rehabilitation, but can also alleviate current stressors to special
need children caregivers. In this way, this project will promote directly one of
the key desired societal outcomes identified by NSF, which is the improvement of
well-being of individuals in society, and indirectly that of increasing the
economic competitiveness of the U.S. primarily through the expected increase in
productivity for individuals with motor disabilities over the course of their
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal puts forth a research plan that enables
the development of an enriched infant motor rehabilitation environment, which
involves stimulation by swarms of robotic toys that are socially interacting
with infants in play-based activities. Our hypothesis is that appropriately
designed swarm motion behaviors can keep infants engaged in active game-play,
and that child-swarm interaction can be coordinated in real-time based on non-
invasive imagery and electroencephalograpy (EEG) measurements. The research plan
expands along four key axes that aim at the following specific goals: (i) the
design of collective motion behaviors specifically for social child-robot
interaction; (ii) the development of resource-aware perception algorithms for
real-time monitoring and tracking of this dynamic interaction; (iii) the
production of EEG data processing methods to provide real-time feedback on
subject engagement; and finally (iv) the integration of this technology into an
adaptive and reactive enriched environment that delivers intervention and
assesses motor rehabilitation outcomes. This proposal pushes the envelope in
pediatric motor rehabilitation by introducing coordinated socially-interacting
smart toys as an adaptive human-machine interface within an enriched
environment. The intellectual contributions include (a) new intervention
pathways to neuroplastic and neuromuscular changes in developing children that
utilize directed play-based interaction; (b) a new mathematical architecture for
regulating human-swarm interaction that is not based on direct human input or
explicit commands; (c) quantitative neurophysiological metrics of infant
engagement with highly mobile and interactive smart toys; and (d) new resource-
aware, robust and consistent multi-target tracking algorithms that leverage deep
networks. These contributions will be significant because they will identify
specific fundamental relationships between coordinated object motion behavior
and infant perception and action, and exploit them to drive therapeutic
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.