* 2014979
* STTR Phase I:  Vertical Structure Thin Film Transistors for High Performance Displays and Internet of Things Devices
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Dong-Kyun Ko, Solsona Enterprise LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 224,900.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve the performance of flat panel
displays of various form factors and sizes. One of the key subsystems of a flat
panel display is a TFT (Thin Film Transistor) backplane that drives the pixels
in the panel. There are increasing demands for improved resolution and frame
rate in displays, posing significant challenges on the performance of the TFT
backplane. The proposed STTR research will produce TFT devices that are several
orders of magnitude faster using existing semiconductor materials. This
technology will lead to more capable solutions for displays, printed
electronics, and internet-of-things applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project develops a novel Thin
Film Transistor (TFT) design for displays and other electronics that require
transistors. Conventional TFT transistors switch current laterally and are
difficult to reduce below micron-level sizes. The proposed research will produce
TFT transistors that switch current vertically. The path length across which the
switching occurs is much shorter in the vertical devices and therefore the
switching happens faster and can carry more current than conventional designs.
This project develops a vertical TFT using amorphous indium gallium zinc oxide
semiconductors. The project will advance the development of a prototype vertical
TFT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.