* 2014255
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Medical Supply Dispenser to Decrease Spread of COVID-19 to Healthcare Professionals
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Cheryl Lohman, MEDAPPTIC, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to protect healthcare workers and conserve
personal protective equipment (PPE) through automated medication delivery. The
healthcare system is facing an unprecedented emergency during the COVID-19
crisis. The US has just 3.3 hospital beds available per 1,000 people, and
healthcare workers have accounted for 10% of COVID-19 cases in Italy. This
project will decrease the frequency of direct contact with patients through a
medication dispenser integrated with the Electronic Health Record (EHR). In the
near term, it will lower the chance of transmission of the novel coronavirus,
saving limited PPE supplies, and potentially alleviating mounting pressure on
the healthcare system. In the longer term, it can be used for other medical
conditions; for instance, it can enable a patient to self-administer pain
medication in a device that provides reporting for EHR and the physician,
potentially addressing the national opioid epidemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is for the design and
development of a medical device managed by secure software and integrated with
the Electronic Health Record (EHR) via FHIR (Fast Hospital Interoperability
Resources), an emerging protocol and evolution of HL7 (Health Level 7) intended
to radically simplify the data interface in the EHR system. The outcome of the
project is to further the interface between the device and the hospital EHR
through FHIR. The SBIR Phase 1 project is focused on defining challenges for
this EHR-FHIR integration, including potential cybersecurity
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.