* 2014661
* SBIR Phase I:  Mimicking Metatarsophalangeal Joints Using Tailored Ultra-Dissipative Liquid-Crystalline Elastomers to Treat Hallux Rigidus
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Amir Torbati, IMPRESSIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2022
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to treat arthritis in joints. This project
will advance the use of special materials for joint repair, which permit devices
to mimic the naturally soft tissues of the body and provide anatomically correct
support. These materials also offer the advantages of minimally invasive
surgery, development of patient-specific devices. It will offer the ability to
arthritis in joints in the foot, hand, knee (e.g. total knee replacement), spine
(e.g. total disc replacement), and repair of any load-bearing orthopedic tissue,
such as meniscus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on advancing
the translation of Liquid-Crystalline Elastomers (LCE) as a cartilage
replacement device for the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint to treat hallux
rigidus. Hallux rigidus is a joint disorder at the base of the big toe. This
project will be the first to investigate LCEs for orthopedic applications and
develop an MTP joint repair using LCEs. LCEs have vastly superior energy
dissipation properties relative to traditional elastomers, such as silicone or
hydrogels. This project will demonstrate LCEs for treatment of degenerated
joints by drawing from the disciplines of liquid-crystal elastomer science,
viscoelasticity, and bioengineering. LCEs are known for behavior that is similar
to biological tissues. This proposed project will accomplish: 1) synthesizing an
LCE to mimic mechanical properties of natural joint to minimize wear rate under
simulated physiological conditions; and 2) validation of biomechanical
performance and biocompatibility of LCEs in comparison to the state of
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.