* 2014869
* SBIR Phase I:  3D Markerless Motion Capture Technology For Gait Analysis During Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Andrew Ekelem, EVOLUTION DEVICES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2021
* USD 244,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance diagnosis and treatment of walking
disorders and associated rehabilitation. An estimated 50 million Americans
experience gait (walking) impairment due to injury, disease, and age, and more
than 38,800 physical therapy clinics treat these patients. This project will
develop an artificial intelligence system to extract gait metrics from video
data from cameras surrounding a small area. A new diagnostic tool will track
nuanced gait metrics throughout rehabilitation treatment. This technology will
enable new and faster ways for physical therapists to precisely diagnose gait
abnormalities and track treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project could result in a system to diagnose
gait deficiencies for people who suffer from neurological impairments. The
proposed project will develop a markerless three-dimensional motion capture
system to accurately diagnose gait pathologies in a time- and cost-efficient
manner for clinicians. The project will: validate of the markerless motion
capture system to ensure accurate measurement of raw kinematic metrics within
10% error of standard methods and potentially expand the system metrics; and
conduct verification and validation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.