* 2014652
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Anti-static Device for Electrostatic Discharge Mitigation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Daan Stevenson, Stevenson Engineering, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2021
* USD 219,516.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to revolutionize the electrostatic discharge
(ESD) prevention market. Currently available ESD mitigation products often
inhibit the mobility of the user, lack reliability, or are prohibitively
expensive. The proposed system enables reliable and economical wireless
prevention of electrostatic shocks for customers handling sensitive electronics
or working near explosives, offering increased safety and productivity. The
development has the potential to increase employee efficiency and manufacturing
reliability in various electronics-based industries. The status quo, a tethered
grounding wrist strap, severely inhibits the mobility of the user, and leads to
considerable potential for neglect or misuse by careless employees. Where
workers might have abstained from using tethered wrist straps because of their
inconvenience, the proposed innovation will decisively prevent disruptive or
even catastrophic ESD events. The proposed innovation has applications in other
markets to alleviate the burden and potential danger of frequent electric
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project is expected to advance the state of the art in antistatic technology.
Preventing electrostatic discharge is crucial when working with sensitive
electronics or in hazardous environments. The project will develop a reliable
wireless device that equalizes the wearer's electrostatic charge. The system
developed here will reliably sense when the electric potential of a capacitive
object surpasses a threshold relative to its adjacent environment. Second, a
miniaturized charge transfer device will actively expel the excess charge from
the body to its surroundings. Lastly, the two components will function
harmoniously in a discrete package to reliably keep the user's electric
potential equalized. An experimental testbed has been developed to mimic the
charged human body and verify technical aspects of the core
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.