* 2014229
* SBIR Phase I:  Eyes in Sync
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Maureen Powers, Eyes in Synch LLC
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 245,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance technologies for vision improvement. Many suffer from
undetected problems with moving their eyes for reading, and current technologies
do not reveal this in school screenings or sometimes, even in doctor's offices.
This product will be an app designed for smartphones to engage children in games
that build skills for optimally using the two eyes together, a critical element
in reading ability and visual performance. The innovation will enhance
scientific and technological understanding by integrating in one app eye
movement, psychophysical, and reading fluency assessment. The technical result
will be an all-in-one, portable, easy and fun-to-use solution for improving
visual skills and reading in children. It will provide data to learning
technologists to improve solutions customized to address conditions, such as
dyslexia and autism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the issue of “functional binocular
vision” or FBV. When the eyes do not look at exactly the same place, or when
they cannot move across a page of text accurately and efficiently, discomfort
often occurs. This discomfort causes children in particular to stop reading,
affecting their learning. The project aims to develop and test an approach less
expensive and more appealing than solutions available today. The proposed app
will test existing visual skills (convergence and tracking) and reading fluency,
then track the eyes as they move while the user plays games. Users receive
points for being able to identify targets; they can only perceive the targets if
their eyes are working together correctly. The technology will enable users to
get immediate feedback on how they performed in the games (their visual skill
level) and how their reading speed (fluency) improves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.