* 2014659
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Building Scale Urine Treatment System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Abraham Noe-Hays, RICH EARTH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2021
* USD 244,994.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project lies in transforming a source of water pollution into a renewable source
of fertilizer, which will reduce dependence on non-renewable resources for both
wastewater treatment and fertilizer production. Rather than combining all
domestic wastewater into one dilute stream, this project inverts the paradigm by
separating out and recycling the largest source of nutrient pollution: urine.
Special toilets with a separate drain at the front of the bowl direct urine
through dedicated plumbing to a compact building-scale processor, which converts
it into a purified liquid fertilizer. This technology will have immediate
utility in sensitive watersheds where regulations require landowners to remove
nitrogen from wastewater using expensive septic systems upgrades. Urine
diversion could be an alternative to such upgrades, at a lower cost, with less
ongoing energy demand, and with the added benefit of producing fertilizer as an
end product. When the technology is more mature, it could be applied in areas
served by central sewers, as a decentralized nutrient recovery strategy. The
technology will create jobs in installation and service, reduce the load on
wastewater treatment plants, help restore our waterways, and yield a clean,
domestically-produced fertilizer for use in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will advance
translation of a building-scale urine collection and treatment system is paired
with commercially-available urine-diverting toilet fixtures to create an
advanced resource recovery system with a conventional bathroom experience. The
system employs a four-step process: acidification, pasteurization, freeze
concentration, and charcoal filtration. The combined effect of these four steps
includes volume reduction, odor control, nutrient stabilization, and removal of
contaminants such as pathogens and pharmaceutical residues. The project has two
main goals: 1) measuring the energy requirements of the treatment steps, using
these data to optimize the freeze concentration step; and 2) testing the
performance during ongoing operation to identify and address problems relating
to biofilm or mineral scale formation. The proposed freeze concentrator uses a
proprietary technology that is mechanically simple, energy-efficient, and
scalable to a small physical footprint. In addition to urine diversion, this
device could have useful applications in other fields requiring a small,
mechanically simple, and inexpensive dewatering system. The four processing
subsystems will be designed using thermal and hydraulic modeling, and tested
using real urine from a source-separating toilet. Subsystems will be tested
individually for performance and energy efficiency, and then together as an
integrated system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.