* 2014890
* SBIR Phase I:  AI Enabled Cameras for Fire Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Emilio Pineda, VOLANT AERIAL INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2021
* USD 244,830.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from the potential to reduce devastation from forest fires.
Wildfires across the world increasingly cause devastating impacts on local
economies, human life, air quality, natural resources, property value, jobs and
wages. In 2018, more than 58 million wildfires burned 8.8 million acres in the
U.S. A system that alerts authorities within minutes (vs. days) dramatically
increases the ability to minimize property damage and loss of life. The goal of
this project is to develop a precise computationally efficient AI-based software
solution for thermal (infrared) imaging detection of fire, to be implemented on
various remote and moving platforms, such as manned aircraft and unmanned aerial
vehicles. The resulting technology will be more precise than current solutions
due to the incorporation of a unique approach to machine learning based on the
use of real-life and artificially created training datasets. In addition, it
will be developed to function “at the edge” to enable local, real-time
operations in remote locations. A Deep Convolutional Learning approach should
dramatically improve current mathematical models, potentially saving thousands
of lives and billions of dollars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate how a solution utilizing
Deep Convolutional Learning can be successfully applied to the detection of
forest fires from moving or static platforms or in remote locations. The project
takes a unique approach to image recognition using multiplication-free neural
networks based only on the discriminator of a generative adversarial network
(GAN) and training the model with real and artificially created datasets that
address extensive variability of conditions. This will eliminate confusion in
the detection of smoke plumes, which can be caused by clouds and reflections of
bodies of water. Additionally, the development of low-power neural network
algorithms for real-time processing of sensory data will enable the software to
run on low-cost embedded computers for use in remote, resource-constrained
environments. Expectations are for precision levels above 80%, false alarm rates
at less than 1 per 24 hours, time to detection in minutes vs. days and ease of
use in the most remote locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.