* 2014346
* STTR Phase I: Active Transport of Caffeine through a Blood-Brain Barrier Model
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Nicole Hashemi, NISTRON, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to create a drug-discovery platform that will screen quickly and
early in the process for candidate therapeutics that can enter the central
nervous system (CNS). The goal is to minimize the lengthy and expensive clinical
trials that ultimately fail because of their failure to enter the BBB by
providing a high assurance that the drug can pass the blood/brain barrier (BBB).
The project will facilitate discovering next-generation interventional
treatments for serious brain-related diseases and will greatly benefit patients
and families fighting debilitating diseases that are difficult or impossible to
treat with current methods. The ability to screen for BBB penetration early is
needed. An estimated 2% of small drug molecules and no large molecules are able
to pass into CNS to treat neurodegenerative diseases, multiple sclerosis and
strokes, accounting for 12% of total global deaths. Each of these diseases
represents a major healthcare cost and caregiver burden.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on mimicking the BBB. This
work will utilize cylindrical hydrogels to provide three distinct regions for
the growth of multiple types of cells related to the BBB, thereby providing an
environment that is similar to the native system. This will provide a highly
relevant model to visualize the active transport of bioactive molecules across
the BBB to create effective, next-generation therapeutics for use in the CNS.
One goal is to show cell survival throughout ten-day-long trials. Additionally,
the genetic response of the cells within the system will be analyzed to better
understand their behavior, and the systemâ€™s inherent conductivity will show
real-time cell-to-cell communication. Once a model is created, the transport of
caffeine across the model barrier will be studied and compared with known values
of how the molecule acts within the body to begin validating the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.