* 2014617
* FSML: A culture facility for small marine organisms at Shannon Point Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2021
* USD 182,413.00

The Shannon Point Marine Center (SPMC; https://www.wwu.edu/spmc/) has
historically relied on culture methods to study how small marine organisms grow,
feed, and respond to environmental pressures such as ocean acidification.
Single-celled algae and non-photosynthetic protists are also used as foods for
other marine organisms that are the focus of research at SPMC, including larger
zooplankton, endangered pinto abalone, and threatened Pacific herring. This
award supports the acquisition of equipment used for culturing small marine
organisms, particularly single-celled planktonic (free-floating) algae and their
direct consumers. The new culture facility will be used by students at a variety
of levels in both classroom and independent research settings, and will involve
new faculty from the main campus in research at the marine laboratory. The
facility will also support increased collaboration with area resource
management.

The new instrumentation will enable isolation and identification of small marine
organisms (stereomicroscope), maintenance of these organisms in culture
(environmental chambers, laminar flow hood, autoclave) and characterization of
their abundance and condition (flow cytometer). Research areas at SPMC that are
dependent on the ability to isolate and culture small marine organisms include
protist chemical signaling and defense ecology, ocean acidification effects on
regional zooplankton and larval fish biology, invertebrate developmental biology
and ecology, chemical defense studies, and symbiosis research. New research
areas that will require the requested isolation and culturing facilities include
culture of endangered pinto abalone and expansion of ocean acidification studies
to threatened stocks of Pacific herring. Student involvement with the culture
facility will occur through multiple avenues, including a summer REU program
(pending), our graduate Marine and Estuarine Science program, and the capstone
projects envisioned for the new undergraduate major in Marine and Coastal
Sciences. Several of the projects that will use the culture facility have
regional conservation impacts, including testing larval herring diet-development
relationships, and developing methods for culture of endangered pinto abalone.
Through these and other avenues, the culture facility will form or strengthen
existing partnerships with area agencies and stakeholders who have interest in
aquaculture pilot projects (e.g. Puget Sound Restoration Fund, Washington
Department of Ecology) or environmental impact research (e.g. WA Ocean
Acidification Center). Finally, the culture facility will improve our ability to
provide cultures of heterotrophic dinoflagellates and ciliates to researchers
worldwide, a service that has led to numerous significant publications in
plankton ecology, biogeochemistry, and phylogenetics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.