* 2014052
* Imprints of New Physics on Cosmological Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Savvas Koushiappas, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Savvas M. Koushiappas at
Brown University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the matter in the universe takes
the form of a mysterious "dark matter" which is unlike the familiar matter we
deal with in our everyday lives. In the last few years, cosmological
observations and laboratory constraints have shown that the nature of this dark
matter remains elusive. Likewise, there have been many challenges to our
understanding of the basic characteristics of the universe itself. As part of
his research, Professor Koushiappas will attempt to understand the nature of
dark matter and dark energy, explore new possible interactions between dark
matter and regular matter, and attempt to study the cosmological and
gravitational effects of dark-matter properties. As a result, research in this
area advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one
of its most fundamental questions: the discovery and understanding of physical
laws. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts.
Professor Koushiappas will involve graduate students and advanced undergraduate
students in this research, thereby providing critical training for junior
physicists beginning research in this field. He will also give public lectures
on his research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Koushiappas will establish a research program to unite theoretical studies of
the physics of dark matter with current and future cosmological observations.
Bridging the gap between cosmology, astrophysics, and particle physics,
Professor Koushiappas will use observations of the cosmic microwave background,
the growth of structure and high-energy photons and other energetic particles to
tackle fundamental questions about the nature of dark matter, the origin of the
discrepancy in the accelerated expansion rate of the universe, the astrophysical
effects of cosmology, and most importantly the interplay and connections between
these different lines of inquiry. These goals will be achieved through
sophisticated theoretical modeling and through the use of new and existing
statistical and analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.