* 2014730
* SBIR Phase I:  A thermogel-based drug delivery platform for the upper gastrointestinal bleeding treatment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Navdeep Kaur, INTACT THERAPEUTICS
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2022
* USD 244,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an innovative method to treat
upper gastrointestinal bleeding (UGIB). UGIB results in more than 550,000
hospitalizations per year in the US alone with a mortality rate of up to 20%.
The gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding market is projected to be nearly USD 1
billion by 2026, with the overall hemostatic agents market reaching over USD 5
billion. Current solutions require endoscopy performed by a specialist or
hospital admission. The proposed approach is a drinkable formulation to stop
bleeding after ingestion, eliminating the need for endoscopic intervention or
hospitalization. The technology developed in this project could then be applied
to other bleeding scenarios, including field/combat medicine or rapid treatment
of hemorrhage during surgical complications. The gel can also be used as a drug
delivery vehicle for a variety of disorders of the upper GI
tract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will demonstrate a new approach to achieve hemostasis in patients with
upper gastrointestinal bleeding (UGIB), based on a novel thermosensitive gel
(thermogel) formulation. The drinkable formulation is liquid at ambient
temperature and becomes a mucoadhesive gel when warmed to body temperature,
thereby treating hemorrhage in the upper GI tract without the need for
endoscopic intervention. Its action is based on two synergistic effects: (1) The
in situ gelation of the mucoadhesive thermogel provides a mechanical barrier
against blood flow, and (2) the slow release of drugs from the thermogel at the
hemorrhage site enables more rapid healing. Initial efforts will be dedicated to
formulation development wherein compatibility of the thermogel with different
drug candidates will be evaluated, and optimization of the gelation temperature
will be performed. The best formulations will then be tested in vitro for
stability, drug release kinetics, and mucoadhesion. Finally, the effectiveness
of the proposed approach will be assessed in preclinical models of bleeding,
demonstrating its superior ability to reach hemostasis. This is expected to
apply to disorders including gastroesophageal reflux disease, eosinophilic
esophagitis, and oral mucositis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.