* 2014116
* Regulation of Bacterial Growth, Division, and Epigenetic Inheritance Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Hanna Salman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 442,993.00

Microorganisms are in continuous interaction with their environment as well as
with each other. These interactions introduce a wide range of fluctuations that
can influence cell growth and protein expression dynamics. In addition,
intracellular biochemical processes are subject to significant molecular noise.
Nevertheless, microorganisms are able to maintain cellular homeostasis to
promote stability. The control mechanism underlying cellular homeostasis has yet
to be discovered despite extensive efforts. To address this problem, the PI has
recently examined cell size dynamics in long lineages of bacteria measured at
the single-cell level. The results revealed a feedback mechanism that acts to
maintain cell size by adjusting the cell's growth rate after every division
event to offset deviation from the "desired" size generated by the division.
However, despite this fast response to size deviation, cell size exhibits long
term memory that lasts for multiple generations. This memory is clearly
manifested in the epigenetic inheritance patterns measured by the PI using
recently developed experimental techniques. The proposed study aims to further
investigate the cell size homeostasis and reveal its underlying control
mechanism. It also aims to quantitatively measure the non-genetic inheritance
patterns of the different cellular traits and determine their effect on the cell
size variation over time. The study will make use of new experimental techniques
coupled with a mathematical framework to model the results and provide testable
predictions to guide future experiments. The project will integrate research in
the interdisciplinary field of biological physics with education in order to
develop new instructional material for undergraduate and high school students.
This is crucial for today's science education because of the increasing need for
quantitative understanding of biological systems in research and industry. The
PI's plan is to: (i) Include high school teachers and students in research
projects in the PI's laboratory and develop instructional material based on
their work to be distributed to high schools in the area. Students from under-
represented minority groups are particularly encouraged to participate in this
initiative, and (ii) Develop biophysics experiments for students' undergraduate
laboratories. The program will expand the science curricula of the undergraduate
program and of high schools in the area to include material in the
interdisciplinary field of biophysics. This will increase the interest among
high school students in the field and encourage them to pursue higher education
in science. It will also provide undergraduate students with more career and
education opportunities, which can attract more students to the physics
department at the University of Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular
homeostasis is a fundamental process for all self-replicating organisms. It is
what ensures reliable progression of living cells. Therefore, it is of paramount
importance to understand its control mechanism. In addition, non-genetic
phenotypic inheritance, which works to maintain cellular properties along
generations, plays an important role in many biological phenomena. The change of
cellular properties over time can often help the cell survive a changing
environment. In other instances it can be detrimental such as in the case of the
growth of cancer metastasis. Thus, the ability to measure inheritance patterns
and characterize them quantitatively will allow us in the future to predict cell
fate and modify it if needed. The research proposed will deliver new
experimental data that challenge existing theories. It will also provide a
comprehensive description of how the long-term inheritance and the fast
intracellular processes integrate to achieve stable cellular traits, and at the
same time generate a wide range of phenotypic variability among members of the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.