* 2014749
* SBIR Phase I:  New laparoscopic power morcellator with containment system for minimally invasive surgeries.
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Doug Porter, BLOSSOM SURGICAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,892.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
advance the development of a novel system for abdominal minimally invasive
surgery (MIS). The proposed procedure will be a safer, cleaner, and more
efficient method of removing tissue specimens, such as a uterine fibroid,
uterus, kidney or spleen, through a small incision. Existing MIS methods and
instruments are not yet optimized for the removal of the separated tissue from
the cavity without enlarging an incision or limiting the surgeon's visualization
and maneuverability. The proposed method will use novel, safer and more
efficient instruments developed for the removal of large tissue specimens via
MIS. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will explore translation of an
integrated power morcellator and containment system for cutting and removing
large tissue specimens from inside a cavity without subsequent contamination.
The proposed project is to conduct tests with standard MIS equipment, including
a 5mm 30 degree angled laparoscope, laparoscopic camera, light source and
monitor, and a CO2 rapid insufflator. The specimens to be cut will be beef
tongue and potato, which is representative of a fibroid uterus. The proposed
project will inform a surgical protocol to 1) improve safety and efficiency, and
2) prevent cavity contamination by the removed tissue. The simulator and trocar
sleeves will be evaluated for traces of tissue contamination using the highly-
precise ATP test. The project will explore the parameter space associated with
the procedure, including the maximum time the power morcellator is in the on
position, blade temperatures, and cavity pressure; as well as post-procedure
examinations of the blades and shaft for cracks and fatigue fractures; and of
the containers for abrasions, punctures and leaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.