* 2014114
* RUI: Studies of Nucleon Structure at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Heddle, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 510,000.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons (protons and neutrons) are made
up of more elementary constituents: quarks and gluons. The research program
supported by this award aims to study the internal structure of nucleons. More
specifically, the PIs and their team of students will scatter electrons from
protons and neutrons at Jefferson Laboratory to measure the electric and
magnetic properties of the nucleon, which represent where the quarks and gluons
are inside the nucleons. This group contributes to these efforts through the
design of new experiments, the construction of advanced particle detectors, and
the development of novel analysis, modeling, and data acquisition software. The
PIs provide meaningful, substantive projects to both undergraduate and graduate
students. The PIs’ mentoring of the students in these challenging projects
prepares the students for STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group’s long-
established program of experiments embody Jefferson Lab’s fundamental mission:
to elucidate the underlying structure of protons, neutrons, and mesons. They
focus on experiments that will further our understanding of the quark spin
structure of the proton and neutron in the non-perturbative regime. As this
program moves forward using Jefferson Lab’s recently commissioned 12 GeV
electron beam, this group is poised to take advantage of the increased physics
reach. The PIs continue to lead efforts to extend the measurements of the proton
and neutron electromagnetic form factors to the highest momentum transfers
possible at Jefferson Lab, and also investigate possible modification of the
proton form factor ratio within the nuclear medium. These experiments provide
strong tests of the available theoretical models of nucleon structure, and at
the same time serve as an impetus for the development of new and more advanced
models based on Quantum Chromo-Dynamics (QCD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.