* 2014934
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Diagnostic Test for Pulmonary Embolism Based on Artificial Intelligence and Spectral Analysis of Blood
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Artur Adib, BIOCOGNIV INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 209,881.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from the development of a fast, non-invasive, and highly
accurate test to diagnose pulmonary embolism in the emergency department. In the
United States, pulmonary embolism (PE) affects up to 1 million patients per year
and is responsible for nearly 100,000 yearly deaths. Its diagnosis is
challenging due to the presentation of nonspecific symptoms and the lack of
high-accuracy screening methods. While the current standard of care is to rule
out PE with an established blood test (D-Dimer), approximately 90% of those
results are false positives, causing the test to be used with restraint in the
clinic, and leading to both the underdiagnosis of the disease and the overuse of
strongly radiative imaging methods like CT pulmonary angiograms. A new, highly
specific test for PE could increase patient safety, standardize clinical care
processes, reduce costs and save lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and validate a new
diagnostic tool for PE based on the combination of fast blood spectroscopy and
modern machine learning (ML) algorithms. A key aim of the research is
demonstrating that ML combined with blood spectroscopy can substantially
outperform the D-Dimer biomarker test, which has notoriously low specificity
(~40%). An important Phase I milestone will be to show that the specificity of
the resulting PE test either (a) already surpasses that of the D-Dimer test when
trained on the relatively small dataset used in this Phase I proposal, or (b)
substantially increases with the size of the training dataset, so that the test
can outperform D-Dimer simply by procuring a larger pool of blood samples. The
technical challenges addressed in this phase include evaluating different
spectroscopic methods and modalities, minimizing the coefficient of variation
for spectra acquisition, as well as designing and optimizing ML models for one-
dimensional spectral data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.