* 2014088
* SCH: INT: Photoacoustic-Guided Cardiac Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Muyinatu Bell, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Heart disease remains the number one cause of death worldwide. The effectiveness
of interventional heart disease treatment requires the use of x-rays, which can
be harmful to patients as well as operators who experience repeated exposure
over time. In addition, accidental injury to a major nerve near the heart (the
phrenic nerve) can cause breathing difficulties after surgery. These two grand
challenges will be tackled with the combination of light and sound, known as
photoacoustic imaging, which is a promising new method to (1) guide treatment
catheters to the heart with robotic assistance and (2) visualize nerves. First,
this project will advance robotic photoacoustic imaging technology to introduce
a radically new concept that will reduce current reliance on x-rays. Second,
this project will expand our knowledge of critical nerve properties for
photoacoustic imaging to initiate a paradigm shift for nerve visualization
during minimally invasive and open chest heart procedures, which both require
careful navigation around the phrenic nerve. This award will also be a vehicle
to increase minority participation in computer science and engineering, to
mentor the next generation of technological leaders, to develop new course
material related to research findings, and to enable cross-disciplinary sharing
of research results with engineering and clinical communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to synthesize acoustic
models and experimental optical analyses to understand the limits of an
innovative robotic photoacoustic imaging system for guiding cardiac surgeries
and interventions. The project has three fundamental research aims. First, new
acoustic models will be introduced, developed, and refined to predict the
likelihood of photoacoustic signal visualization and segmentation during
photoacoustic-based robot control, which will be used to advocate a novel
paradigm of reduced reliance on x-rays. This prediction will relate fundamental
photoacoustic spatial coherence theory to photoacoustic signal-to-noise ratios
and associated laser energies in order to avoid the time-consuming, trial-and-
error procedures that are currently implemented to determine minimum required
energies for the new technology. This theory-based approach will then be
compared with deep learning approaches that exhibit the potential to exceed
theoretical limits. Second, the currently nonexistent optical properties of
multiple phrenic nerves will be characterized in order to create realistic
expectations for the challenging task of nerve visualization and avoidance
during cardiac procedures. Third, the integration of theoretical acoustic
models, deep learning methods, vision-based robot control, and nerve
characterization results will be evaluated as a novel interconnected system to
guide in vivo cardiac procedures. This research has promising potential to
reduce ionizing radiation exposure, to improve current knowledge of nerve
optical properties, and to eliminate nerve-related injury complications, while
making fundamental contributions to the disciplines of engineering, computer
vision, biomedical optics, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.