* 2014828
* SBIR Phase I:  HumanGo, the Artificial Intelligence based Health Coach Assistant
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Eric Abecassis, HUMANGO INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 223,525.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from helping individuals achieve higher levels of wellness.
The proposed system will collect data from a user’s wearables and other devices
(smart watch, wifi scale, sleep tracker…) for a novel solution. The proposed
project will develop an artificial intelligence (AI) coach monitoring fatigue
and fitness to continuously optimize an integrated fitness, diet, and sleep
plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will use advanced AI and Deep Reinforcement Learning methods to
develop a system that automatically builds and updates a training plan
integrating workouts, diet and recovery subject to real-life conditions such as
work, sickness, etc. Through advanced data preparation leveraging deep learning
techniques, the system will cleanse the data to ensure high quality input data
to the digital avatar. This avatar uses Reinforcement Learning to learn by
exploration the best individualized courses of action for pre-specified goals.
This system will form a novel personalized, predictive, proactive solution for
monitoring health in real time at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.