* 2014027
* Collaborative Research: International Physics of Living Systems Graduate Research Network
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Sharlene Denos, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 282,838.00

The international Physics of Living Systems (iPoLS) graduate research network
(GRN) connects graduate students across the globe who are using methods and
concepts of physical systems to unravel the mysteries of living dynamics. This
inherently interdisciplinary field has undergone a tremendous growth over the
past decade, partly as a result of community efforts such as the iPoLS graduate
research network. This network enables the creation of coherent training
programs, forums for peer-to-peer learning and information transfer, and
provides support for efforts to grow the faculty and student numbers in this
field at US universities. The current project will continue building the network
in the US, and one of the major goals continues to be fostering communication
and cooperation across national boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan
to use network resources to share best practices related both to education and
into the building and support of a diverse community. They will present
innovative plans for the recruitment of undergraduate interns from
underrepresented groups, based on the successful experience of several of the
network nodes. The PIs will collectively explore mechanisms for advocating for
the unique capabilities of PoLS research and PoLS researchers to the broader
biology and biomedicine communities, including the creation of PoLS-based
sessions at major society meetings in cell biology, neuroscience, and
fundamental cancer research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.