* 2014000
* Transitions in Quantum Complexity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Maxim Olchanyi, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,999.00

A universal quantum simulator needs unlimited access to a so-called universal
set of gates. Universal gates, however, are expensive and noisy and therefore a
resource that must be used sparingly with current technology. Understanding how
starting from economical designs one can achieve more universal quantum
simulators with sparse resources is of fundamental importance in both the
construction of realistic quantum computers and in the theoretical understanding
of quantum complexity, quantum chaos, and even black hole physics. Advancing our
understanding of quantum simulators and quantum computers is one of the main
goals of the country's current endeavor in both fundamental and applied science.
Being at the forefront of the upcoming quantum information industrial revolution
will bring enormous benefits for the economy, in particular creating new
opportunities for people from disadvantageous backgrounds and provide an impulse
for the advancement of scientific education at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How universal a quantum circuit is can be captured by how
well it reproduces some average properties of quantum evolutions. In this
project the group aims at studying how by doping circuits made of non-universal
Clifford gates by means of non-Clifford gates one can drive transitions in
quantum complexity and achieve a more universal coverage of the ensemble of
quantum circuits. They study the transitions in quantum complexity by
entanglement complexity, out-of-time-order correlation functions, unitary
t-designs, and the behavior of such circuits under an entanglement cooling
protocol. Moreover, they plan to apply techniques of machine learning by a deep
neural network to both detect the transitions in quantum complexity and to
optimize the circuit architecture given the density of non-Clifford
gates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.