* 2014292
* FSML: Data and Security Infrastructure Improvements to Advance Biological Research at Claytor Nature Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Coco, University of Lynchburg
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 167,592.00

The mission of the Claytor Nature Center at the University of Lynchburg is to
enrich learning about nature through education and research, to promote
sustainable human-environment interactions, and to preserve and enhance
ecosystem diversity and function. This project will upgrade Claytor's security
and information technology infrastructure in order to safeguard research
installations and sophisticated equipment used in modern ecological and
conservation research. This will allow scientists to carry out high-quality
research projects that address important questions about, for example, wetland
plant community dynamics, the effects of invasive plants, and the impact of
human agricultural and clearcutting activities. Thus, the upgrades will ensure
that Claytor expands its relevance as a contributor to ecological and
conservation research efforts well into the future. The improvements will also
provide richer experiential learning experiences to the center’s many visitors
that include students and educators, enhancing Claytor's award-winning
environmental education programs for learners of all ages. This is directly
responsive to the Virginia Environmental Literacy Challenge, which aims to
engage students in experiences and projects that improve their understanding of
the environment. The Claytor Nature Center encompasses nearly 500 acres at the
base of the Blue Ridge Mountains and is the fourth-largest biological field
station in Virginia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Lynchburg's Claytor
Nature Center (www.lynchburg.edu/academics/academiccommunity-centers/claytor-
nature-center/) occupies a unique and important position among field stations,
spanning the geographic, topographic, hydrologic, sub-surface geologic, and
ecological flora and fauna of the Blue Ridge and Piedmont provinces in Virginia.
The center's core research agenda i the study of diverse natural and human-
influenced habitats to inform and improve conservation efforts. This project
will modernize the center's security and communication systems by installing
electronic entry gates, burglar alarms, and security cameras, as well as fiber
optic cable and associated broadband hardware. The security upgrades will
safeguard existing research installations and facilitate future installation of
sophisticated equipment used in modern ecological and conservation research.
Preapproved researchers will be able to enter the center at all times of the day
for activities such as tracking wildlife. Security gates and cameras will reduce
the risk of vandalism or theft, allowing researchers to set up and leave
scientific equipment unattended. Improved communication capability will enable
large amounts of research data to be transmitted. This will allow the center’s
herbarium to efficiently share images and other datafiles with other
institutions in its role as a collaborator on the NSF-funded “Key to the
Cabinets” project. Wildlife biology researchers will have increased capacity to
manage and share photos and videos, as well as to store and manage data
efficiently. Internet-connected remote sensors will make it possible to
continuously transmit data from Claytor's weather station. Broadband will enable
a future stream gauging station on the Big Otter River with networked remote
sensing capacity, thus enhancing water quality research. Increased public
outreach capacity, with greater attendance of workshops and other educational
programs by students and the public, will help create a citizenry capable of
understanding complex problems such as global environmental change and making
informed environmental policy decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.