* 2014984
* SBIR Phase I:  iD3: Intelligent, Invisible Electronic ID Tags
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Alejandro Cortese, OWIC TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the demonstration of an innovative,
broadly applicable unique ID technology to link physical objects to the digital
world. The proposed technology could help prevent counterfeits, as well as
providing a manufacturer information on the product's movement in the supply and
distribution chains. The key limitation preventing broad use of unique ID tags
is that many key products and components are difficult or impossible to label
with existing technologies due to either security, size, or cost. These
constraints dramatically limit the space of applications. The tag prototype
developed in this Phase I project will advance the field of wireless electronics
by demonstrating the first remotely accessible microscopic electronic
package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will further the development of a new class of microscopic
Optical Wireless Integrated Circuits (OWiCs). Specifically, this project will be
focusing on developing a new OWiC specifically designed for use as a unique ID
tag. The tag combines an all optical communication and power system with low-
power integrated circuits in an effectively invisible package, too small to be
resolved by the naked eye. This project will address the following technical
challenges: 1) making a tiny wireless tag with complete functionality, 2)
manufacturing at scale, and 3) using the tag. Each of these hurdles will be
addressed in this project with low-power integrated circuit design, parallel
all-lithographic nanofabrication techniques, and new methods for placement of
tags.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.