* 2014230
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous and permanently deployed ship hull inspection and cleaning vehicle
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Eduardo Moreno, O-Robotix Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve efficiency in the shipping
industry. Biofouling, or surface contamination on ships, increases drag and
consequently makes travel inefficient. This project will develop an underwater
robotic system that performs automated ship hull inspections and cleaning,
increasing fuel efficiency by 10 percent and subsequently saving a container
vessel $2 million annually. An automated cleaning solution improves safety and
minimizes expensive human labor. The proposed innovation will maintain hull and
coating performance; furthermore it will generate high-resolution images that
can lead to improvements in coating design, as well as expensive and time-
consuming dry-dock procedures. Beyond ship hull cleaning, automated cleaning
technology has broad applications in vertical industrial inspection automation
and military use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop an autonomous and permanently deployed ship
hull inspection and cleaning vehicle. This Phase 1 project will develop a low-
cost sensor architecture and localization algorithm that can reliably place the
vehicle on the hull. To date, there has been progress on large human-deployable
robotic cleaning vehicles that can be an alternative to diver operations.
However, these vehicles must be used at or close to a port, have complex
filtration systems, are expensive and difficult to deploy, and require trained
operators. During Phase I project, an autonomous magnetic crawling vehicle with
a minimum cleaning speed of 0.25 m/s will be developed to test sensors for this
application. Sensors identified as complementary and reliable will be integrated
to position the vehicle on the hull using a probabilistic estimator. To ensure
the vehicle optimizes its energy usage when submerged in a high drag
environment, a key metric of success will be to accurately position the vehicle
within 3 meters on the ship hull 95 percent of the time to minimize cleaning
coverage overlap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.