* 2014829
* SBIR Phase I Machine Learning for Screening Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome in General and COVID-19 Patient Populations
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Ritankar Das, Dascena
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve early and accurate acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) detection. ARDS detection is vital due to
the recent COVID-19 outbreak and the propensity for individuals testing positive
for COVID-19 to develop ARDS as a serious complication, as well as the 140,000
patients per year in the United States admitted with ARDS. The ARDS diagnostic
market in the US was an estimated $154 million in 2018. This project will
advance a machine-learning algorithm to accurately predict ARDS onset in the
COVID-19 patient population. These systems will monitor patient electronic
health records and automatically provide ARDS prediction alerts for both general
and COVID-19 patient populations, thereby enabling appropriate intervention and
prevention methods in advance of ARDS onset to improve patient outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will use semi-supervised machine learning (SSL) to develop and validate
an ARDS prediction screening tool. The goals and anticipated technical results
are as follows: Aim 1 will employ semi-supervised deep learning to develop a
model for the prediction of ARDS up to 48 hours prior to onset. Because SSL will
improve generalized performance, the tool can be applied in settings where many
clinical features are not available, including a lack of radiographic data. Aim
2 will validate and optimize the semi-supervised model across external datasets.
Validation on external datasets will evaluate the algorithm across a variety of
hospital-specific measurement frequencies, demographics, and care
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.