* 2014621
* SBIR Phase I:  Directed protein evolution: Creating high affinity protein ligands for controlling economically detrimental plant pathogens and pests
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Jiarui Li, INNATRIX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2021
* USD 249,594.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to create next generation crop products. Crop loss due to pathogens
has been estimated to be approximately 20-40% of total possible yield. The
proposed technology is an environmentally-friendly way to combat pests, even if
they evolve to be resistant to conventional methods. This technology can be used
for other life sciences applications, including special cancer treatments.

The proposed project is to generate new and durable resistant crops by producing
ligands that can bind to virulence factors of plant pathogens to make them
malfunction. The novel protein evolution technology is a rapid and automated
platform for developing high-affinity protein ligands. It comprises a self-
sustaining, iterative bacterial culture system that drives the emergence of new
protein and peptide sequences expressed by the M13 bacteriophage. Once pathogens
or pest develop resistance for the ligands we generate, new and stronger binding
ligands could be quickly evolved to control them. The technology is broadly
applicable to developing optimized protein sequences for virtually any affinity
interaction. Other applications include protein purification, antibody
optimization as well as engineering novel receptors for cancer immunotherapy. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.