* 2014713
* SBIR Phase I:  A smart wearable platform for remote respiratory monitoring: building better technologies for telemedicine in the age of COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Jason Kroh, Strados Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a smart wearable stethoscope
platform as a new tool to remotely monitor patients affected by COVID-19. Many
infected patients may not present with symptoms until it is too late. Remotely
monitoring these patients for the development of cough and shortness of breath
prior to presentation in respiratory distress is critical. Patients with
existing cardiopulmonary disease are at increased risk of contracting viral or
secondary bacterial pneumonia due to COVID-19, but it is challenging to
continuously assess these patients’ lung sounds due to risks of healthcare
worker exposure. There is a clear need for more effective ways to monitor
patients’ respiratory health due to COVID-19 both in quarantined patients and
those in acute care. This project allows for remote monitoring to help triage
COVID-19 patients and reduce healthcare worker
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses the further development and optimization of an
artificial intelligence-based wearable device that monitors and analyzes lung
sounds in high ambient noise environments. Ambient noise affects the use of
standard electronic stethoscopes. Many commercially available electronic
stethoscopes address ambient noise by reducing dynamic range or by warning the
user not to use the device in a high noise environment. These mitigation methods
restrict the utility of these devices by limiting the information that can be
obtained from the acoustic measurements. Additionally, susceptibility to ambient
noise eliminates its potential use in the home environment. Ambient noise has
been shown to degrade the effectiveness of machine learning algorithms trained
in low-noise environments to accurately detect lung sounds. This project
addresses issues with high ambient noise using novel and established techniques
of passive noise cancellation, active noise cancellation, signal processing
techniques, and machine learning algorithms. The optimal combination and
integration of these solutions in a wearable respiratory monitoring platform
will establish a useful tool for use in a variety of real-world environments.
The success of this project will be measured by the improvement of the machine
learning sensitivity metrics after system
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.