* 2014556
* SCH:INT: Self-powered Smart Ring for Always-On Health Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Holly Jimison, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,537.00

Continuous monitoring is becoming increasingly more important in preventive,
personalized care supporting just-in-time interventions. New sensor and
communications technologies offer opportunities for more proactive models of
care that reach people in their homes and everyday lives to improve health
behaviors. Although wearable sensors have played an important role in
technology-facilitated health interventions, maintaining use for longer than a
few weeks has proven difficult for much of the population. One substantial
barrier to extended use is the need to recharge the devices, usually on a daily
basis for tailored just-in-time messaging and effective interventions. Current
techniques for real-time assessment and interpretation of physiological sensors
require power hungry data collection, transfer, and interpretation to deliver
tailored and timely feedback. Each time a wearable device requires charging, it
takes renewed motivation to charge it and additional motivation to put it back
on. The goal of this project is to create a multi-sensor comfortable self-
powered ring that never needs charging. The team will use stress monitoring and
management as an important clinical challenge requiring multiple sensors and
just-in-time interactions as an example to test the contributions of a multi-
sensor smart ring, as well as intelligent sampling inference and transmission,
to provide tailored stress coaching advice without the need for battery charging
or device removal. Stress is one of the key threats to the health and
productivity of the nation. As a health hazard, it affects all major organs and
is associated with many diseases and a reduction in life expectancy. Normally,
monitoring stress data and providing real-time intervention would require
recharging a wearable device every 6 hours. To address this issue, the research
team plans to develop an energy harvesting system on a chip (SoC) with
algorithms that minimize power consumption. This system will be embedded within
a comfortable waterproof ring that users never have to remove or charge. This
novel capability will enable effective health coaching interventions that
require continuous engagement and feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this one-
year project, the team plans to develop a prototype self-powered ring with the
capability to monitor health and activity variables important in stress
management interventions. These variables include heart rate, heart rate
variability, and electrodermal activity (an indicator of skin conductance). This
research group also plans to measure motion using an accelerometry sensor to
provide information in distinguishing physical stress from the target
classification of emotional stress. The project will involve two main
activities. Firstly, the project will develop algorithms to minimize power
consumption to enable perpetually operating sensors for stress monitoring. To
accomplish this goal, the project team will first specify the clinical
requirements for the monitoring and feedback protocols. This specification will
then inform signal sampling and filtering requirements, data fusion
specifications, as well as guidelines for approaches to minimizing data storage
and transfer. Decision-theoretic algorithms will be used to optimize the
sampling and transmission of multiple sensor data from the ring. Existing
algorithms will be optimized for stress monitoring and sensor fusion by
integrating heart rate, heart rate variability, electrodermal activity and
accelerometry to accurately classify stress levels in real time. The second main
activity will be to develop an energy harvesting SoC with dynamic performance
scaling and fabrication protocols for smart ring system integration and
waterproof packaging. The project will develop a high-precision on-chip clock
source and advanced power management circuitry to enable implementation of the
dynamic decision algorithms and energy utilization harvested from external
indoor solar cells. The team will then integrate high efficiency GaAs solar
cells, dynamic sampling/transmission SoC, sensor components
(photoplethysmography sensors, electrodermal activity electrodes), and wireless
modules with advanced flexible encapsulation scheme into an always-on smart
health monitoring ring. It is anticipated that the success of this project will
generalize to markedly improve health behavior interventions and will transform
the next-generation health and medical research through always-connected data,
people, and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.