* 2014108
* Advanced Research Training in Physiology - Integrating Biology Across the Scales
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Daniel Fletcher, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2024
* USD 852,590.00

&lt;p&gt;Founded in 1892, The Marine Biology Laboratory (MBL) Physiology Course
is one of the oldest, continually-running biology courses in the World. This
training course remains a "Gold Standard" for bringing together faculty, and
students selected from a highly qualified pool, across many disciplines in the
life sciences. The instructors work closely as a cohesive team to educate early-
career biologists, many of whom go on to make their own ground-breaking
discoveries. The MBL Physiology Course fosters a unique training environment
that uses cellular, molecular, and physical principles of biology to understand
living organisms. This NSF award will be used to integrate cellular and genomic
science with principles and practices of organismal and evolutionary biology.
Faculty and students will combine their unique perspectives to problem solving
in physiology. By so doing, a deeper understanding of the physiological
principles of "How Life Works" will be attained and integrated across biological
subdisciplines. To extend the learning experience beyond the time that each
trainee spends at the MBL, instructors in the MBL Physiology Course will invite
and support teams of students to continue to work together after they return to
their respective research groups at their home institutions. Through this post-
course experience, each participant will have the opportunity to engage and
educate the general public regarding fundamental principles of living organisms,
related to the societal importance of new knowledge and discovery in the life
sciences.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;The MBL Physiology Course provides intensive
training and research experiences at critical intersections of cell biology and
physical science - ranging from molecular biology, genetics, genomics, to
evolutionary biology. The course begins with an intensive "Boot Camp," when
biologists, physicists, and all students become familiar with cutting-edge
techniques in cellular anatomy and physiology, fabrication, bioinformatics,
while working together to analyze big data sets. The revised MBL Physiology
Course will now incorporate interactions with three other concurrent summer
courses to bring physiology "back into the organism" and challenge students to
consider cells in their natural contexts. Intentionally bringing students
together from the Physiology, Microbial Diversity, Embryology, and Biology of
Parasites courses will provide opportunities for synergism of ideas and expanded
multidisciplinary perspectives inherent in this horizontal integration across
biological subdisciplines. The MBL Physiology Course trains a diverse student
body, with specific attention given to the recruitment and support of under-
represented groups in STEM. In addition, the course will aid students in
disseminating techniques and concepts via support of organized groups at the
students' home institutions and at scientific conferences.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p&gt;This award is cofunded by the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy
of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and
broader impacts review criteria.&lt;/p&gt;