* 2014025
* RUI: Solitons in Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sophia Domokos, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sophia Domokos at the New
York Institute of Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle physics has made
enormous strides in pinpointing the elementary building blocks of matter. Still,
many common physical systems behave in ways we don’t fully understand, even
though we know exactly what they’re made of. The elementary particles in these
systems interact so forcefully and often that we simply can't keep track of
them. Sometimes a new order emerges: electrons team up to let electric currents
flow indefinitely; elementary particles called quarks and gluons clump together
to form protons and neutrons in atomic nuclei. How precisely elementary
particles create this new order remains a mystery. Research in this realm
advances the national interest by yielding a deeper scientific understanding of
fundamental physical systems --- like the interior of the atomic nucleus --- and
the mathematics that describes them. It also allows scientists to make
predictions for new phenomena never seen before. In her research, Professor
Domokos aims to use a powerful concept called "holographic duality" to make
progress in this area. Her project will also yield significant broader impacts:
she will involve undergraduate students in cutting-edge research, providing them
with personalized training in advanced physics and experience presenting their
work at conferences. She will also give lectures about her work to lay
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Domokos's research
is aimed at gaining insight into real-world strongly coupled solitons --- like
baryons --- via their "cousins" in supersymmetric gravity duals. These gravity
duals come from D-brane intersections, which have the powerful soliton-finding
machinery of supersymmetry and string theory built in. Professor Domokos's work
will include establishing both sides of the gauge/gravity duality in brane
intersections with gravity duals, including identification of soliton-like vacua
and finite-energy soliton states, and some aspects of the low-energy behavior of
these objects. This program will also yield powerful mathematical tools with
which to tackle solitons in curved space, and a more complete understanding of
defect-gauge/gravity duality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.