* 2014792
* SBIR Phase I:  A Microbial Inoculant for the Degradation and Recycling of Hemp Waste into a Nutrient-Rich Fertilizer
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Victoria Holden, FULL CIRCLE MICROBES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,935.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I Project is to
increase the advance a technology to transform leftover plant matter into a
fertilizer to support the agricultural industry. The proposed project will
develop a microbial inoculant that will rapidly and efficiently transform post-
harvest leftover plant matter into a nutrient-rich bioavailable fertilizer used
to nourish future crops, particularly in the emerging hemp industry. The
findings from this research project are potentially applicable to the
degradation of other common agricultural crops, such as corn, and the conversion
of feedstock into biofuels. The technology will add value to farms, save farmers
money, and prevent further environmental harm through the production and use of
synthetic fertilizer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project advances a
cooperative, synthetic microbial inoculant that degrades lignin, a polymer in
hemp that is highly resistant to degradation, into a nutrient-rich fertilizer
that increases hemp yield. This innovation will be achieved by developing and
performing assays that quantify the efficiency with which microbes degrade
lignin and produce peroxidases, the family of enzymes that degrade lignin. After
identifying microbes with lignin-degrading capabilities, these microbes will be
incorporated into a plant growth promoting co-culture, at which point the
inoculant will be optimized to achieve the maximum lignin degradation efficiency
at a wide range of temperatures and conditions. This will be achieved through
lab-scale adaptation, i.e. a natural forced microbial evolution. Finally, the
output of the optimized microbial inoculant will be evaluated for its ability to
increase hemp seed germination and decrease the harmful effects of plant
pathogens. These characteristics will be examined using seed germination assays
and microbial plate competition assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.