* 2014862
* NeuroNex: Enabling Identification and Impact of Synaptic Weight in Functional Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Mark Ellisman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2025
* USD 12,500,000.00

Trillions of synapses connect billions of neurons in neural circuits that allow
sensation, thought, action, learning, and memory. This NeuroNex Network involves
the development of new approaches to determine the strength of connections
between neuronsâ€”synaptic weight--in the brain. Understanding synaptic weight is
crucial, yet even a clear definition remains elusive, despite more than a
century of searching. This NeuroNex Network assembles world experts to study
synapses from molecules to behavior, to answer this fundamental and ambitious
question: What constitutes synaptic weight, and what role does it play in
shaping neural circuits? Synaptic weight is hypothesized to involve the
differential composition and co-occurrence of key proteins and subcellular
resources. Multidisciplinary approaches are used to assess these features in
well-defined states of neural circuits involving multiple cell types, brain
regions, and diverse behaviors. Consistent predictors of synaptic state are
mapped onto neural connectomes to enhance understanding of how synaptic weight
influences circuit organization and function. New electron microscopy
technologies developed and used in this project bridge gaps in image size and
resolution needed to achieve deeper understanding of brain function and
regulation from nanoscale to circuit levels. A long-lasting, far-reaching impact
involves leveraging work from this NeuroNex Network with other BRAIN Initiative
projects to enable acquisition and sharing of the new knowledge. Future
applications, even beyond the brain, of the knowledge and tools developed here
will give rise to data that address fundamental and novel principles of complex
self-organizing systems. The NeuroNex Network also involves training the next
generation, including through inter-laboratory and fellow
exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What constitutes synaptic weight, what role does
it play in shaping neural circuits, and how does it change during growth and
plasticity? Answers require a shift away from thinking about synapses as
isolated entities. Synapses are not simply on or off one-bit machines; instead
the information content stored in synapse size, as a proxy for weight, is much
higher. Synaptic weight is controlled over broad temporal and spatial scales
dynamically regulated by neural activity. New evidence points to subcellular
resources (endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, endosomes, ribosomes) as brokers
that drive synaptic efficacy and plasticity. This project seeks to understand
how synapse composition and structure predict synaptic weight and function at a
scale that reveals biological mechanisms at the subcellular level. A new 3D
electron microscopy (EM) approach is developed using conical tilt tomography on
the scanning EM operating in the transmission mode (tomoSEM). TomoSEM fills the
current resolution-to-volume gap between methods of structural biology (high
resolution, small volumes) and connectomics (relatively low resolution, larger
volumes). TomoSEM eliminates major artifacts of other EM methods while reducing
human effort and cost. The investigators comprise world experts in protein
chemistry, cell biology, connectomics, and behavior. Experts in EM implement,
validate, and deploy tomoSEM. Experts in image analysis, geometry, statistics,
machine learning, and multilevel modeling create platforms to search data for
hidden order. These strategies share international resources to overcome limits
of accumulating data locally one synapse at a time. This project is co-funded by
Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.