* 2014300
* The Role of Cell Cycle Regulation in Leaf Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Larkin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 890,720.00

Ultimately, all of the worldâ€™s food supply, as well as many other crucial
products, depend on energy harvested from sunlight by plants. This sunlight is
captured by leaves that have shapes optimized for light harvesting while
minimizing water loss. Leaves of some plants are also adapted to growing in
extreme environments such as high stress or high salt conditions, showing that
there are genetic controls of growth responses to the environment. Understanding
how leaves adapt to the environment through cell growth will provide
foundational information for a resilient and sustainable agriculture in the face
of changing environments. Leaves generally grow by increasing cell number
through division followed by an increase in cell size by expansion. It is not
clear how these two processes of division and expansion are controlled to give
rise to the final shape of a leaf. This research explores the function of a
family of regulators that restrict cell division and promote the switch to cell
expansion in the genetic model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The findings are then
applied to study how cell expansion is controlled in response to salt exposure
in leaves of the salt-adapted plant Schrenkiella parvula. Understanding how
plants can grow in extreme salt-stressed conditions will provide basic
information about how plants respond and adapt to the environment. The next
generation of scientists will be trained in hands-on research through experience
in the laboratory and by developing course-based undergraduate research projects
in plant biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The SIAMESE-RELATED (SMR) family of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, first discovered in the Larkin lab, are key
regulators of the transition from cell proliferation to endoreplication, an
alternate version of the cell cycle in which DNA replication continues without
subsequent division. Two family members, SMR1 and SMR2, have distinct effects on
leaf cell number, cell size and overall leaf size in Arabidopsis thaliana. Our
central hypothesis is that SMRs serve as key regulators of leaf growth for both
developmental and environmental cues by controlling the timing and extent of
endoreplication during leaf development. This hypothesis will be tested by
examining the regulation and functional roles of the SMR1 and SMR2 genes during
leaf development, and by examining the role of SMRs in Schrenkiella parvula leaf
development in response to salt treatment. This work will contribute to the
identification of regulatory networks controlling the onset of endoreplication
in leaves, and to understanding the role of endoreplication in leaf function and
stress adaptation, and will develop resources for the extremophyte model S.
parvula. The proposed work will play a role in the education of three graduate
students and several undergraduates from a wide diversity of backgrounds. A
course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) lab focusing on gene
expression is also planned, using SMR promoter:reporter fusion transgenic lines
that will be produced as part of the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.