* 2014195
* Exploring the Topography of String Theory and Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Savdeep Sethi, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Savdeep Sethi at the
University of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the structure of space
and time is one of the enduring mysteries of nature. Did space and time emerge
in some kind of Big Bang? Will the universe end in a Big Crunch? What is the
nature of the so-called "dark energy" which is responsible for the accelerated
expansion of the universe? In order to answer such basic questions about the
physics of our universe, Professor Sethi will utilize theoretical techniques
coming from quantum field theory and string theory, which are the two
theoretical frameworks for tackling such questions in theoretical high-energy
physics. The research topics Professor Sethi will tackle are quite varied in
scope and include issues of potential interest to physicists in many different
subdisciplines, including the physics of condensed matter and the physics of the
elementary particles that form the ultimate "building blocks" of the natural
world, as well as cosmology. Research in this area is thus in the natural
interest because it advances our understanding of fundamental science. This
research is also envisioned to have a number of broader impacts. The first
involves providing research opportunities for undergraduates, including
continued participation in the Chicago REU program and continued public outreach
at places like the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago. The second aims
to improve the climate for women in physics through direct involvement in a
CUWiP (Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics) conference to be held at
the University of Chicago, and through direct mentoring of undergraduate women
in physics. The final aspect involves the development of improved
interdisciplinary ties with cosmologists, condensed-matter physicists, and
mathematicians through lectures at schools and workshops, through direct
collaborations, and through the organization of workshops at the Kadanoff Center
for Theoretical Physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Sethi's research will have a strong primary focus on two questions. First, can
de Sitter space be realized in string theory? Or must dark energy be a dynamical
phenomenon? Second, what kind of theories exist in the region between local
quantum field theory and string theory? There are very exciting hints of a new
structure residing in that region from recent progress in studying deformations
of quantum field theory by irrelevant operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.