* 2014232
* SCH:INT: SCH: INT: A gamified mobile system for real-time mental health data modeling and personalized autism care across sociocultural settings
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Dennis Wall, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,100,099.00

Neuropsychiatric disorders are the single greatest cause of disability due to
non-communicable disease worldwide, accounting for as much as 19% of the global
burden of disease. These disorders include autism spectrum disorder, which is
among the fastest growing pediatric concerns today and highly representative of
many other neuropsychiatric conditions. The current standards of care for
neuropsychiatric disorders are negatively impacted by subjectivity, inconsistent
delivery, and limited access as waiting lists grow. New informatics solutions,
in particular artificial intelligence (AI), that can port to more ubiquitous
mobile health devices and that are not restricted for use in clinical settings,
have great potential to complement the current standards of care. With this
research project, a novel digital support for autism will be developed.
Specifically, working together with families and their affected children ages
2-8, we will establish a gaming system for mobile devices. This system will use
augmented reality and AI to adapt to the childâ€™s needs and foster a social
exchange between the primary caregiver and the child. This mobile solution will
connect families to care, fostering the development of a community of
stakeholders, together with AI models capable of personalizing care and tracking
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1) combine human-computer-
interaction with clinically validated treatment approaches through iterative co-
design with affected children and their families; (2) identify at least three
promising augmented reality game modes that address core autism features
including social-reciprocity and emotional understanding; (3) lower barriers to
secure and trustworthy data sharing by game players; and (4) construct a series
of AI models from game play data that can be used to understand and dynamically
react to the treatment effect during game play. Our research project will result
in an engaging at-home digital tool accessible to any family with a smartphone
(iOS or Android). The project will show how this mobile AI solution can act as a
scalable supplement to standard therapy and one that has the potential to reduce
the healthcare burden by empowering caregivers. Finally, the research will
generate solutions, code, examples, and computer vision libraries that will
enable the development of a broader platform for AI in the mobile environment in
socioeconomically diverse populations and set the stage for similar solutions
for other mental health conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.