* 2014776
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel photographic steganography to reduce digital piracy on live streaming platforms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Eric Wengrowski, STEG AI CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to detect screen-to-camera video piracy, through first-in-kind
development of a robust video piracy detection method that uniquely applies
camera-display messaging to copyright protection, while maintaining network
quality standards. Existing watermarking solutions cannot reliably handle video-
in-video piracy, where users upload pirated media captured using a smartphone
camera; either they fail to detect video piracy or exhibit injurious
hypersensitivity. The proposed solution balances these two concerns by embedding
unique and unextractable watermarks into video content, thereby improving the
ability for platforms to accurately match uploaded content with messages in the
copyright-protected database. The resulting technology will allow for the
detection of copyright information in camera-captured images and video, so that
distributors can automatically filter against the illegal sharing of copyright-
protected material, dramatically reducing liability—and costly copyright
infringement fines—for social media companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop an
innovative camera-display message system that uses photographic steganography to
embed covert messages in displayed video, addressing the need to detect screen-
to-camera video piracy. Although photographic steganography has been applied to
still images, video message embedding is complicated by the presence of
perceptible artifacts that degrade visual quality. This project proposes to use
novel spatio-temporal embedding that adapts to video content to reduce visual
artifacts and support message recovery. This method circumvents the artifact-
based constraints of traditional grid systems and will support the standard
viewing quality. The following Phase I objectives will establish technical and
commercial feasibility: 1) develop a video compression model that can handle
multiple compression variations; 2) develop an optimal adaptive spatio-temporal
embedding approach that reduces observed visual artifacts while maintaining a
high accuracy rate; 3) design and implement a paired comparison protocol
perceptual metric to evaluate video quality after message embedding; 4) develop
a real-time robust screen detection and segmentation
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.