* 2014635
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel, Cost-Effective Gait Training Device Utilized at Home for the Neurological Patient Population
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Ben Taylor, HEALING INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 223,370.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation (SBIR)
Phase I project would be the development of a neurorehabilitation technology
with a total addressable market of $54B and the opportunity to increase access
to advanced care for the 5.2 million people in the US living with paralysis and
the 1.3 million people each year that experience an extreme neurological injury
or diagnosis that can lead to severe gait impairment. This technology will
encourage a proactive approach to care, eliminate the need for a clinician to be
physically present in the rehabilitation experience, and introduce software
solutions to increase motivation and connectivity. Clinically, if successful,
this technology could dramatically decrease secondary complications, help people
regain the ability to walk, and ultimately reduce costs associated with
neurological diagnoses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I is to develop an at-home gait trainer for rehabilitation
and physical therapy of individuals with neurological injuries or neurological
conditions using a patient-centered approach. This project integrates at-home
advanced medical technology with telemedicine physical therapy. This will enable
continued rehabilitation and physical therapy without clinical oversight via
training videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.