* 2014198
* Development of High-Purity NaI(T1) Crystals for the SABRE Dark Matter Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Frank Calaprice, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data give strong evidence that
nearly a quarter of the Universe consists of dark matter. Weakly interacting
massive particles (WIMPs) and axions have been proposed as theoretically favored
candidates for dark matter. Despite the strong evidence for the existence of
dark matter, neither WIMPs nor axions have been conclusively detected. The
DAMA/LIBRA experiment claims for more than a decade to have detected dark matter
with an array of low background NaI(Tl) crystal scintillators. However, other
experiments with different detectors have not seen evidence for dark matter,
even though they have very high sensitivity. Because the sensitivity to dark
matter may depend on details of the detector material, a new search for evidence
of dark matter with NaI(Tl) detectors with much lower background than DAMA/LIBRA
achieved is needed. This award will fund the SABRE (Sodium-iodide with Active
Background REjection) experiment which has been focused on the development of
new crystals with lower background than DAMA/LIBRA. The development of high
purity crystals can affect many fields of research, perhaps even semiconductors
which presently have trace levels of radioactivity that affect their
reliability. The effort also involves many fields and attracts students with a
wide range of backgrounds. SABRE also promotes strong relationships with
industrial partners, who then brought new products and services to all
customers. Collaboration with RMD, Sigma Aldrich, Seastar Chemicals, and
Sandfire has brought high purity products and sensitive assay services to the
market. Collaboration with the Mellen Company has led to an invention that can
be used to purify materials with higher efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research funded by this award will support the development and testing of a low-
background NaI(Tl) crystal detector exploiting the new zone-refining technique
developed by Princeton in collaboration with Mellen Company in order to improve
the present record established with NaI-33; and the development of a crystal
growth facility underground at the Canfranc Laboratory, Spain. SABRE will have
two phases: phase 1 consists of one detector at the Gran Sasso Laboratory
(LNGS), in Italy, which works as a proof-of-principle (PoP) for testing the
radio-purity of crystals; in phase 2, twin detectors will be built in the
northern and southern hemispheres. The SABRE-south is planned to be installed in
the SUPL (Stawell Underground Physics Laboratory), a new underground laboratory
in Australia under construction. The two detectors will enhance the potentiality
to differentiate a dark matter signal from seasonal and local
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.