* 2014822
* Pacifichem 2020 Symposia #337, #396, #106, and #109; Honolulu, HI - Dec. 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yi Zuo, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

A large body of literature has resulted from research on interactions between
nanomaterials and biological and ecological systems. As a consequence of these
research activities, current regulations are being examined for adequacy. The
overall goal of these symposia is to promote collaboration and discussion across
multiple disciplines related to nanotechnology. These symposia will help bring
together chemists, biologists, engineers, and legislators to discuss the
necessary approaches and to discuss cost-effective measures to prevent
unintentional environmental and health degradation as a result of the widespread
use of nanomaterials. Support for these symposia will provide outstanding
graduate students and participants with travel funds to attend the 2020
International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies, to be held in
Honolulu, Hawaii, December 15-20, 2020. The awarded graduate students and
participants will be selected by a scientific committee based on the
intellectual merit and the broader impacts of their research. To promote
diversity, equity and inclusion, students and participants from traditionally
underrepresented groups will be given high priority. The awarded students and
participants will have the opportunity to expose to be a variety of scientific
topics, including but not limited to nano-bio interactions, nanotoxicology,
nanomedicine, colloid and surface science, particulate matter, smart surfaces,
self-assembly, 3D printed organs, and bionanotechnology. Particular focus will
be on understanding and designing safe nano-bio interfaces for materials,
medicine, and the environment. These symposia will provide students and
participants with an excellent opportunity to communicate research and education
activities in the area of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will seek
participation from distinguished researchers and students in four symposia
within the 2020 International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies
(Pacifichem), which will be held in Honolulu, Hawaii, December 15-20, 2020.
These four symposia are (1) Understanding and Designing Safe Nano‐Bio Interfaces
for Materials, Medicine, and the Environment, (2) Interfacial Phenomena for
Bubbles, Droplets, Films and Soft Matter, (3) Peptide Self‐Assembly: Chemistry
and Nanotechnology, and (4) 3D Printing in Chemistry, Biology and Materials. All
four symposia are highly interdisciplinary and have far-reaching impacts on
multiple scientific disciplines. This support will provide students and
participants with a unique opportunity to attend the Pacifichem 2020, and to
learn the state-of-the-art knowledge of nanotechnology and nanosafety. The PI
will disseminate knowledge to the academic community and the industry through
the publication of review and commentary articles that will highlight the state-
of-the-art of nano-bio interactions, colloid and surface sciences, self-
assembled peptides and nanomedicine, additive manufacturing, and other major
topics discussed in these symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.