* 2014226
* F-Theory and its Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Morrison, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor David Morrison at the
University of California, Santa Barbara.

Some theoretical problems in physics are known as "perturbative". For such
theoretical problems there exist robust mathematical methods by which they may
be addressed. For other problems, by contrast, these methods do not work and
different methods must be found. Professor Morrison's research involves non-
perturbative aspects of theories which unify quantum mechanics (the physics of
the subatomic world) with gravity, concentrating in particular on a theory known
informally as "F-theory." As part of his research, Professor Morrison will use
techniques borrowed from pure mathematics to study these theories, potentially
leading to progress in both physics and mathematics. As a result, research in
this area advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in
two of its most fundamental directions: the understanding of new physical
theories, and the discovery of new mathematical tools with which to investigate
them. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts.
Professor Morrison will involve graduate students and postdocs in his research,
and thereby provide critical training for junior scientists beginning research
in this field. He also intends to promote the public understanding of science
through efforts to make the scientific literature broadly available to the
public at large.

More technically, Professor Morrison will investigate a number of aspects of
F-theory (compactified to four spacetime dimensions). He will determine the
possibilities for discrete gauge symmetries in such theories, investigate the
role of background fluxes and branes in these theories, and investigate the
theories induced by F-theory on probe D3-branes with an eye towards determining
how much of F-theory can be recovered from such probes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.