* 2014686
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a fully annotated corpus for the training of a Clinical Question Answering System for critical results delivery at the Point of Care
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Robert Grzeszczuk, IN CONTEXT REPORTING INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,961.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from improving the quality of healthcare and streamlining
its delivery. The accumulation of clinical data has become a potentially
valuable resource for clinical practice, as Electronic Medical Records (EMRs)
contain information on day-to-day patient care. Latest Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques applied to EMR data enable the development of health
Intelligent Virtual Assistants (hIVAs) to assist healthcare professionals in
incorporating evidence-based decision support, reducing errors and improving
efficiency. Current most promising NLP approaches are underdeveloped for the
clinical domain given the lack of high-quality annotated clinical data required
for training, testing and validating the machine learning algorithms. As most
EMR data is available as unstructured free text, software developers in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) struggle to find these annotated texts. The
proposed project will inform the production of high-quality hIVAs - from voice-
based clinical AI chatbots for assisting physicians at the point of care to
Question-Answering systems for clinical decision-making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project addresses the technical challenge of exploiting different combinations
of Deep Learning (DL) structures for developing a novel set of annotation tools
and an expert adjudication methodology to optimize the development of annotated
corpora, specifically tailored for the clinical domain. The lack of these
standard and annotated data sets is a major bottleneck preventing progress in
clinical Information Extraction. Without these corpora, individual Natural
Language Processing applications abound without the ability to train different
algorithms, share and integrate modules, or compare performance. The company is
leveraging the latest DL techniques to develop a unique architecture, able to
identify a comprehensive set of context modifiers within unstructured clinical
texts. This approach will boost the semi-automatic annotation of clinical
corpora; produce accurate and robust annotated corpora; and reduce corpora
production time and cost. The project objectives include: (1) adapting the
existing in-house algorithm for automatic clinical text pre-annotation; (2)
integrating a hybrid algorithm into a multi-user operable software platform for
obtaining a minimum viable semi-automatic annotation product; (3) conducting a
small pilot study to validate the performance of the resulting software platform
and a Minimum Viable Product of an annotated corpus for diagnostic imaging
reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.