* 2014224
* SBIR Phase I:  Feature Engineering Automation via Human Insight Integration and End to End Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Nisha Talagala, PYXEDA, INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 223,925.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable individuals with minimal mathematics and programming
knowledge to learn and build AI, and through that success open a pathway to
greater STEM engagement and success. This innovation helps by automating a key
component of the AI lifecycle, Feature Engineering (FE), within a full lifecycle
framework. Industries can apply AI to business solutions faster, at lower cost,
and with existing employees. By focusing on enterprise data, this technology
enables broad corporate use and subsequent economic benefit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project addresses a key limitation of commercial AI solutions, the human expert
driven and largely manual Feature Engineering (FE) stage. The innovation is a
novel approach to FE automation within a full lifecycle context, with three
differentiations: (a) embedding human insight via auto-generated and human
annotated Knowledge Graphs, (b) structuring the complex FE process as a series
of sub-stages for dynamic combination of innovations, further tuned via
Knowledge Graph insight and (c) iterative optimization via quantitative end-to-
end feedback. The approach integrates expert intuition, enabling a wide
selection of potential FE transformations and explorable state space via the
Knowledge Graph and feedback. The research ensures translational viability by
testing against real-world scenarios and utilizing customer datasets that
directly expose realistic FE problems, addressing a significant limitation of
past research efforts. The project strives to prove the feasibility and benefits
of this approach in tackling Feature Engineering problems in production
enterprises. The anticipated result is a solution that can be easily
commercialized to automate Feature Engineering for a wide range of business
usages using numerical, categorical, text and time series
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.