* 2014959
* SBIR Phase I:  High performance non-volatile-memory circuits for artificial intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Yu Lu, SUPERMEM INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable wider adoption of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) through development of a high-bandwidth, low-cost integrated
circuit memory solution. AI is poised to make fundamental changes to how people
live and work but require dramatic improvement in computing power and
efficiency. So-called "edge AI" applications, such as smart home devices, smart
city, and autonomous vehicles, will demand on-device AI subject to tight power
and cost constraints. Current configurations with conventional memories may not
offer a combination of performance, cost, power, operating temperature range
necessary for many edge applications. The proposed project will advance the
development of a new circuit architecture to address these challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
develops high-speed analog circuit architectures and techniques in the context
of emerging memory readout circuits. The proposed novel read circuit is
applicable to magnetoresistive random-access memory (MRAM) and other emerging
memories to achieve high performance and low power. This Phase I project will
fully develop the concept and overcome key technical challenges that include (1)
increasing differential amplifier speed and margin under severe area limitation,
(2) reducing noise level and silicon area of a novel signal passing circuit, and
(3) searching for an efficient way to serve typical data access requests with
the novel read operation. The project goals are to validate the novel MRAM read
circuit with silicon test data and perform a model study to quantify system
level benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.