* 2014663
* SBIR Phase I:  Extraction of iron material from red mud using a novel combination of ionic liquids, solvents and electrochemistry
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Thomas Villalon, MVM INDUSTRIAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve resource efficiency and
sustainability to the mining industry. "Red mud" is a hazardous waste product of
a key step in aluminum production. For every ton of aluminum produced, 2.5 tons
of red mud are pumped into a tailings pond. 120 million tons of red mud are
produced annually, with over 30 billion stored in tailings ponds around the
world. This project advances a technology to reduce the volume of waste with
innovative metals extraction, creating a viable source of metals from waste.
This process could also create a supply of critical metals for electric
vehicles, wind energy, and other applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project seeks to develop an end-to-end process for red mud processing.
It will utilize ionic liquids as highly selective solvents enabling precise
separation of a variety of different metal compounds from a mixed and variable
inorganic feedstock. Compared to current industrial practices that typically
operate above 1000 degrees C, this approach allows a much lower temperature
operation, drastically reducing the energy consumption and thus the cost of
metal material processing. Additionally, the unique properties of ionic liquids
at low temperatures make them ideal for use as electrolytes in electrochemical
processes producing pure metal materials. The proposed project will conduct a
feasibility study at laboratory scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.