* 2014021
* Physics at the Frontier: Colliders to Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 810,709.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Will Kinney, Dejan
Stojkovic, Doreen Wackeroth, and Ciaran Williams at the University at Buffalo,
The State University of New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will conduct a
wide-ranging research program which aims to provide answers to key open
questions at the frontier of particle physics, cosmology, and gravity research.
Research topics to be investigated span a large range, including the physics of
cosmological inflation, the physics of black holes, the physics of Dark Energy
(which is believed responsible for driving accelerated cosmological expansion),
the properties of the Higgs boson, and studies of the theory that underlies the
strong interaction and its effects at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and at
future accelerators. This research aligns with NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science and advance the national welfare by performing research
aimed at extending our understanding of the origin and structure of the
universe, and the properties of fundamental particles and fields. As part of
this research, Professors Kinney, Stojkovic, Wackeroth, and Williams will
involve graduate students and postdocs in their research and thereby provide
training for junior physicists beginning research in this field. The PIs will
also continue to conduct public outreach, including public lectures, planetarium
shows, interactions with the press and other media, and the Science &amp; Art
Cabaret series, now in its twelfth season. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Kinney's research will involve investigation of so-called
"swampland" criteria in the context of early-universe physics. He will also seek
to constrain the physics of inflation with new observations of the Cosmic
Microwave Background and Large-scale Structure, and (in collaboration with
Stojkovic) explore possible resolutions of the Hubble tension. Stojkovic will
continue the development of a comprehensive event generator BlackMax which is
currently used by the LHC collaborations in searches for exotic physics. In
collaboration with Wackeroth and Williams, Stojkovic will also explore the
gamma-ray and neutrino signatures of bubble production associated with false
Higgs-vacuum decay and other cosmological phase transitions. Stojkovic will also
study the imposition of observational strong-lensing constraints on a wide class
of modified-gravity models. Wackeroth will focus on mixed QCD-Electroweak (EW)
corrections to W and Z boson production, which is relevant for a high-precision
W-mass measurement. Wackeroth will also provide improved predictions for SM
processes which will allow for new tests of non-standard interactions of the top
quark and the quartic electroweak self-interactions. Williams will calculate
NNLO corrections to Higgs production in association with a b-jet, and will also
calculate the mixed QCD-EW terms for the H-to-bb process and use the results to
constrain the ultimate precision for the bottom-quark Yukawa coupling which may
be reached at future lepton colliders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.