* 2014888
* SBIR Phase I:  Bacteriophage-Based Microbial Gene Therapy Platform for In Situ Engineering of Microbiomes
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Michael Koeris, Vulcan Biologics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2021
* USD 245,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be the stable and persistent modulation of microbiomes – the
community of microorganisms that populate the different regions of a person’s
body. All organisms have an associated microbiota that play an intimate role in
that organism’s growth, health, immunity, and stress tolerance. Current
approaches for modulating the microbiome, including the use of prebiotics,
probiotics, and other living therapeutics, lack a demonstrated ability to induce
long-term changes in the microbiota. In contrast, this project uses
bacteriophages—viruses that infect bacteria but do not affect the human host—for
long-term or permanent alteration of resident bacterial members of the
microbiome. As a proof of concept, initial development will focus on altering
human gut microbes to treat gluten-related disorders, ranging from mild gluten
sensitivity to celiac disease. Ultimately, this technology could be adapted to
address a vast number of microbiome-related issues that span a wide range of
clinical, commercial, and societal interests. Potential health applications
include microbiome-related conditions such as obesity, type 2 diabetes,
atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease, inflammatory bowel disease, autoimmune
disorders, gingivitis and caries, multiple types of cancer, skin disorders, and
recurrent bacterial infections. Other potential applications include
agricultural and environmental fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will exploit the utility and power of bacteriophages to transduce genetic
information. As engineering bacteriophages to modulate the microbiome has not
yet been attempted beyond preliminary proof-of-concept experiments,
establishment of the proposed microbial gene therapy platform will require
research and development efforts to overcome numerous technical challenges. The
objectives of this project include: 1) engineering Bifidobacterium-targeting
temperate bacteriophage capable of infecting B. longum to express a gluten-
degrading enzyme from Sphingomonas capsulata and 2) introducing the glutenase-
expressing phage into a B. longum in vitro biofilm model. This project will
result in enhanced knowledge of bacteriophage–host interactions, genetic circuit
modulation, and management of horizontal gene transfer, which will have far-
reaching implications for innovation in the fields of applied virology, genetic
engineering, and microbiomics. In particular, the ultimate success of this
project will rely upon the use and development of synthetic biological
approaches to enhance bacteriophage capabilities, such as flexibly integrating
and excising genes from host genomes, managing intra-host expression, converting
phages between lifestyles (e.g. lytic to lysogenic and back), expanding phage
host range, and neutralizing bacterial host defense
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.