* 2014704
* SBIR Phase I:  Integration of innovative materials into a modular system of semi-permanent construction.
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2021
* GUSTAVO SANTANDER, GREEN MAGIC HOMES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,975.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the development of a new modular
construction that is easy to assemble and cost-effective for a variety of semi-
permanent and permanent uses. There is a great need among disaster relief
organizations, the military, local government in rural and remote areas. and
emergency response teams for sturdy, portable structures that are quick and easy
to assemble and provide shelter from the elements. This project will expand the
capabilities of a unique construction system using technically advanced
materials and integrating them into a kit. The system will be environmentally
friendly, employ special insulation to reduce internal temperature variation,
and will maintain a hygienic environment. The proposed project will demonstrate
the technical and commercial feasibility of this system and fulfill unmet needs
of the estimated $1 B global market for modular construction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project is to integrate advanced
materials into an existing system of modular construction. The project will
focus on the integration of components made from recycled polymers, advanced
thermal insulation materials, and antimicrobial coatings. The technical focus is
to combine these advanced materials without compromising the underlying
performance of the system. The project will develop prototype wall panels in the
form factors of the building system’s components. These prototype wall panels
will then undergo structural, loading, and wind and fire resistance testing. The
panels will be tested for the preservation of component functionality. The
project will develop a full-scale prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.