* 2014378
* SBIR Phase I:  HaloFilm – a spray-on, rechargeable, reapplicable antimicrobial coating
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Mingyu Qiao, HALOMINE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop an antimicrobial surface coating with unique application
and efficacy features. As many as one-third of Healthcare-Associated Infection
(HAI) cases can be attributed to environmental surfaces, particularly hospital
“high touch” surfaces (e.g., bed rails, machine buttons, equipment). In the US,
an estimated 1.7 million HAI occur in hospitals each year, resulting in 99,000
deaths and an estimated $20 billion in healthcare costs. The proposed project
will advance the development of a solution offering continuous protection from
bacteria, fungi and viruses, as well as food-borne pathogens and even mold. The
current disinfecting paradigm relies on killing pathogens daily or less
frequently, leaving surfaces vulnerable to new contamination. The proposed
antimicrobial coating maintains surface integrity, potentially serving
hospitals, long-term care facilities, outpatient centers, and other applications
such as home health, food safety, mass transit safety, mold abatement, and
schools.

The proposed project will investigate the translational utility, efficacy and
safety of a spray-on, re-chargeable, re-applicable antimicrobial surface
coating. The proposed technology is a spray-on solution that leaves a thin
transparent film on a surface. The film is a polymer composed of one monomer
adhering to the surface and a second another monomer that stabilizes chlorine.
The coating converts the surface into a chlorine battery such that even a
commercially available sanitizer leaves the surface covered with chlorine in a
form that can last for more than two weeks without toxic effects upon contact.
The proposed coating has excellent efficacy against pathogens because it relies
on chlorine; it has enjoyed decades of use because of its broad-spectrum
efficacy without generating resistance in pathogens. The proposed work is to
advance the development of a formulation that includes anti-fouling monomers.
The goal for this Phase I effort is to demonstrate efficacy against Clostridium
difficile, a particularly concerning pathogen for hospitals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.