* 2014012
* Photonic Connections for Neutral-Atoms Quantum Processors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Paul Berman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 279,998.00

Most everyone is familiar with telecommunication networks, networks that link
our computers and mobile devices. What might be less known to the general public
is that quantum networks can offer tremendous advantages over their classical
counterparts. Quantum networks make use of principles of quantum mechanics,
which allow for increased speed and security. Such networks, consisting of nodes
and interconnecting channels, could revolutionize communication and computation,
as well as providing a new means for modeling complex systems in physics and
biology. The network’s fixed nodes (quantum memory elements) can be implemented
using matter in the form of trapped atoms that are able to store complex,
quantum encoded messages for many seconds. Light can be used to connect the
nodes, carrying quantum communication signals along optical fibers. As a
consequence, the fundamental building block of a quantum telecommunication
network involves interfacing the fixed nodes (material quanta) with light
(photons). To exploit the quantum properties of the network, it is necessary to
couple the nodes in a uniquely quantum manner, referred to as quantum
entanglement. This project will focus on demonstrating new capabilities for
generation of such remote entanglement, to be used as a resource for distributed
quantum information processing. A major goal of the project is to develop
photonic interconnects for arrays of trapped neutral atoms. Information will be
processed and stored in the atomic arrays and mapped onto propagating light
fields coupled into optical fibers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
program will investigate quantum information processing using single photon
states and trapped ultracold atoms. Strong interactions of atomic Rydberg levels
will serve as the basis for creating quantum gates between atomic qubits, while
atom – single photon entanglement will be achieved using Raman scattering of
laser fields. This should allow for a scalable generation and manipulation of
complex entangled states involving both atomic qubits and single photons.
Realization of this program will also lead to efficient distribution of
entangled many-particle quantum states over long distances using optical fibers.
The planned activity will contribute to the future implementations of long-
distance quantum repeaters and distributed quantum computing. Efficient
production of multi-qubit entangled states will impact fundamental physics
investigations and advance quantum-enhanced measurement techniques. In doing so,
this research will impact progress of emerging technological applications of
quantum computation and communication, quantum sensors for navigation and
magnetometry, and atomic clocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.