* 2014915
* SBIR Phase I:  Sensitive and Rapid Endotoxin Assays via a Unique Optical Biosensor-Based Limulus Amoebocyte Lysate Test
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Nikolay Akimov, SAFEBIOSENSE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,246.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to explore an innovative, highly sensitive,
rapid, compact and inexpensive system for detection of contaminants known as
endotoxins. If pharmaceutical products or implantable medical devices
contaminated with endotoxins come into contact with the bloodstream, they can
cause a rapid rise in core body temperature followed by a severe shock, possibly
fatal even before the problem is diagnosed. An estimated 70 million endotoxin
tests are performed each year in the US alone. However, the conventional methods
suffer from limited sensitivity and speed or chemical interference issues. The
proposed project will advance the development of an endotoxin detection system
using a novel optical biosensor for quick, precise detection of low levels. The
proposed system can potentially be applied to sepsis diagnosis in acute care.

The proposed SBIR Phase I project will address endotoxin testing for
pharmaceutical quality control. The proposed approach will use a different
physical parameter, refractive index (RI), to sensitively monitor the early
onset of the gel-forming process in a mixture of analyte solution and Limulus
Amoebocyte Lysate (LAL). Endotoxin concentrations will be correlated with the
changes in RI due to the coagulation of LAL. A unique photonic-crystal biosensor
will be used to monitor changes in RI with high speed (<5 min.) and high
sensitivity (0.000025 EU/mL), 200 times higher than the state of practice. This
crystal will be used in a total internal reflection (PC-TIR) configuration, with
an imaging system to monitor the sensor's state. The project will conduct rapid
prototype iterations through 3D printing. Technical objectives include: (1)
design and construct a prototype; (2) conduct verification and validation in the
presence of typical interfering species; (3) evaluate assay speeds for testing
of radiopharmaceuticals with a short half-life.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.