* 2014163
* New Techniques for Holography from Supergravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Oscar Varela, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Oscar Varela at Utah State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General relativity (the theoretical language
for understanding gravity) and quantum field theory (the theoretical language
for understanding the elementary particles of nature) have traditionally been
thought to be irreconcilable theories. The former governs the large-scale
structure of the universe, while the latter describes the fundamental
interactions —-- electromagnetic, weak, and strong —-- that operate at a
subatomic level. More importantly, only the latter is consistent with the
probabilistic expectations of quantum mechanics. However, is it possible that
these two seemingly different theories are actually two different sides of the
same coin? Could they be regarded as dual manifestations of an overarching set
of physical principles? If this were the case, general relativity and quantum
field theory would complement rather than conflict with each other, as they
would be equivalent, differing only in their regimes of applicability. In his
research, Professor Varela will further develop this idea within the framework
of an equivalence called "the AdS/CFT correspondence". As such, this research
advances the national interest by promoting the development of science in a
fundamental direction, by developing relations among the laws of physics at
deeper and deeper levels. This research will also have broader impacts by
providing training for junior physicists. The results of this research will also
be disseminated to the general public, with an emphasis on reaching members of
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, aspects of the
AdS/CFT correspondence will be studied, with a focus in the supergravity regime
where tighter control of the correspondence is attained. New tools will be
introduced and developed to construct solutions to the supergravity equations
that contain anti-de Sitter space. These methods will exploit the reformulations
of higher-dimensional supergravities that make exceptional symmetries manifest,
and will provide new efficient tools to compute observables in the dual field
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.