* 2014499
* SCH:INT: Collaborative Research: Semi-Automated Rehabilitation in the Home
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Thanassis Rikakis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,100,000.00

With the aging of the US population, there is an increasing need for effective
and accessible rehabilitation services for debilitating illnesses and injuries
such as stroke and arthritis. Intensive long-term rehabilitation is challenging
to administer in an accessible and affordable way as it requires frequent trips
to the clinic (usually supported by a caregiver), and significant one-on-one
time with rehabilitation experts. Telemedicine and telehealth are gaining
prominence as cost effective ways to deliver home-based health and wellness to
wider populations. However, automated tele-rehabilitation is not currently
feasible as the expert functions of the therapist cannot yet be fully automated
and replicated in the home. In addition, there are significant technical,
behavioral, and clinical challenges to scaling technology assisted home-based
rehabilitation. This project aims to address these challenges through the
development of a system for Semi-Automated Rehabilitation At Home (SARAH). The
system is defined as semi-automated because it relies on the remote
participation of the therapist for developing and adapting the therapy program.
The SARAH system uses the remote therapists’ instructions to guide the patient
through daily intensive therapy sessions at the home. Using inexpensive sensing
technologies that are non-intrusive and mindful of the patient’s privacy, the
system records and analyzes the daily therapy sessions as well as the general
activities of the patient in the home. The SARAH system then provides feedback
to the patient based on their therapy activities and general movements around
the home. The system also provides summaries of patient progress to the remote
therapist so that they can adapt the program for subsequent therapy sessions.
The first version of the SARAH system focuses on upper extremity stroke
rehabilitation at the home as the team of researchers has significant experience
in this space. Additional outputs from this project, including the development
of a generalized system and relevant methodology, are designed to support a wide
variety of home-based rehabilitation contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goals of the project are the development of movement assessment
algorithms fusing knowledge based and data driven approaches. This fused
approach produces automated patient assessment feedback during home-based
therapy, and summaries of patient therapy and daily activities to assist the
therapist with remote decision making. The project utilizes a Hierarchical
Bayesian Model (HBM) approximating the therapist decision process as a common
framework for the development of integrative cyber-human movement assessment
algorithms. Therapy sessions are captured using two video cameras and four
wearable Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), while daily activity is only be
tracked through the IMUs to estimate the wearer's 3D kinematics. The project
fuses clinician’s expert knowledge of therapy tasks and segments with video and
IMU data to implement automated segmentation and rating of therapy at the home.
The fused cyber-human assessment of therapy data is used to inform the
translation of low-level IMU feature tracking during daily life activities into
daily movement summaries assisting remote therapy assessment and customization.
The automated summaries include: therapy adherence, quality of therapy
performance, quantity of patient daily activity and movement in the house, use
of impaired limb, tasks detected during daily activity, and confidence of
identification. The fusion of knowledge based and data driven approaches for
computational movement analysis, as well as the cyber-human design process
itself, will yield higher-level generalizable insights extending to many more
applications of machine learning and deep learning in data-constrained
scenarios. The low-cost sensor networks and wearable sensor solutions produced
by the project will provide practical ways to monitor kinematics in real-world
environments such as improved control systems for prosthetics and exoskeletons,
prevention of workplace injuries through biofeedback, and enhancements in human-
robot collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.