* 2014691
* SBIR Phase I:  Flexible high-temperature foam insulation materials mass produced using low-cost extrusion processing
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Arthur Yang, LIATRIS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,969.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the development of a fully
flexible high-temperature (operating in the 200-400°C range) insulation product
for industrial applications (e.g. pipes and other process systems). The proposed
technology offers performance improvements compared to current solutions, such
as fiberglass and mineral wool, while reducing costs through lower-cost
manufacturing and easier installation. High-temperature industrial insulation
can achieve significantly greater energy savings versus building insulation,
leading to project paybacks as low as 1-2 years. This will reduce costs and
energy loads in energy-intensive industries such as food, paper, chemicals,
refining and metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will utilize nanomaterials to produce a novel
composite insulation material that is flexible and delivers high performance
above 200°C. The inorganic materials will raise temperature durability while
high-temperature specialty polymers will enable flexibility. The materials will
be processed using high-volume chemical foaming processes (such as extrusion)
scalable into mass production using off-the-shelf equipment, addressing cost and
throughput issues. This work addresses a longstanding industry challenge to
mass-produce a fully flexible high-temperature insulation material easily
installable by a single individual using standard tools and supplies. A key
activity is to reduce pore sizes below the mean free path of air (~100 nm). This
minimizes all three forms of heat transfer - conduction, convection and
radiation, the last of which becomes more prominent at high
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.