* 2014351
* SBIR Phase I:  NARROW-BEAM DEDICATED BREAST COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Peymon Ghazi, MALCOVA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2021
* USD 245,000.00

This broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
improve detection and diagnosis of cancer in women with dense breasts, a
significant fraction of the 40 million women screened annually. Women with dense
breasts are at greater risk for low cancer detection and overdiagnosis of
disease. This risk arises from limitations in the x-ray imaging techniques
currently available to them: mammography, tomosynthesis and breast CT. The
proposed technology utilizes the benefits of CT imaging science - advantageous
over mammography and tomosynthesis - while incorporating innovations in CT image
acquisition. The technology will deliver high quality three-dimensional images
of the breast providing high visibility of microcalcifications (small traces of
cancer) at radiation levels on par with existing breast cancer screening
standards. This technology has the potential to reduce the financial burdens of
misdiagnosis without introducing new risks to the patient.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project initiates development of a new form
of tomographic breast imaging, built upon the discovery that scatter-free x-ray
images result in improved visibility of small microcalcifications. The proposed
design overcomes limitations of mammography and tomosynthesis - primarily the
masking of cancer by healthy tissue - and limitations of existing breast CT that
include poor microcalcification visibility, limited posterior breast anatomy
coverage, and inadequate image quality at screening dose levels. The proposed CT
design minimizes dose exposure to the patient and delivers acquired raw data
that are near scatter-free. These improvements result in higher quality images
with greater microcalcification visibility. The overarching objective of this
SBIR Phase 1 project is to build a prototype for improved study and simulation.
In the first stage of prototype development, a collimator and shielding
apparatus will be implemented to control scatter and dose. In the second stage,
this apparatus will be incorporated into an existing, functional breast CT
scanner. Performance objectives include a reduction in radiation dose to an
average-sized breast by as much as 30% over existing methods, achievement of
near scatter-free image acquisition, and improved visibility of small
microcalcifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.