* 2014656
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Form of Distributed Electric Propulsion for UAVs and Air Mobility
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Andrew Dickens, WildSpark Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2021
* USD 224,814.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to advance the capability for both
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and air taxis to operate in urban environments.
The form factor of this propulsion technology will allow air vehicles to
maneuver, land, and park in tight spaces and to reduce or eliminate the risk of
propeller contact injuries. These new capabilities will allow unmanned aerial
vehicles and air taxis to operate in dense urban environments and in closer
proximity to human beings without risk of injury or collision with the urban
environment. In turn, this will accelerate applications such as autonomous
package delivery, where UAVs are expected to operate autonomously around
unpredictable humans, as well as air taxis, with inherent challenges in tight
maneuvering and proximity to waiting passengers. Furthermore, these
manufacturing techniques may find other applications in fields such as wearable
and implanted hybrid electronic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the state of
the art in unmanned aerial vehicle and manned air vehicle capabilities. The
proposed research will develop a novel propulsion solution that can be built to
form factors unachievable with current technology. These form factors can be
designed to both eliminate the possibility of propeller contact injuries to
human beings and allow a significantly higher degree of maneuverability in very
close quarters. The implementation of this solution will require new innovations
in the manufacture of flexible hybrid electronics (FHE), combining flexible
substrates with support electronics. This project will evaluate the technical
feasibility of this proposed approach through the construction of a prototype
device using flexible hybrid electronics manufacturing techniques. This project
will then conduct verification and validation tests in environments relevant to
the missions envisioned for unmanned aerial vehicles and other urban air
mobility systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.