* 2014924
* STTR Phase I:  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy at Low Magnetic Fields
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Matthew Rosen, SCALAR MAGNETICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
novel method for chemical analysis using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy at moderate and low magnetic field strengths. A major cost and
physical limitation of NMR spectroscopy is the high-field magnet typically
required. Although high-field instruments face competition from smaller
benchtop-sized instruments, now a $120 million segment of the $1.25 billion NMR
market, these moderate-field devices have lower performance, high cost, and lack
portability. This project will address these challenges by exploring a new
method designed to work in weaker, different magnetic fields produced with
cheap, light, portable magnets. This will bring down the cost and expand the NMR
market in a broader range of applications in petroleum exploration, refining,
and chemical manufacturing; and potentially smaller educational institutions
such as high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is the development of the physical theory behind a new form of NMR
spectroscopy and its testing in moderate-field benchtop spectrometers, as well
as in low-field regimes where spectroscopic information is currently impossible
to acquire. This is made possible by a recently discovered phenomenon called
"spin-lock induced crossing" (SLIC), which measures how the system responds to a
small rotating magnetic field rather than a strong static field. One goal will
be to expand the theoretical understanding of SLIC in order to predict and
analyze the unconventional spectra it produces. Other experimental tasks will
include exploring the physical specifications necessary for spectrometers to use
the technique, evaluating the method's performance compared to conventional NMR
spectroscopy, creating a dictionary of low-field spectra for common chemicals,
and developing methods for automatic analysis and interpretation of the spectra.
The results will be used to develop software for implementing the method on
current benchtop instruments and will also provide a basis for the design and
translation of low-field spectrometers based solely on these
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.