* 2014566
* Collaborative Research: Speciation in laboratory populations of bacteriophage T7
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Ricardo Azevedo, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 559,941.00

This research will advance our understanding of how evolutionary changes
happening within populations (microevolution) drive the accumulation of genetic
barriers to reproduction between populations, eventually resulting in the origin
of new species (macroevolution). Although it is well established that
differences in the environment experienced by diverging populations can result
in different adaptations that are not compatible in the hybrid offspring of
divergent parents, only a few evolution experiments have shown that the same can
happen in populations evolving in identical environments. The aim of this
research is to develop mathematical models for predicting the rate at which
incompatible adaptations accumulate between populations evolving in identical
environments, and to test the predictions using laboratory evolution
experiments. The project will build on a 14-year collaboration between the
researchers (Burch and Azevedo) that has used a combination of computational and
laboratory evolution experiments to investigate the causes and consequences of
interactions between genes. In addition, the project will capitalize on the
connections that the researchers have already formed with Latino organizations
and dual-language primary schools in and around Chapel Hill and Houston to build
teams of primarily Latino students. The researchers will mentor the student
teams to develop games and activities to teach basic concepts in coding,
mathematical modeling, microbiology, and evolution, that the teams will then
deliver, in English and Spanish, to classrooms and science expos in these
communities. The goal is for the students to become teachers over the course of
this outreach project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use computational
and laboratory evolution experiments to investigate the initial stages of
speciation, from the accumulation of the very first incompatible adaptations.
The central goals will be to determine, experimentally, whether adaptation often
results in the accumulation of functionally interacting mutations that, over
time, make it difficult for diverging populations to produce viable hybrid
offspring. Computer simulations and mathematical models will be used to develop
quantitative predictions that will then be tested using laboratory evolution
experiments. The researchers will: 1) monitor the evolution of replicate
populations of the bacteriophage T7 evolving in identical laboratory
environments; 2) generate hybrid offspring between pairs of these evolving
populations and monitor the accumulation of mutations that increase fitness in
one of the parental populations, but decrease fitness in their hybrid offspring,
3) measure the rate at which such incompatible adaptations accumulate, and 4)
determine whether the identified incompatible adaptations resulted from the
kinds of functional interactions that the researchersâ€™ mathematical models
predict to be likely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.