* 2014895
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Minimally Invasive Reconstruction Device for the Treatment of Male Urethral Stricture Disease
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Chanya Godzich, CELEFLUX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 224,998.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project supports the
development of a medical device that enables minimally invasive graft-based
reconstruction of the urethra as a long-lasting treatment for male urethral
stricture, a class of conditions causing restrictions in flow. Approximately 1%
of men on Medicare are treated for stricture annually, and an estimated 1 in 5
men will get a stricture in their lifetime. A urethral stricture progressively
narrows the urethra - leading to urinary urgency, frequent and painful
urination, and impaired intimacy. The current state of practice has many
challenges: Widely available endoscopic treatment is simple and minimally
invasive but rarely curative, with high recurrence rates, and repeated
endoscopic intervention worsens the stricture and turns a curable condition into
a chronic disease, with devastating consequences to quality of life. Graft-based
urethral reconstruction has excellent long-term outcomes but limited
availability – as the complex open surgery is performed by a select group of
reconstructive urologists. The proposed medical device simplifies minimally
invasive graft-based urethral reconstruction to empower general urologists to
deliver minimally invasive curative treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project focuses on demonstrating the anti-migration properties of a temporary
indwelling urethral device prototype. The device is designed to deliver a graft
to a urethral graft bed, and hold it in place as the graft adheres over a period
of 14 days without migrating. Proof-of-concept studies of the mechanically
functional prototype will be performed on the bench and in vivo, to be further
advanced by integrating proprietary anti-migration features. Key milestones
include the prototype's ability to meet: targeted biocompatibility/cytotoxicity
benchmarks, anti-migration benchmarks using an in vitro model, and an absence of
significant migration in vivo over a 14-day period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.