* 2014192
* Modeling Tumor Invasion with Spheroids Embedded in Extracellular Matrix
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mingming Wu, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 469,248.00

Over the past decade, much experimental work has focused on how stiffening and
fiber alignment in the tissue around a tumor can transform the carcinoma into a
more aggressive and invasive phenotype. On the theory side, there has been
recent progress on modeling strain-stiffening transitions in fiber networks, as
well as modeling single-cell migration through fiber networks. However,
cellular-based models have yet to describe how large collections of cells
interact with surrounding tissue, and therefore cannot predict observations such
as cellular streams that leave a tumor collectively, for instance. One possible
reason for this surprising theoretical gap is that modeling cell-ECM
interactions requires a framework that simultaneously describes cellularized and
acellularized tissues as well as a (possibly convoluted) interface between them,
with a minimal number of directly observable parameters, such as cell shape and
fiber network microarchitecture. New experimental techniques will allow the PIs
to perform measurements that can not only be directly tested against the
modeling but will help guide the modeling as well. In the clinical treatment of
cancers like carcinomas, it is difficult to identify biomarkers that correctly
predict the aggressiveness of a tumor in an individual patient. It is also
difficult to quantify how the microenvironment of a tumor might alter the
prognosis for a particular patient. The research proposed here will address
these two problems using ideas that are complementary to the ones typically
being explored in cancer biology labs, by identifying how experimentally-
accessible metrics correlate with tumor invasiveness and perhaps even patient
outcomes. The PIs suggest that structural biomarkers such as cell shape and
fiber alignment may work together to specify tumor invasiveness. To broaden the
participation in the growing interdisciplinary fields of tissue mechanics and
active matter, the PIs will establish an inter-departmental and inter-university
soft matter-biology journal club and will devise a short course on “the soft
matter physics of cancer” to disseminate at venues such as the Boulder school
for condensed matter and other summer schools. These endeavors should help
generate interest among a new generation in important problems at the
intersection of soft matter and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use
theoretical and experimental tools to quantify the interactions between a
multicellular tumor spheroid and its extracellular matrix (ECM) environment.
Their hypothesis is that bulk rheology and interfacial energies place strong
constraints on how the spheroid and ECM interact to stabilize or destabilize the
tumor boundary and, thereby, govern tumor invasiveness. Their prior theoretical
work demonstrates that both vertex models for dense, cellularized tumors and
fiber network models for the acellular extracellular matrix (ECM) exhibit
similar rigidity transitions driving their respective rheologies. Additional
theoretical work has carefully characterized the surprising dynamics of
interfaces between two different tissue types in these models. Finally, they
have developed a powerful experimental technique to probe the mechanical
interactions between single breast tumor cells and extracellular matrices. This
technique will now be applied to multicellular tumor spheroids. Therefore, the
PIs are well-poised to develop testable predictions for tumor invasion in this
model system. They first will theoretically and experimentally study how the
rheology of the tumor spheroid, coupled to the ECM, via a mechanosensitive
interfacial energy modulates the competition between cell-cell adhesion and
cell- ECM adhesion to deform a stable tumor-ECM boundary. They will then
investigate how cell growth, relevant at longer time scales, affects this
competition to lead to deformable and propagating, stable tumor-ECM boundaries.
Finally, they will explore under what conditions the spheroid-ECM boundary
ultimately destabilizes at the individual and/or multicellular scale to lead to
invasion of the surrounding tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.