* 2014281
* Collaborative Research: Joint Space Muscle Fatigue Model and Integration into Full Body Motion Prediction for Repetitive Dynamic Tasks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yujiang Xiang, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,096.00

Worker fatigue increases the risk for illnesses and injuries. An estimated
annual cost in the US of over $130 billion is from fatigue-related lost
productive work time to employers, which indicates that fatigue needs to be
considered during the workplace safety design process. Although different muscle
fatigue models have been developed, all were applied to isometric contractions
(contractions without muscle shortening), but the majority of everyday
activities are involved in concentric (muscle contracts/shortens) and eccentric
(muscle lengthens/returns to resting state) muscle movements, i.e., repetitive
dynamic tasks. Conventional motion simulation approaches for injury prevention
typically optimize a motion without considering muscle fatigue. Thus, the goal
of this project is to address the need for a musculoskeletal model that can
predict muscle movement considering muscle fatigue. The model can be adapted to
the physical properties of an individual worker, e.g., height, weight, length of
body segments, etc. The methods and associated numerical tools developed will be
applicable to broad occupational health and safety designs such as lower back
injury prevention for repetitive lifting and repetitive package handling in the
delivery industry. The project will also enable education and training for
undergraduates, graduate students, and store employees. Results will be
integrated into courses for Biomechanics and Digital Human Modeling and made
available for future generations of engineers. In addition, a week-long summer
camp will be organized for local store managers with lifting jobs at Texas Tech
University. For these managers this summer camp will help them to understand the
injury mechanism and causes for injuries, contributing to their awareness of
work-related injuries whenever employees conduct repetitive lifting tasks
daily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel and
efficient dynamic motion prediction tool considering muscle fatigue for
repetitive dynamic tasks, which, if successful, will be the first full body
biomechanics human model with this capability. The project’s objectives are to:
develop: a new joint space muscle fatigue model for repetitive dynamic tasks;
develop a new joint space predictive simulation method considering fatigue; and
decompose the fatigued joint torques into fatigued muscle forces. The Research
Plan is organized under 6 tasks. TASK 1 is to develop a three-compartment joint
space fatigue model for repetitive tasks beginning with a 3D musculoskeletal
model that has 30 DOFS, 21 segments, 324 musculotendon actuators and 5 lumbar
vertebrae connected with 6 DOF joints. Fatigue is incorporated by bundling all
muscles responsible for each joint into one virtual muscle with virtual units
being divided into compartments depending on the state in which they are in:
active, fatigued or resting. TASK 2 is to perform an inverse dynamics-based
optimization without fatigue. The design variables for the skeleton optimization
problem are joint angles from which joint torques can be computed. TASK 3 is to
optimize join space motion prediction considering fatigue using collocation
methods. The joint torques obtained under Task 2 will be used to calculate a
“target load” vector that will be used to initiate the fatigue process. The
optimization problem is to find the optimal joint angles, joint torques, joint
resultant and virtual muscle active states that minimize the cost function of
normalized joint torque squared subject to model dynamics equations of motion.
TASK 4 is to find the lower extremity and lumbar spine model muscle forces
corresponding to the fatigued joint torques using static optimization. Tasks 1-4
are interconnected elements of a complete nonlinear motion optimization
considering muscle fatigue for dynamic tasks. TASK 5 is to collect experiment
related data from 20 subjects (10 males and 10 females) of varying ages,
statures, and BMIs. The data will be used to validate the joint space muscle
fatigue model and skeletal motion prediction. TASK 6 is to validate the muscle
fatigue model for repetitive dynamic tasks involving wrist, elbow, shoulder,
trunk hip, knee and ankle joints and then to validate the 3D motion prediction
model considering muscle fatigue during a repetitive box lifting process. For
joint related validations, 8 subjects of each gender will be used to tune the
model and the 2 remaining subjects will be used for validation. For 3D motion
prediction validation, three aspects (muscle levels, joint profiles and ground
reaction forces), model predictions will be compared to aspects determined from
EMG and motion capture data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.