* 2014827
* STTR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence Tool to Optimize Organ Transplantation Outcomes (Transplant-AI)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Jim Havelka, InformAI, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be to improve solid organ transplantation outcomes. Few significant
clinical or technological advancements have been made within the last two
decades to improve organ matching success, and the accuracies of current models
predicting survival outcomes are diminishing. There is a great need for
clinicians to have better decision-making support tools. Every 12 minutes, a new
person is added to the organ transplant waiting list, a number growing by about
five percent each year. Within a single day, 21 people die waiting for a kidney,
liver, or other organ match. Although 36,500 kidney and liver transplants are
performed each year, the patient demand for donor organs far outweighs supply by
four to one, so the need to improve donor-recipient matching is urgent.
Optimizing the donor organ-patient match is a key determining factor for
improving transplant success and patient survival. This project's artificial
intelligence (AI) model will guide transplant surgeons, physicians, and other
healthcare professionals will deliver precise, accurate, quantitative
information for real-time predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes artificial intelligence to
predict outcomes after solid organ transplantation procedures. Clinicians
currently consider several factors when determining organ allocation and
candidate patient ranking on the recipient waitlist, including extent of disease
pathology, functional status of the recipient, and intrinsic donor and recipient
compatibility factors. Measures, indices and functional status scores have been
designed to predict specific outcomes but are not easily combined into one
optimized decision to guide organ allocation decisions. To date, no organ-
matching predictive outcome model has comprehensively synthesized all available
patient- and donor-specific variables at the time of transplantation. This
project will train an artificial intelligence (AI) algorithm to comprehensively
integrate all information available at the time of transplantation procedures
(hundreds of variables) into a predictive model. An AI model of this nature
would be a substantial improvement from linear models able to synthesize only a
modest number of parameters (approximately 15) to date. It is expected that the
proposed technology will predict both pre- and post-transplant survival more
accurately than currently accepted models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.