* 2014262
* SBIR Phase I:  Transcranial Dynamic Focused Ultrasound for the Non-Invasive Opening of the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB)
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Bhaskar Ramamurthy, CORDANCE MEDICAL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,986.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop technology designed to provide
physicians with a new capability to manage patients with brain diseases such as
brain cancers, Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s. One reason brain disease is difficult
to treat is the existence of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) that prevents almost
all therapeutic agents from reaching diseased tissue from blood. The proposed
technology enables opening the BBB in a non-invasive manner with a system that
is portable and may be deployed in an out-patient or a clinic setting. This
system could impact the cost burden of managing patients with brain diseases and
provide better quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
develops methods to accurately direct focused beams of ultrasound to therapy
targets within the patient’s brain from an array of ultrasound transducers
embedded in a cap-like device conformed comfortably to a patient’s head. In the
last several years, focused ultrasound with microbubbles (an FDA approved
ultrasound contrast agent) has been used to transiently open the BBB to
administer drugs or provide therapy. The proposed cap-like device includes
mechanisms both to conform to the patient head and to measure the resulting
alignment to the patient anatomy. The envisioned method is to acquire
information on cap placement and MR and CT images of the specific patient
&lt;br/&gt;in advance so that the therapeutic ultrasound can then be directed
accurately to targets within the patient's brain. The proposed work includes a)
developing beamforming algorithms applicable to a range of patient head sizes,
with transducer elements arranged on the conforming cap; and (b) understanding
and mitigating potential sources of errors limiting the performance. The project
will conduct simulation and analysis using MR and CT images from real patients,
obtained from the U.S. National Library of Medicine Visible Human Project,
resulting in specifications suitable for construction of a laboratory device for
verification and validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.