* 2014645
* STTR Phase I:  Biomimetic Solution for Gesture-Based Human Machine Interactions
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Trevor Moon, NEUROWIRED
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 244,999.00

The broader/commercial opportunity of this Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project is to address the emerging demand for intuitive human-
machine interfaces. Interest in virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR)
technologies has increased substantially, but current VR/AR interface algorithms
are often inefficient and hamper many gesture-based interfaces, due to
limitations in current machine learning algorithms. This limits the performance
and widespread adoption of new VR/AR technologies. The technology developed here
will enable intuitive interactions with VR/AR that will greatly expand the scope
of commercial applications and shorten the development timelines for new
products.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
prototype musculoskeletal technology for decoding movement from muscle activity.
Traditional machine-learning-based gesture recognition approaches for virtual
and augmented reality (VR/AR) interfaces cannot fulfill the demand for more
natural and intuitive interactions, due to the reliance on only motion
observation. Current gesture recognition technologies are often not
generalizable to novel or perturbed movements. The goal of this project is to
develop a backend technology for real-time and accurate decoding of intended arm
and hand movement from muscle activity, which overcomes both of those
limitations. This project will lead to a new tool for continuous real-time
computer interface with multidimensional hand gestures or movements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.