* 2014896
* AGEP Research Universities Alliance Model: Advancing Minority Math, Physical Science, Environmental Science, and Engineering PhD Candidates and Postdoctoral Scholars to Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Mark Smith, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 89,990.00

This collaborative research project brings together nine very high research (R1)
universities with the goal of developing, implementing, self-studying,
externally evaluating, and disseminating an AGEP Alliance Model about faculty
career pathways that increases the number of historically underrepresented
minority (URM) Mathematical, Physical Science, Environmental Science, and
Engineering (MPESE) faculty. The partnership involves the University of
California Berkeley (Berkeley), the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA),
Stanford University (Stanford), the California Institute of Technology
(Caltech), the University of Washington, the University of Texas at Austin, the
University of Michigan, Harvard University and the Georgia Institute of
Technology. The Alliance team is expanding and improving activities that have
previously been piloted by a Berkeley, UCLA, Stanford and Caltech partnership;
and the nine-institution team will study, operationalize, adapt and implement
the activities across all collaborating universities. The project employs
multiple participant-focused interventions to facilitate the advancement of URM
doctoral candidates, postdoctoral scholars and early-career faculty in MPESE
disciplines: A doctoral candidate and postdoctoral scholar research exchange
across partnering institutions; an on-line portal to facilitate placement and
hiring management of postdoctoral scholars; a faculty advancement initiative for
postdoctoral scholars transitioning into early-career faculty positions; and a
suite of academic community-building activities to enhance faculty career
pathways, such as targeted professional development, cohort building and network
development. The primary outcomes of this AGEP Alliance Model project are
increased rates of doctoral candidates transitioning into postdoctoral scholar
positions and postdoctoral scholars transitioning into early-career faculty
employment, as well as the scaling of the research exchange and postdoctoral on-
line portal beyond the nine partnering institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
nation addresses a STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate
and graduate students, our universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain
and promote URM STEM faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for
URM students to learn from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate
that URM STEM associate and full professors occupy only 8% of these senior
faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and universities, and only about 6% of
these positions at the nation's most research-intensive institutions. This AGEP
Alliance Model has the potential to improve the success of URM doctoral
candidates and postdoctoral scholars transitioning into early-career MPESE
faculty positions. Advancing the careers of URM faculty ultimately leads to
improved academic mentorship for URM undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral scholars, in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.