* 2014071
* Theoretical Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Csaba Csaki, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,175,000.00

This proposal funds the research activities of Professors Csaba Csaki, Yuval
Grossman, Thomas Hartman, Peter Lepage, Liam McAllister, and Maxim Perelstein at
Cornell University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy physics is the study of the
fundamental building blocks of matter and their interactions. There are several
different approaches to answer the biggest puzzles facing this field. Extremely
precise measurements --- of particle collisions at high energies, of the cosmic
afterglow of the Big Bang (the so-called "cosmic microwave background
radiation"), and of other signals ---yield new clues as to the interactions of
elementary particles and the evolution of the Universe. Powerful computer
simulations can also be used to study the properties of the strong nuclear
interactions. Finally, theoretical studies of gravitational and quantum
phenomena in extreme settings, such as near black holes or in the earliest
moments of the Universe, can lend insight into theories that join gravity with
quantum mechanics. Pursuing all of these directions, the Cornell Particle Theory
group will advance the national interest by promoting the advancement of science
in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of
new physical law. In his research, Professor Csaki will develop and scrutinize
models that could provide an explanation of the origin of the masses of
fundamental particles, as well as the origin of the observed acceleration of our
Universe --- models which can potentially be tested either at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) or at a planned future accelerator. The research of Professor
Grossman will focus on questions related to the unexplained fact that the world
is made of only ordinary matter particles, while antimatter is exceedingly rare.
Professor Hartman will explore quantum-mechanical aspects of black holes.
Professor Lepage will use large-scale computer simulations for high-precision
studies of strongly-interacting particles --- calculations that are needed for
high-precision experiments seeking to detect and quantify new physics. Professor
McAllister will study the effects of quantum mechanics in cosmology. Finally,
Professor Perelstein will propose and study novel theories of dark matter, a
mysterious form of matter which comprises most of the matter in the universe but
does not consist of any of the known elementary particles. He will also
investigate applications of machine learning to particle physics. This project
will also have significant broader impacts. The Cornell Particle Theory group
will train graduate students and involve postdocs in their research, and thereby
provide critical training for junior physicists beginning research in this
field. They will also give public lectures on their research results, as well as
regular lectures to local high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Professor Csaki will pursue several directions, including new
approaches to the cosmological-constant problem and tests of vacuum energy;
novel aspects of composite-Higgs, dark-matter, and warped extra-dimensional
models; clarification of anomalies via scattering amplitudes or the AdS/CFT
correspondence; and the physics of magnetic monopoles. Professor Grossman will
explore flavor physics, including the implications of the recent discovery of CP
violation in charm, as well as the indications of anomalies in B decays and rare
kaon decays. Professor Hartman will study the connection between entanglement
and emergent geometry, and investigate the role of higher topologies in black-
hole information. Professor Lepage will continue his work with the HPQCD lattice
collaboration to extract important physics from nonperturbative QCD simulations,
with a particular emphasis on heavy-quark systems and other high-precision
measurements. Professor McAllister will study flux vacua in compactifications of
string theory on Calabi-Yau threefolds, including de Sitter and inflationary
cosmologies. Finally, Professor Perelstein will investigate novel theories of
dark matter and dark sectors with non-standard cosmological histories, including
their phenomenological consequences, as well as further explore applications of
machine learning to collider physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.