* 2014086
* String Compactifications: From Geometry to Effective Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Eric Sharpe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 702,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Lara Anderson, James
Gray, and Eric Sharpe at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory is a
proposed framework of physics that encompasses both quantum mechanics (the
theory describing the behavior of subatomic particles) and gravity (the force
dictating the large-scale behavior of the Universe). In string theory, physics
and the mathematical subject of geometry are intrinsically intertwined. While
the questions that string theory attempts to answer are physical, the path to
those answers frequently involves cutting-edge challenges in modern mathematics.
This award will fund a collaborative program of research to explore the physics
that arises from studying aspects of string theory. The goals of this work
include developing new foundational tools for the subject of string
phenomenology, which is the attempt to extract the observable consequences of
string theory for experimental physics. As part of their research, Professors
Anderson, Gray, and Sharpe aim to further bound and characterize the types of
geometrical shapes that arise in string theory. Experience shows that when
strong physical requirements are expressed in geometrical terms, they can open
the door to new and unexpected results in both physics and mathematics. As a
result, research in this area advances the national interest by promoting the
progress of basic science. Professors Anderson, Gray, and Sharpe will involve
junior scientists in this project, including a postdoctoral researcher and
several graduate students who will take part in the collaborative research.
Their efforts will also include the organizing of conferences and workshops that
will increase dialog between physicists and mathematicians on pressing problems
at the boundary of both fields, all while actively encouraging the inclusion of
under-represented groups into the frontline of progress in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, two of the most flexible
frameworks for four-dimensional compactifications of string theory --- namely
heterotic string theory and F-theory --- will be investigated. Within heterotic
string theory, novel geometric tools will be used to compute previously
undetermined aspects of the effective theory. These include the N=1 matter field
Kahler potential, physically normalized Yukawa couplings, and vacuum values of
the perturbative superpotential. The non-perturbative contributions to Yukawa
couplings will also be computed via quantum sheaf cohomology, a generalization
of ordinary quantum cohomology. Within F-theory, new results in the geometry of
elliptic fibrations will be used to study the properties of singular Calabi-Yau
manifolds and their links to Hitchin systems, as well as to study the
implications of the ubiquity of multiply fibered manifolds for string dualities,
effective theories, and possible boundedness of the set of smooth Calabi-Yau
varieties. Recent progress in heterotic/F-theory duality will be used to extract
new features of the effective theories describing F-theory compactifications,
including the explicit four-dimensional field-dependent form of flux
contributions to the superpotential. Finally, Professors Anderson, Gray, and
Sharpe will also apply some of their recent insights into the global structure
of moduli spaces of SCFTs to study possible swampland
conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.