* 2014784
* SBIR Phase I:  A scalable platform to produce nematode pheromones for crop protection
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Fatma Kaplan, Pheronym, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 249,800.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to create a manufacturing method for a new class of environmentally
friendly, sustainable biopesticides. Chemical pesticides pollute the environment
and cause harm to humans and other nontarget organisms. In contrast,
biopesticides are safe to humans and the environment. The proposed project is a
platform to manufacture special chemicals to enhance food security and
sustainable agricultural practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SBIR
Phase I project addresses the feasibility of manufacturing nematode dispersal
pheromones using in vitro fermentation to control agricultural pests.
Entomopathogenic nematodes are natural bioinsecticides commercially produced
using in vitro fermentation; they produce pheromones that can greatly enhance
their efficacy as biocontrol agents. This project will demonstrate the
feasibility of manufacturing nematode dispersal pheromones using in vitro
fermentation methods with the following technical tasks: 1) An in vitro
fermentation system will be established using Steinernema feltiae in shaker
flasks; 2) Optimum harvesting time for dispersal pheromones will be determined
using dispersal assays; 3) The effectiveness of the produced pheromones will be
compared with that of in vivo counterparts for dispersal and infectivity; 4)
Media will be supplemented to boost pheromone production and create a platform
for specific pheromone mixtures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.