* 2014439
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS'2020)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Carol Fung, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)/International
Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Network Operations and Management
Symposium (NOMS) is a leading conference in network and service management. NOMS
2020 will be held in April 20-24, 2020 in Budapest, Hungary. Attending the NOMS
conference will expose students to frontier research topics in the area of
network and service management and to be inspired by researches from around the
world working in these fields. Students may also utilize this opportunity to
establish collaboration relationships with other researchers who share similar
interests during the conference social and academic activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides travel support for students in the
United States to attend the NOMS 2020 conference. The travel awards will focus
on bringing in first-time attendees and under-represented minority students into
the conference, since attending conferences is an important part of their
educational experience, and they often have limited travel funds. The research
community and the technical workforce benefit from the improvement of students
in the pipeline, and new ideas generated through introducing new participants
into the research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.