* 2014173
* Modeling Sources of Variation in Interaction Networks Using a C. Elegans Microbiome Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Host-associated microbiomes are shaped by networks of interactions among
microbes and between microbes and the host. It is not possible to directly
measure these interactions, requiring inference from co-occurrence data. Such
inferences are prone to high rates of false positives and negatives, and the
complications found in real data - in particular demographic noise, higher-order
and frequency-dependent interactions among microbes, and variation across hosts
- are not well understood. In this project a direct test will be developed using
the utility of co-occurrence-based interaction networks in understanding host-
associated microbial communities where these biologically realistic
complications are present. Further, the PIs will test the common implicit
assumption that variation in individual hosts within a population does not
fundamentally alter the inter-species interactions in a microbiome, such that
the same interaction network can be used to understand the microbiome.
Educational and outreach activities are specifically designed to excite and
engage students at all levels in biophysics and theoretical biology. The
proposed work will actively engage undergraduate students from the Biology and
Physics programs in independent biophysics research. Further, quantitative
laboratory modules are being developed for the Biology and Physics curricula at
Emory to familiarize students with core concepts in population dynamics and to
introduce the concepts of variation and hidden states in biological
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use the nematode worm Caenorhabditis
elegans and an eight-species bacterial consortium from the worm's native
microbiome. The worm is a powerful model system for understanding microbial
community assembly, where bottom-up assembly and quantification microbiome
composition in large numbers of homozygous individual hosts is possible on short
experimental time scales, allowing rapid generation of large, high-quality data
sets describing microbiome composition and variation. Using this tractable
system, the PIs will obtain microbiome composition data from large numbers of
individual hosts, directly parameterizing interactions among microbes
(competition, facilitation etc.) and between individual microbial species and
the host (e.g. colonization rates and densities in the intestine). Using these
data, they will fit and constrain neutral and near-neutral stochastic models of
community assembly to: 1) determine the interactions shaping these systems, 2)
measure the effects of higher-order and frequency-dependent interactions on
inferred networks, and 3) test the assumption that microbial interaction
networks are conserved across hosts. The project will use a tractable
experimental system as a tool to understand a complex network inference problem
on noisy data with hidden underlying states, a problem that is highly relevant
for real- world understanding of microbiome data and other data from systems
where interactions are not directly measurable, and is therefore relevant for
the Physics of Living Systems program. The combined expertise of the PIs will
allow rigorous analysis of the technical problem while maintaining a firm
connection of these analyses and conclusions to the biological
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.