* 2014996
* SBIR Phase I:  High-speed, precision wire plotting for electromechanical sensors and actuators
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Samuel Calisch, FOLI RESEARCH, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 224,700.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
increase performance and simplify the development of electric motors. This
project develops additive manufacturing technology for the electromagnetic and
electronic components necessary for new high-performance motors for applications
such as commercial aviation. The global electric motor market was estimated at
$100 B in 2017. The proposed technology allows more efficient utilization of
rare earth materials, and could eliminate the conventional trade-offs between
motor efficiency and cost, enabling reduced energy intensity by cost-driven
applications, like heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), to
significantly reduce their energy intensity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
SBIR Phase I project will explore translation of a novel manufacturing process
allowing printing of high-density wire windings with the same design freedom and
streamlined manufacturing associated with printed circuit boards today. Because
the upstream wire manufacturing and coating processes have such tight
tolerances, a relatively modest plotting machine can produce electromagnetic
devices at speeds of several meters per second. Further, by incorporating
electronics directly into the plotted windings, devices which would
conventionally require integrating multiple manufacturing processes can be made
in a single step. In this project, we will advance the development of an end-to-
end workflow for this manufacturing process and use it to prototype a novel
high-performance electric motor design. Gravimetric power densities of over 20
kW/kg may be possible with this approach, representing a 4X improvement over
state-of-the-art in the 100kW class and potentially enabling electric aviation.
In this project, we will advance and validate the performance of a new motor
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.