* 2014215
* Research in Particle Theory, Cosmology, and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Graham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,470,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Savas Dimopoulos, Peter
Graham, Shamit Kachru, Renata Kallosh, Andrei Linde, Leonardo Senatore, Stephen
Shenker, Eva Silverstein, and Leonard Susskind at Stanford
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of their research activities, these
nine professors will study a broad range of subjects, all aimed at answering two
basic questions: Can we understand the origin and historical evolution of our
Universe? And can we determine the nature of the basic building blocks --— the
elementary particles —-- that constitute the world around us? This group of
researchers will attack these questions from diverse perspectives. Professors
Dimopoulos and Graham will focus on developing and proposing new techniques
using cutting-edge modern technology to detect new particles (or even new forces
that act between known particles) via experiments that fit on a table top.
Professors Kallosh, Linde, and Senatore will focus on the behavior of our
Universe at the largest observed scales. A number of experiments hint that the
Universe expanded very rapidly, undergoing a period of cosmic "inflation" early
in its history. Finding theoretical models of inflation that fit this data will
be a part of this effort. Professors Shenker, Silverstein, and Susskind will
focus on conceptual questions about the foundations of gravity as well as the
interplay between gravity and quantum mechanics. This work will include attempts
to understand the mysteries of black holes, wormholes, and other enigmatic
objects that emerge within Einstein’s theory of gravity. Professor Kachru will
focus on understanding the interplay between our most fundamental theories that
unify gravity with quantum mechanics and ideas in modern mathematics. Each of
these lines of research also has significant broader impacts that are in the
natural interest. New tools will be developed which can have applications in
diverse areas of science. Likewise, students and postdoctoral fellows who will
be trained in the course of performing this research are likely to serve the
nation in crucial ways, whether by joining the next generation of leaders in
research and teaching, or by transferring their expertise towards the
development of important new technologies in the private sector. These
professors will also engage in outreach activities designed to bring the fruits
of modern science to the general public through public lectures, videos, and
popular publications, including books accessible to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, Professors Dimopoulos
and Graham will use quantum-interference effects in atomic physics, which can be
measured to very high precision, to leverage indirect signs of potential new
physics to detectable levels. Professors Kallosh and Linde will explore
supergravity and string-theory models of the expanding Universe and their
connection to the most recent experiments constraining early-Universe inflation.
Professor Senatore will develop theoretical frameworks to predict large-scale
structure based on models of the early Universe. Such frameworks can also be
turned around, allowing the use of observed large-scale structure data to
postdict inflationary parameters. Professor Shenker will study low-dimensional
toy models of quantum gravity, which can be solved exactly via connections to
models of random matrices. Professor Silverstein will study models of string
theory in which the required extra dimensions are curled up on a space of
negative curvature. Indeed, such models offer a natural home for cosmologies
with accelerated expansion. Professor Susskind will investigate connections
between complexity theory in the information sciences and gravity. Finally,
Professor Kachru will use dualities in field theory and string theory to
elucidate still-mysterious aspects of Calabi-Yau compactification of string
theory (such as the explicit form of the Calabi-Yau metric), and also
investigate connections between number-theoretic notions and string
compactification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.