* 2014181
* The Role of Hydrodynamic Slip in Insect Respiration
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Socha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 477,149.00

It is usually assumed that at a liquid-solid interface the liquid has zero
velocity. However, this condition is not always satisfied, and the liquid slips
along the solid surface. This project tests the hypothesis that such slip plays
a major role in reducing the cost of producing airflows in the insect
respiratory system. Although theoretical considerations suggest that slip flow
should exist in insect tracheae, its existence has never been studied. In
mammalian and other blood-based circulatory systems, the shape of the red blood
cells interacts with the cardiovascular geometry to reduce the friction in the
distal portions of the vasculature, greatly reducing how hard the heart has to
work to deliver oxygen to the body's cells. Insects use a different paradigm for
oxygen delivery: they transport it directly to the tissues using a tracheal
system, without the aid of blood. There is strong evidence to suggest that the
insect system uses the slip to reduce energetic cost. The PIs will integrate
computations and experiments to investigate the role of slip in insect
respiration. The project will also provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate and undergraduate students by immersing them in fluid mechanics and
insect biology, and training them in experimental methods combined with rigorous
theoretical and computational modeling. The results of this research will be
disseminated in the classroom through courses that the PIs teach, in scientific
publications, and at conferences, contributing to a generation of future
researchers that promote cross-disciplinary research and technologies.
Leveraging a recent NSF REU site award at Virginia Tech, three summer
undergraduate researchers will work on this project. This REU partners with
three HBCUs in Atlanta (Morehouse College, Spelman College, and Clark Atlanta
University), and this connection will be used to recruit underrepresented
students from those schools. Finally, both PIs are passionate about science
communication and will actively engage the broader public via their Twitter and
YouTube accounts, and previously established connections with journalists at
print, web, and television venues like the New York Times, National Geographic,
and the BBC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect respiratory systems have evolved over
millennia to handle gases at the microscale extremely efficiently, as evidenced
by insects' unparalleled metabolic range. Without sophisticated active
respiration strategies in the largest tracheal tubes, insects would likely be
size-limited by diffusion. For the smaller tubes, the PIs propose that the
mechanisms insects have evolved to enhance transport of gases and dissolved
solutes deep into their bodies rely on passive respiratory actuation, in concert
with asymmetric, three- dimensional respiratory geometries that are precisely
tuned so that the air flow in them spans the continuum, slip, and transitional
gas flow regimes at extremely low Reynolds numbers. The PIs have previously
studied simplified mathematical and computation models of insect respiratory
systems. Here, they propose studying the physics of gas transport in the
smallest parts of actual insect respiratory systems directly for the first time.
By uncovering the fundamental fluid mechanical strategies that insects use for
transporting gases and solutes deep into the bulk of their centimeter-scale
bodies, they will discover how nature solves the problem of actively
distributing nutrients at the microscale, which will provide inspiration for new
microfluidic devices and insight into the physics of respiratory flows at the
smallest scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.