* 2014475
* SCH: INT: Personalized Models of Nutrition Intake from Continuous Glucose Monitors
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,099,881.00

In the United States, poor diet contributes to more than half of premature
deaths related to cardiovascular and metabolic disease, including type 2
diabetes (T2D). At present, the number of adults developing T2D continues to
rise, with over 30 million Americans living with T2D. Another 80 million are
currently at-risk of progressing from pre-diabetes to T2D. Improving food
choices remains a cornerstone of modern diabetes care and can decrease the risk
of progression to T2D. However, at present, achieving timely and appropriate
lifestyle change in adults with or at-risk of T2D is challenging. Conventional
methods to record meal choice and track nutritional composition can be
inaccurate (e.g., estimating protein content of a meal) and burdensome (i.e.,
individuals must manually enter information into a food diary). Interestingly,
the blood glucose profile after a meal depends not only on the carbohydrate
content but also on the amount of fat, protein, and fiber; as an example, adding
fat and protein to carbohydrates generally leads to smaller increases and slower
decreases in achieved glucose levels, lowering risk. This suggests that the
shape of the glucose response to a meal may have the potential to indicate meal
content. A unique opportunity to exploit this information is to use a continuous
glucose monitor (CGM). A CGM is a small sensor that attaches to the skin and
measures glucose continuously every 5-15 minutes, making it possible to
automatically record the glucose responses to meals. To this aim, the
investigators will conduct ambulatory studies in which people (healthy, with
T2D, or at-risk of T2D) will consume a variety of conventional meals in free-
living conditions while wearing a CGM and a smartwatch to assess physical
activity. With data from these devices, the investigators will develop machine-
learning algorithms that can predict the content of a meal. This project would
be helpful to clinicians to provide new information to support positive behavior
change to reduce the risk of or progression from pre-diabetes to T2D, and would
make it easier for patients to passively and accurately track nutritional
components of their diet, potentially leading to healthier diets and improved
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new inverse metabolic
models (IMMs) of the glucose response to mixed meals that can estimate the
meal's macronutrient composition (carbohydrates, protein, fat, and fiber) from
CGM and activity data. To account for large inter-individual variability in food
metabolism, the investigators will develop IMMs that consider the phenotype of
each person (e.g., anthropometric variables, gut microbiota) as well as their
recent history of food intake and physical exercise. Two types of models will be
developed, individualized and personalized IMMs. Individualized models are
developed specifically for each person based on their own data (i.e., CGM
recordings labeled with the corresponding macronutrient information), but this
may require collecting a large training set per person that would be impractical
in clinical settings. For this reason, the investigators will also develop
personalized IMMs that leverage data from other individuals who have similar
metabolic characteristics and phenotype. Accomplishing this work will require
development of new deep-network recurrent architectures to estimate meals'
macronutrient compositions, and attention mechanisms and transfer-learning
techniques to explore and explain inter-individual variability in food
metabolism. The investigators will also make available the multimodal de-
identified data, including CGM recordings, anthropometric and phenotype
variables, physical activity and diet entries. Such corpus, the first of its
kind to be publicly released, will promote further research on computational
modeling of food metabolism and diet monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.