* 2014804
* STTR Phase I:  Development of resonators on high temperature piezoelectric materials for harsh environment sensor and oscillator applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kushal Bhattacharjee, Kampanics, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to address the need for accurate devices
capable of operating in extreme environments exceeding 250 °C. Many sensors have
key components made of quartz, known for its high sensitivity, accuracy, and
stability; but it cannot operate at temperatures exceeding 250 °C. The
applications requiring sensitive components operating at these high temperatures
include interplanetary spacecraft, nuclear reactors, deep drilling, enhanced
geothermal systems, and hypersonic aircrafts and missiles. The proposed project
will develop new sensors using advanced material technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project aims to develop a novel resonator on piezoelectric materials optimized
for performance at high temperature and pressure. The proposed dual-mode
resonators are expected to exhibit much higher stability and accuracy. They are
also expected to have significantly less need for systemic recalibration. The
three main objectives in this project are to optimize the cut angles of the
piezoelectric material; develop wafer-level fabrication processes, for size and
cost reduction; and to develop a wafer bonding process for eventual wafer-level
packaging of the resonators. The effort address translation challenges in device
structure, synthesis, modeling and optimization, wafer level fabrication and
packaging, to make highly sensitive, accurate, small footprint, low-cost
resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.