* 2014968
* SBIR Phase I:  Scaling Ocean Observation with Millions of In Situ Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* David Mann, Loggerhead Instruments
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
benefit from a global network of proposed sensors continuously monitoring the
world’s oceans at unprecedented scale. The need for better ocean sensing will
benefit weather forecasting and fisheries management. Predicting hurricane
strength is difficult when the heat content of the ocean is not measured at high
resolution. In addition, many fisheries are showing signs of change as fish
migrate towards the poles. This project will provide ocean temperature data to
weather forecasters, as well as information about commercially important fish
species. Applications include academia, government, fisheries, maritime
shipping, energy, and the military. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project will scale ocean observation by developing the technology required to
enable deployment millions of inexpensive smart platforms (surface drifters and
profiling buoys) using acoustics, motion sensors and AI to detect marine
animals, track vessels, and measure oceanographic conditions. This project will
develop and test low power, efficient artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms to
detect boats on a bottom-stationing profiler. This bottom-stationing profiler is
designed to rest on the bottom to hold station, and then rise to the surface to
transmit boat detection information over a satellite to a cloud computing
system. This project includes a demonstration of monitoring boat visitation
rates at artificial reefs in Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.