* 2014798
* STTR Phase I:  Algorithmic Mid-Infrared Spectroscope Utilizing Narrow-Band, Epsilon-Near-Zero Thermal Emitters
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Edward Sachet, THIRD FLOOR MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,969.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will advance the development of a new method to conduct infrared
spectroscopy, an important tool in the life sciences, materials development and
pharmaceutical industries. Chemical producers will spend an estimated $140
million on analytical instrumentation in 2020. The instrument concept is based
on human vision, which can deduce roughly 10 million colors from the signals
extracted from just three types of light-sensitive cones that have overlapping
sensitivity to measure color combinations. The proposed solution uses the same
architecture, replacing multiple instruments with a single device.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will advance the translation of
an algorithmic spectroscopy tool. Utilizing newly available thermal emitter
technology with tunable center emission frequency across the infrared (2-10
microns wavelength), the program will demonstrate that spectroscopic information
can be recovered algorithmically from a series of non-dispersive absorption
measurements. The technology uses the human vision system as a model and pairs
multiple emitters with overlapping emission spectra with low-cost, non-
dispersive infrared detectors, such as thermopiles. The proposed solution will
develop an algorithmic spectroscopy solution at a frequency range of 3800-2100
cm-1 by demonstrating sensitivity to the characteristic CO2 absorption bands and
algorithmically reconstructing the CO2 spectrum. Successful completion of the
proposed effort will establish the benchmarks for a new infrared spectroscopy
technology that operates without costly dispersive elements or moving
parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.