* 2014816
* Collaborative Research: Distributed Mechanism Design with Learning Guarantees: Resource Allocation Among Networked Strategic Agents
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jianghai Hu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 224,629.00

During the last decades there has been significant research in understanding how
strategic agents in communication, transportation, energy, economic, societal
networks make decisions in the presence of uncertainty about other agents'
preferences. This research is motivated by a multitude of applications in our
ever-connected society and economy, and the realization that assumptions such as
fully-informed or fully-compliant agents are untenable in vastly decentralized
networks. The design of incentives for resource allocation problems in the
presence of strategic agents falls under the research area of mechanism design
(MD). There are two issues with the current state of the art in MD. First, it
assumes the existence of a central entity accepting bids and being capable of
communicating with each agent. Second, it does not adequately address the
question of how agents converge to the designed equilibria.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Our overarching objective in this proposal is to
create a new subfield of research that addresses these issues in a unified
framework. We utilize this framework to design mechanisms that are distributed
and have learning (i.e., convergence) guarantees for a sufficiently broad range
of agents' behaviors. To achieve our objective, we plan to proceed along a path
that blends in fundamental research with targeted applications. In particular,
we first investigate the design of distributed mechanisms. We consider two
illustrative applications, namely, rate allocation in unicast/multicast-
multirate networks and demand management of energy communities. We then
investigate distributed mechanisms that incorporate learning guarantees, by
which the community reaches an equilibrium. Finally, we study the above two
problems in the context of non-Bayesian agents with ``no-regret'' type limited
rationality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Besides the two illustrative
applications, research to be carried in this project will benefit a broad range
of practical fields of large societal impact. Examples include smart energy and
infrastructure systems, communication systems, cyber physical and human systems,
social and economical systems, to name a few. The research outcomes will be
utilized for curriculum development, for training undergraduate and graduate
students, and for various outreach activities at the PIsâ€™
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.