* 2014928
* Statistical Inference for Multilayer Network Data with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Marianna Pensky, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Analysis of stochastic networks is extremely important and is used in a variety
of applications such as sociology, biology, genetics, ecology, information
technology and national security. Networks are very convenient for describing
relationship between nodes that may represent people in a social network or
brain regions of a person. One of the properties of the majority of networks is
that they can be divided into communities with distinct properties and
connection patterns. These partitions can be used for answering a variety of
questions such as finding tightly connected social groups, or identifying brain
regions' connection patterns associated with a disease. While initial efforts
were focused on analysis of a single network model, in the last few years one of
the most important directions in network science has shifted to the study of
sets of individual networks, the so-called multilayer networks, due to both the
versatility of the multilayer networks and the variety of applications that can
be addressed using this concept. The objective of this research is to develop
tools for theoretical and algorithmic analysis of such networks. The theories
developed can be applied to analysis of speech-related brain networks that can
be affected by epilepsy surgery. This research will be carried out in
collaboration with the Functional Brain Mapping and Brain Computer Interface Lab
of Advent Health Hospital for Children. The techniques resulting from this
project could be applied in a variety of fields that rely on analysis of
multilayer stochastic network data: a) medical practice, since a better
understanding of connections between brain regions associated with speech will
result in more safe and efficient epileptic treatment options; b) medical
research, by providing tools for taking into account individual variations of
connections between brain regions associated with particular diseases; c) brain
science research, by providing tools for analysis of brain networks and their
variations; d) molecular biology, by proposing techniques for analyzing the
enzymatic influences between proteins related to various functions; e)
statistical genetics, by developing procedures for simultaneous studies of gene
networks related to several diseases; f) international relations and finance, by
analyzing world trade and financial networks corresponding to various
modalities; g) social sciences, by analyzing the similarities and the
differences in communities related to various types of social connections.
Funding will also be used for training work force by carrying out various
educational activities, and promoting interdisciplinary research and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda of this proposal will
substantially advance the fields of non-parametric statistics in general, and
the emerging field of network data analysis in particular. The spark of the
interest in multilayer networks has led to a stream of publications on the
subject. However, these publications fall into two very distinct categories:
applications driven papers with no theoretical guarantees of the results and
statistical papers where those guarantees are provided, but under very
restrictive assumptions. While in many applications the main goal is to
determine the differences between communities in different layers or sets of
layers, the statistical papers focus entirely on the case where the communities
are the same in all layers. Due to the absence of relevant theoretical results,
in applications, the authors either utilize ad hoc techniques or are forced to
make a questionable assumption that the community structure is the same for all
the layers. For this reason, there is an overwhelming need for laying solid
theoretical foundations and developing efficient computational algorithms for
analysis of multilayer networks with diverse community structures. In
particular, the objective of this research is the construction of non-parametric
techniques that carry out estimation and clustering of multilayer networks where
each layer follows the popular Stochastic Block Model and the community
structures coincide for some layers and differ for the others. Furthermore,
statistical procedures will be supplemented with the precision guarantees via
oracle inequalities and minimax studies. This will be accomplished by
application of modern algebraic techniques recently employed by the PI. In
summary, the research will significantly broaden the arsenal of methods
applicable to analysis of multilayer network data by developing techniques for
non-parametric estimation and clustering that require few assumptions, are
computationally viable, and are also accompanied by theoretical precision
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.