* 2014103
* Model Independent Interpretations of Precision Measurement and Data Utility Preservation with SMEFT
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* William Shepherd, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 45,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor William Shepherd at Sam
Houston State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Hadron Collider (LHC)
is the highest-energy experiment in fundamental physics ever built, and it is
producing copious amounts of data and highly precise measurements of the
properties of the known elementary particles. A significant international
investment has already been made in its planning and construction, and it is now
important that we ensure that we learn as much as we can from the data taken
there. In his research, Professor Shepherd aims to develop tools and techniques
to interpret LHC and other fundamental physics measurements within as broad a
scope as possible, without needing to refer to one specific model. As such,
these tools will make such measurements easier to interpret in new models which
have yet to be invented, thereby preserving and enhancing the utility of this
data for the future. Research in this area advances the national interest by
maximizing our understanding of fundamental physical law. This research also has
significant broader impacts, most importantly in the mentoring and involvement
of undergraduate students in the process of frontier scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Shepherd will study
the Standard Model Effective Field Theory (SMEFT), which encodes in a new
perturbation series in inverse new-particle masses all of the possible effects
of new physics which are too heavy to probe directly. The SMEFT gives a valuable
dictionary for discussing what deviations can be expected from the Standard
Model (SM) predictions in such cases, and importantly is valid at all lower
energies as well, thereby allowing the complete integration of lower-energy,
high-precision measurements such as flavor-changing processes, SM-forbidden
processes, and precise measurements of, e.g., parity-violating scattering at low
energies. This work importantly includes theoretical uncertainties inherent in
the SMEFT treatment, which enables the bounds derived to be straightforwardly
applied to new physics models without the caveats often needed for previous EFT
approaches to new physics. This project will build out the number of observables
which have been consistently calculated including these errors, design searches
which are more sensitive to SMEFT effects and more robust against the
theoretical errors, and ultimately contribute significantly to global fits of
the full SMEFT parameter space, which have the potential to serve as a successor
to the precision Electroweak data encoded into usable pseudo-observables by the
LEP ElectroWeak Working Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.