* 2014814
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a connected implantable vascular access port to facilitate oncology drug delivery and AI-data analytics for personalized cancer care
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* James Mitchell, ONCODISC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 223,881.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes the potential to improve survival and
quality of life outcomes in cancer care while decreasing treatment costs. Each
year, 1.7 million people in the US are diagnosed with cancer. National
expenditures on cancer care are projected to reach $156 billion by 2020. Cancer
treatment is delivered mostly in an outpatient setting, leaving patients
unmonitored at home while at high risk of complications that can lead to high
utilization of emergency services and associated hospitalizations. Early
detection of complications can trigger rapid intervention when most effective,
leading to improved outcomes and lower costs. A linked implantable vascular
access port will provide sterile means of cancer drug delivery and physiologic
monitoring. Advanced analytics will identify patients showing the earliest signs
of common complications. Finally, aggregated data will provide valuable insights
for hospitals to better understand outcomes and costs, serving as a valuable
research tool for industry and academic researchers developing next-generation
cancer therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will advance technology development toward a linked
implantable vascular access port (VAP) capable of intravenous drug delivery and
patient monitoring. The proposed research will focus on risk in technology
development and clinically important endpoints. For ease of use, the linked
implantable VAP will communicate with the patient’s mobile device via secure
Bluetooth wireless. Aim #1 focuses on establishing a front-end mobile
application to control the collection and transport of ‎multiple sensor inputs
and associated metadata. This mobile application will provide a critical link
between the implanted sensor technology and the cloud database for analytics. As
an implantable medical device, replacing the power supply would carry
unacceptable risks and costs. Therefore, Aim #2 focuses on power supply
characterization, selection, and optimization. In Aim #2 power requirements for
12 months of active patient monitoring will be identified based on clinical
needs and used to identify a power supply compatible with implantation. Most
cancer patients require radiation therapy as part of their treatment. It is
therefore critical to understand the effect of ionizing radiation on any device
implanted in cancer patients. Aim #3 addresses this need through in vitro
irradiation of the device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.