* 2014010
* Quantifying and Optimizing the Performance of Continuous-Variable Quantum Logic Operations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Mark Wilde, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 12/31/2022
* USD 352,331.00

The main goal of the proposed research is to develop theoretical tools for
assessing the performance of continuous-variable quantum logic gates,
operations, and channels. Continuous-variable quantum computing is a promising
approach to quantum information processing that is being pursued by leading
academic groups around the world, and there are now even commercial efforts.
Quantum computing has the potential to change the world in profound ways, by
allowing for breaking encryption methods that are in wide use, allowing for
faster simulation of quantum chemical reactions (thus playing an important role
in medicine), and more recently it has been discovered that there is the
potential for speed-up in optimization and machine learning. With these
applications in mind, it is essential to understand the continuous-variable
approach, by quantifying the performance of these quantum computers. It is also
clear that this research and the related applications serves the national
interest and mission of the NSF: "to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare; to secure the national defense." Additionally, there are broader
impacts of this research for the Louisiana / Mississippi River Delta Region. The
research will increase the training of graduate students at LSU in the expanding
field of quantum information science. Graduate students will present results in
the public forum of QuILT Day (Quantum Information in Louisiana) Day, which is a
day-long conference held each semester that brings several research groups
throughout Louisiana and nearby regions to discuss recent advances and ongoing
research in quantum information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical contribution
of the research is to quantify precisely by how much an experimental
approximation of a continuous-variable operation deviates from its ideal
implementation. Continuous-variable quantum gates are an essential component of
quantum computing with the continuous quantum variables of light. Continuous-
variable systems are present in many quantum information processing
architectures, including superconducting, ion trap, and photonic devices. It is
essential to devise methods for quantifying the performance of continuous-
variable quantum devices. While there have been several advances in this domain
in discrete-variable quantum information processing, there are not nearly as
many tools available for the continuous-variable case. One of the main aims of
this project is to rectify this situation, with the idea being to develop tools
for quantifying the performance of continuous-variable quantum gates and
operations. Particular examples include improving continuous-variable
teleportation protocols to more effectively simulate an ideal channel, as well
as developing novel machine learning techniques in order to discover and improve
such protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.