* 2014649
* SBIR Phase I:  Neurocognitive and behavioral detection of THC impairment
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Ari Kirshenbaum, DRIVEABILITY VT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2021
* USD 224,472.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to develop a reliable tool for law enforcement for the
detection of cannabis-related driving impairment. Impaired operation of
equipment costs the nation hundreds of billions of dollars annually. Our
detection tool is a software application designed to be presented on a mobile
tablet device. It will utilize a combination of neurocognitive, behavioral, and
physiological indicators of cannabis intoxication to make an informed
determination of impairment. This detection tool may be used as a roadside
device by law enforcement, as a screening tool by employers of transit
companies, or by an individual user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a portable mobile
device and software to perform a roadside cannabis detection test. The software
will perform a rapid sequence of neuropsychological tests. Combined with an
infrared camera to track eye movement and pupillary reflex during driver
evaluation, this system can potentially detect driving impairment due to
tetrahydrocannabinol. A machine learning algorithm will be used to both assess
physical and neurological test results and to present a progressive testing
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.