* 2014217
* NeuroNex: From Odor to Action: Discovering Principles of Olfactory-Guided Natural Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Brian Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2025
* USD 11,186,072.00

The Odor2Action network consists of 16 investigators from 16 research
institutions in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada. The
composition and scientific goals of the effort are designed to leverage prior
investments in neurotechnologies funded by the BRAIN Initiative, other domestic
agencies and international partners. Specifically, Odor2Action will address a
central question of neuroscience: How do animals use information from odor
stimuli in their environment to guide natural behaviors? To synergistically
study this problem, the network is subdivided into three interdisciplinary
research groups (IRGs); each IRG contains experts in a wide range of
experimental and theoretical approaches, and investigates how similar problems
are solved by nervous systems in phylogenetically diverse species. IRG1 will
test a novel framework for organizing olfactory stimulus space and olfactory
codes around the statistical relationships among natural odors. IRG2 will work
to understand how neural circuits translate odor signals into dynamic and
adaptive behaviors, a critical component of our overall network goal of
understanding how natural odors trigger natural behaviors. IRG3 will investigate
the physical structure of odor environments and how animal motion and sensory
capabilities interact with those environments to detect, discriminate and
localize odor objects. Collectively, the network will determine how neural
representations of odor are generated, how they are progressively reformatted
across successive circuit layers, and how they support useful behaviors. While
focusing on olfaction, this project will provide broad and fundamental insights
into brain function. This compact circuit architecture associated with olfaction
offers unique opportunities to achieve an end-to-end understanding of the core
computational logic by which various brains organize and read out such high-
dimensional, discrete variables to generate adaptive behaviors. This coordinated
project on the neuroscience of olfaction across species will have important
societal impacts in science, technology, health, and policy. Given the
complexity and high dimensionality of chemical space and its primacy in driving
behavior among most species, studying how odor leads to action promises to
provide insight into optimal biological solutions for encoding complex
information about the external world. Elucidating biological solutions to
olfaction can inform the development of algorithms and engineered devices for
detection and identification of chemicals in applications that span the range
from homeland security to food safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Odor2Action
network will address a central question of neuroscience: How do animals use
information from odor stimuli in their environment to guide natural behaviors?
The network will approach this problem in the context of olfactory-guided
behavior as an instance of a much more general problem of many complex brain
systems - how are high-dimensional, discrete, and combinatorial variables that
are not simply ordered along easily discernible axes represented in brain
circuits and mapped to actions? The compact olfactory circuit architecture
offers unique opportunities to achieve an end-to-end understanding of the core
computational logic by which brains organize and read out such high-dimensional,
discrete variables to generate adaptive behaviors. This network will study
olfactory systems of mammals and insects, which have independently evolved
common structural elements at successive levels of olfactory processing in their
central nervous systems. These common elements possibly reflect convergent
evolution towards a set of similar solutions to shared olfactory problems. The
network comprises three interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) that are
designed around specific elements of an end-to-end investigation of olfaction.
IRG1 aims to understand the first stages of how neural representations of odor
are generated, and how they are progressively reformatted across successive
circuit layers to support meaningful behaviors. IRG2 aims to understand how
neural circuits translate odor signals into dynamic and adaptive behaviors, a
critical component of our overall network goal of understanding how natural
odors trigger natural behaviors. IRG3 will investigate the physical structure of
odor environments and how animal motion and sensory capabilities interact with
those environments to detect, discriminate and localize odor objects. Each IRG
integrates theory and experimental approaches in two or more species in ways
that produce complementary, synergistic interactions across levels of biological
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Neuronex award is co-funded by the Division
of Emerging Frontiers and the Behavioral Systems Cluster within the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure within the
Directorate for Computer and Information Sciences, the Mathematical Biology
Program and the Physics of Living Systems Program within the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, as part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's
Understanding the Brain activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.