* 2014166
* Global Non-Gaussian Stochastic Partial Differential Equation Models for Assessing Future Health of Ecohydrologic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,010.00

In recent decades, the dramatic increase of computational power, coupled with
technological advances in portable and remote sensing devices has exponentially
increased the volume, variety and velocity of data, facilitating new scientific
and engineering breakthroughs. This project focuses on global spatio-temporal
data, a data type highly affected by this Big Data revolution and aims to
develop a new global dynamical model for processes monitored at high resolution
in time (daily or hourly). The application will focus on the occurrence and
intensity of rainfall, and the model will be applied to assess risks faced by
diverse hydrologic systems, including lakes, wetlands, and the
surface/groundwater interaction zone. The proposed global statistical model will
be flexible enough to explain floods and drought events governed by large scale
atmospheric/oceanic patterns (for example, the El Ni√±o Southern Oscillation)
that a local model could miss. This application will focus on four regions in
the continental USA known to be sensitive to precipitation events. Outreach
activities at different levels, from lectures to high school students to events
for the local community, are planned to increase awareness on the value of
healthy hydrological systems, and a computer program will allow users to explore
which areas in the United States are at higher risk of floods and droughts. The
graduate student support will be used on interdisciplinary research and writing
codes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Models for global data represent a
theoretical challenge, as there are restrictions in defining valid processes
over the sphere and time. Practical and computational challenges also exist as
these models must be both flexible enough to capture non-trivial data structure
across the globe, and be able to fit the extremely large size of modern data
sets (billions of points). A latent Gaussian model for global spatio-temporal
data is proposed, which will control the spatial dependence by a Stochastic
Partial Differential Equation with an operator able to capture non-stationarity
with a local tensor deformation, and changing behavior across land and ocean to
allow for a smooth transition across the two domains. The model will be solved
with a finite volume approach which will guarantee sparsity of the precision
matrix in the latent process, thus allowing scalability for extremely large data
sets. The application will address the critical issue in hydrology of the
assessment of the uncertainty in future health of ecohydrological systems.
Global simulations of daily precipitation and a mass conservation equation will
provide estimates of the future risk to droughts and floods in four regions in
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.