* 2014881
* STTR Phase I:  Continuous Manufacturing of Mechanically-Robust, Superinsulating Aerogel Monoliths and Thin Films via a New Ambient-Pressure Freeze Drying Technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Stephen Steiner, Aerogel Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2022
* USD 224,557.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to enable affordable manufacturing process
for aerogel, an ultralight structural material that can reduce the fuel
consumption and emissions of cars, planes, and rockets. Aerogels are a class of
ultralight materials exhibiting unparalleled thermal insulation, soundproofing,
and energy-absorbing properties. New structurally-durable aerogels can serve as
ultralight alternatives to plastics with potential applications in vehicle
lightweighting, energy-efficient buildings, and ultralight armor. The proposed
work facilitates transitioning these materials to applications and reducing
operating costs, reliance on typical fuels, and emissions in the transportation
and construction sectors. It will also benefit artificial tissue scaffolds,
apparel, bulletproof vests, and energy storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project will advance the translation of aerogels. Manufacturing
monolithic aerogels is currently challenging and expensive because of high-
pressure batch processing. The proposed work will develop a first-of-its-kind,
potentially continuous, accelerated atmospheric-pressure freeze drying
technology to enable cost-efficient manufacturing of monolithic polymer-based
aerogels of unlimited dimensions. This will require a multidisciplinary approach
integrating freeze drying, fluid physics, and nanoporous media in which jet
impingement arrays will be used to achieve drying rates approaching a vacuum-
based process without requiring a vacuum or pressure chamber. The research will
focus on mass transfer phenomena related to removal of solvent from sol-gel-
derived nanoporous gel media without damaging the gel's delicate skeletal
framework. The research plan includes fluid flow modeling and experiments to
demonstrate process feasibility for large-scale
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.