* 2014330
* EAGER: SUstainable Material Management Extreme Events Reconnaissance (SUMMEER) Organization
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nazli Yesiller, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Large quantities of debris are generated from natural and anthropogenic disaster
events. The sheer magnitude and highly variable composition complicate
management of the post-disaster debris. With proper material recovery processes,
reusing and recycling create value and divert debris from landfills, minimizing
the overall environmental impacts of the debris. The main goal of this project
is to establish the SUstainable Material Management Extreme Events
Reconnaissance (SUMMEER) organization with a geographically distributed network
to respond to post-disaster debris management challenges. The mission of SUMMEER
is to: (i) facilitate a combined member and community-based approach to maximize
the effect of post-disaster debris reconnaissance activities, (ii) organize and
train a broad range of individuals for reconnaissance and study of debris from
extreme events, (iii) coordinate pre- and post-disaster efforts to collect
perishable data on post-disaster debris in a timely and effective manner, and
(iv) provide significant data and resources for research on sustainable
management of post-disaster debris. The framework and tools developed in this
study will facilitate proper planning for and sustainable management of disaster
debris to maximize benefits from the materials through reuse and recycling and
to minimize adverse effects on human health and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of recycling/reuse of post-
disaster debris has been recognized in the literature and practice; however,
quantitative frameworks and tools for pre- and post-disaster planning are highly
limited due to the lack of detailed post-disaster debris investigations. This
new Extreme Events Reconnaissance (EER) organization will fill this gap by
providing standardized data that has not previously been available. The new EER
organization will, for the first time, provide reconnaissance guidelines,
response protocols, data standards, and training programs for high-quality field
assessment for sustainable debris management research. Accumulation of this
post-disaster debris data will lead to development of quantitative planning
methods for disaster debris and enable effective post-disaster reuse and
recycling applications. SUMMEER will function as an integrated platform for
coordinating the deployment of interdisciplinary researchers to collect such
multidimensional debris data from extreme events. Also, a data repository will
be generated during the study for use by the research community. In response to
major disaster events, SUMMEER will participate in joint response activities
with the other NSF-funded EERs to evaluate environmental impacts of disaster
events that are important for sustainable debris management research in a timely
and effective manner in addition to the structural, geotechnical, and social
impacts identified through the existing EERs adding value and expanding the
impact of the combined EERs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.