* 2014438
* SCH:INT: Collaborative Research: Deep Sense: Interpretable Deep Learning for Zero-effort Phenotype Sensing and Its Application to Sleep Medicine
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jimeng Sun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Sleep represents one third of everyone’s life and affects the quality and the
health of everyone’s life. Traditionally, long-term characteristics of sleep
patterns (sleep phenotypes) are largely unknown due to the lack of convenient
monitoring devices and automatic algorithms. Recently, massive health sensing
data such as activity data, electroencephalogram, respiratory monitoring data
and electrocardiography are being collected in clinics and at home, which brings
unprecedented opportunities for understanding sleep phenotypes outside clinics.
However, there are tremendous challenges to translate these noisy and unreliable
multimodal sensing data into accurate phenotypes such as sleep stages and apnea
events. Beyond sleep, many neurological conditions such as Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s all expect objective tracking of long-term disease progression,
which is currently impossible. This project will provide the computational
capability to conduct phenotype tracking at home with the focus on sleep
phenotypes. Machine learning methods and software will be developed to conduct
accurate phenotyping of sleep with minimal effort on sensor instrumentation,
data collection and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
at developing DeepSense, a deep learning toolbox to model massive data streams
including in-clinic monitoring data such as polysomnography and novel radio
frequency signals from a wireless sensing device. The research team will develop
accurate deep learning methods to automate sleep monitoring using
polysomnography data. They will invent adversarial deep learning methods for
modeling radio frequency signals and leverage large historical polysomnography
data to help improve models for radio frequency signals. They will develop
interpretable models that leverage and expand medical knowledge on sleep
phenotypes. Finally, all the proposed models will be validated through a
prospective study with a goal of automating manual sleep studies and assessing
the feasibility of sleep studies via radio frequency signal data. The research
team plans to release the open-source software and large datasets from this
project that can benefit computer science, engineering and medical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.