* 2014157
* Collaborative Research: Non-Ideal Majorana Fermions: A Practical Approach to Topological Quantum Computation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sumanta Tewari, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The main obstacle to quantum computation is the “noise” affecting the basic
units of a quantum computer – the so-called qubits – as a result of their weak,
but nonzero coupling to the environment. Since this coupling is essentially
local, a promising approach to overcoming the noise problem is to encode the
information using topological quantum phenomena – robust global properties
characterizing certain types of quantum systems that are immune to local
perturbations. A promising platform for realizing robust topological qubits is
based on a special kind of quantum quasiparticle called a Majorana fermion or
Majorana zero mode (MZM). Recent theoretical studies by the PIs and other groups
indicate that experiments may have already uncovered non-ideal versions of MZMs,
the so-called quasi-Majorana modes. In this project the PIs will examine
fundamental aspects of topological protection and practical design questions
related to maximizing qubit lifetime and minimizing noise rates in quantum
devices with non-ideal Majorana fermions. With most of the ongoing research in
the field focusing on ideal Majorana fermions, which in practice may be hard to
realize, the present studies will be critical to engineering the first
generation of topological qubits using what may be already available, namely,
non-ideal Majorana fermions. The project will serve the national interest and
promote the NSF mission of progress of science by deepening our understanding of
topological quantum matter in condensed matter systems and investigating the
feasibility of topological quantum computation based on experimentally available
devices. The project will provide excellent education and training opportunities
to undergraduate and graduate students at Clemson University, including
economically disadvantaged students and underrepresented minorities who
constitute a significant percentage of the student population. This project is
jointly funded by the Quantum Information Science Program (Physics Division),
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in semiconductor-superconductor
(SM-SC) nanowire heterostructures are currently being investigated as possible
building blocks for topological qubits in a future quantum computer. Theoretical
studies by the PIs and others have shown that much of the parameter space of the
experimentally investigated SM-SC heterostructures is in fact occupied by so-
called quasi-Majorana zero modes, which are separated from each other by a
length scale well below the nanowire length. Since the principle of fault
tolerance in topological quantum computation (TQC) depends critically on the
non-local encoding of quantum information using topological MZMs separated by
the length of the nanowire, this situation presents a major problem for the
feasibility of TQC, as quasi-Majoranas do not enjoy sufficient topological
protection for fault-tolerant qubit operations. Nonetheless, quasi-Majoranas are
likely to be present in the first generation of Majorana-based qubit devices
either by design, or by accident. This project fills the critical void created
by the near absence of studies of topological qubit designs and schemes for
braiding and error correction when the constituent building blocks are quasi-
Majoranas, rather than ideal topological MZMs. The PIs will perform analytical
and numerical research with the following intellectual goals: (1) Designing and
modeling SM-SC qubit devices based on controllable quasi-Majorana zero modes,
(2) Understanding and characterizing the key physical processes that control the
quasi-Majorana qubit lifetimes, and (3) Error analysis in measurement-only TQC
schemes with quasi-Majorana zero modes. The overarching goal is to investigate
the feasibility of fault tolerant TQC with quasi-Majorana zero modes (rather
than ideal MZMs) and to better understand practical aspects of engineering
Majorana-based topological qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.