* 2014542
* Collaborative proposal: Regulation of pre-mRNA splicing by light signals
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Anireddy Reddy, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 280,000.00

The perception of light is one of the most fundamental ways that plants interact
with the environment to alter growth and maximize capture of sunlight. This
project will address how environmental light signals perceived by the
phytochrome photoreceptors regulate gene expression to affect plant growth and
productivity. This project will train the next generation of scientists
preferentially from underrepresented groups, who will gain considerable
experience in developing new tools in agricultural biotechnology to improve food
security, human health, and environmental sustainability. Development and
dissemination of educational toolkits will greatly expand educational
opportunities to high school students in scientific research. Presentations in
biology classes of local K-12 schools will not only teach young students about
genetically modified organisms (GMOs), but also improve communication and
teaching skills of participating researchers. This will expose a diverse group
of K-12 students to a modern research facility, introduce them to the scientific
method in a fun and engaging way and inspire them to choose a scientific career
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate poorly understood
mechanisms by which phytochromes regulate gene expression at both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. Alternative splicing (AS) is a
highly regulated process that enhances the diversity of mRNAs encoded in the
genome. Previous work by this group showed that this process is also affected by
light signals mediated through the photoreceptor phytochrome B (phyB), thereby
providing a novel mechanism by which plants can rapidly respond to light
signals. The goals of the project are to: 1) Understand the biochemical
mechanisms of regulation of splicing by the SFPS-RRC1-SWAP1 splicing module, and
2) Investigate how phyB regulates splicing through the SFPS-RRC1-SWAP1 module
under light. The project will use biochemical, molecular, genetic and genomic
approaches to elucidate the early events by which phytochromes directly affects
alternative splicing in response to light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.