* 2014212
* Collective Olfactory Communication in Honeybee Swarms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Orit Peleg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,744.00

Pheromones are a prevalent volatile communication signal in nature, but their
range and noise tolerance of information exchange are limited by the
spatiotemporal decay of these signals. Using honeybees as a model organism, the
researchers will study the communication network of honeybee swarms that locate
their queen by tracking her pheromones. Specifically, how can honeybees that are
far away from the queen locate her? Bees disperse information about the queen's
location via a pheromone gland located on their abdomen. Importantly, bees not
only passively diffuse these pheromones but also actively fan their wings, which
draws air along their anteroposterior axis. The researchers will study the
localized airflow, which the PI hypothesized that it creates a directional bias
in the diffusion of the pheromones to ensure the signal reaches the rest of the
swarm. As bees arrange in a specific spatial distribution where there is a
characteristic distance between individuals and a characteristic direction in
which individuals broadcast the signal, the researchers will study (1) how this
dynamic network recruits new broadcasting bees over time as the pheromones
traveled a distance which is orders of magnitude the size of an individual; and
(2) how the swarm overcomes local obstacles such as solid objects as well as
turbulent airflow and opposing chemical signals. Our world is full of living
creatures who routinely exchange information with each other in order to survive
and reproduce. Understanding these communication signals is not just a problem
in biology, but also one in physics - given the energetic cost, compression, and
detectability of the exchanged information. Since the energetic cost of signal
production drives bees to push the envelope in terms of minimal signal design
and maximal signal to noise ratios, these fascinating communication strategies
could reveal new optimalities in signal design and signal processing. Harnessing
these natural solutions - honed by eons of evolution, selection, and refinement
- we can not only more deeply understand collective animal behavior, but also
leverage that understanding to create bio-inspired system designs in the fields
of swarm robotics and distributed communication, not to mention in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Honeybee swarms hold an impressive skill-set
when it comes to manipulating large length-scale physical fields such as
mechanical strains and flow-mediated temperatures. But to become a coherent
swarm in the first place, honeybees must locate their queen by tracking her
pheromones that decay rapidly in time and space. Unlike the traditional
isotropic chemical signaling (as seen in early embryonic development and
aggregation of amoebae), bees use a new artifice to direct their communication
signal - airflow. In this complex system, the individual building blocks (an
insect) can sense their micro-environment and respond in a way that promotes
survival; typically, the response changes the macro-environment the individual
is embedded in, thus creating a perpetual coupling between the individuals, the
group and the environment. When combined with quantitative analysis and
computations, the researchers will integrate the sensing of the environmental
cues (pheromone concentration and airflow) and convert them to behavioral
outputs that allow the swarm to remain coherent. Hence, this work expands the
traditional view of collective behavior via stigmergy (wherein organisms respond
to local cues with little or no long-range effects) to establish long-range
interactions mediated by physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.