* 2014760
* SBIR Phase I:  Hemorrhagic Stroke Detection with Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy  ;
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Madeleine Wilcox, Forest Devices, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,385.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to investigate an affordable prehospital
hemorrhagic stroke (HS) detection device. The current state-of-the-art
technology for prehospital HS detection is a computed tomography ambulance (i.e.
mobile stroke unit). Mobile stroke units have high upfront and operating costs,
and a lower-cost device could revolutionize healthcare for stroke patients in
two ways. First, prehospital identification allows these patients to be triaged
to hospitals equipped to treat them (neurosurgical centers), resulting in faster
care and better outcomes. Second, the ability to rule out HS prehospital will
allow earlier treatment of another condition, ischemic stroke, to improve
outcomes and reduce long-term healthcare costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed SBIR Phase I project will use electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) to differentiate HS and ischemic stroke. EIS involves injecting an
alternating current signal and measuring the resulting impedance across a
spectrum of frequencies. The impedance spectrum of materials often differ,
allowing EIS to be useful in a variety of applications including examination of
corrosion, antibody binding, body composition, and disease diagnosis. This work
will advance the use of EIS, to date used experimentally in detecting
intracranial pathologies, to detect hemorrhagic tissue within the brain. This
work will explore the development of a fast-acquisition EIS HS detection
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.