* 2014753
* STTR Phase I: Development and Commercialization of the SafeLight Family of Antimicrobial Materials for Combatting the COVID-19 Pandemic and Hospital Acquired Infections
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Robert Sheehan, PHOTOCIDE PROTECTION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is the development of new antimicrobial materials to reduce the spread
of harmful bacteria and viruses in a variety of settings, particularly for self-
disinfecting personal protection equipment against SARS-CoV-2 to combat the
COVID-19 pandemic. While primarily intended for use in hospitals, these
antimicrobial materials can also impact bio-defense; military facilities; food
processing, packaging, and service industries; wastewater treatment facilities;
daycare and long-term care facilities; and even personal households. Beyond the
current pandemic, this technology can address hospital-acquired infections,
which add an estimated $30-45 billion to health care costs every year; and the
food service industry, where norovirus foodborne infections alone account for an
economic loss of about $5.8 B annually in the United States. The proposed
technology offers significant benefit for the current COVID-19 challenge and
beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop light-activated
surface-disinfecting materials based on photodynamic inactivation that generates
singlet oxygen – a highly reactive yet environmentally benign species – to cause
non-specific damage to microbes, rendering them inactive. The technical
challenges are: 1) the development of chemical species capable of producing
singlet oxygen upon exposure to light, but stable at the high temperatures of
manufacturing processes, for which we will start with a known class of
compounds; 2) the development of a method for the production and embedding of
the newly-developed photoreactive compounds within relevant materials,
particularly for the manufacture of personal protection equipment; and 3)
evaluation of process efficacy for virucidal (against coronaviruses),
antibacterial, antimycotic and sporicidal use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.