* 2014151
* Triggering Celltype Specific Behaviors with Rationally Designed Nanoenvironments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Fourkas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 628,688.00

The goal of this project is triggering cell-type-specific behaviors with
rationally designed nano-environments. Cell behavior critically depends on the
cellular microenvironment, i.e. the physical and (bio)chemical properties of the
material surrounding the cell. The PIs have demonstrated that nanostructures in
the environment elicit a unique and universal response across cell types. The
response to subcellular scale nano-environment can drive unique cell behaviors,
including guidance over large distances, control with subcellular precision,
and, when combined with other cell guidance cues, cell behavior that is
controlled on multiple scales. The research will yield quantitative insights and
predictive phase-field simulations that will be validated and improved in
feedback between experiments and simulations. This feedback loop relies
critically on controlled cellular experiments with advanced image analysis,
cutting-edge 3D phase-field modeling, and machine learning to link experiments
and simulations and forge a path towards predictive understanding of cell
behavior in nano-environments. Precise control of cell behavior with nano-
environments holds great promise for a broad range of biological and biomedical
applications that require precise steering of the migration and behavior of
cells and tissues. The research project will allow the PIs to develop guiding
principles for the design of such nano-environments for specific tasks, which
will enable these materials to be applied to a broad range of tasks that are
beneficial to society through medical and other technologies. The PIs will train
scientists in the use of the image-analysis and modeling software that will be
developed, which will be freely available. This training will be offered in the
form of week-long, intensive bootcamps. The PIs will also use the research to
reach out to the general public. The results of the project will be broadly
disseminated to the academic community through publications, conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Esotaxis, the guidance of cytoskeletal dynamics
by nanotopography, is a phenomenon that was discovered only recently by the PIs.
It is a highly conserved phenomenon in mammalian cells that opens up novel,
cell-type-specific and spatially precise control opportunities, but it is not
yet well understood. This project will lead to a predictive understanding of
esotaxis and how it can be harnessed with rationally designed nano-environments.
This understanding will be achieved through an iterative cycle involving
materials design and fabrication, validation through cellular imaging and
advanced analysis, and tuning and extension of the three dimensional phase field
simulations. Machine learning approaches will allow the team to determine which
cellular characteristics are the most important for determining esotactic
phenotypes, as well as well as to correlate nano-topographic features with
specific esotactic behaviors. Starting with initial results from 3D phase-field
simulations that exhibit qualitative agreement with key experimental
predictions, the team expects to develop a quantitatively predictive model that,
as a second goal, will also incorporate realistic cytoskeletal dynamics, and
enable simultaneous control of cell functions on multiple scales. The third goal
is to demonstrate cell type specific control in a biologically relevant
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.