* 2014636
* Bootstrap Methods in High Dimensions: Complex Dependence Structures and Refinements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Kengo Kato, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Bootstrap methods constitute a class of powerful statistical methodologies for
uncertainty quantification in statistical analysis. Recent developments
demonstrate that bootstraps are effective in developing theoretically valid
inferential methods for high-dimensional or large-scale data. Modern-day data
availability allows us to access large-scale data with complex dependence
structures, for which there is a serious need to develop high-quality inference
methods. Examples of such data include data observed on networks, multiway-
clustered data often seen in economics, environmental data, and high-frequency
financial data. In this project, the PI aims to develop bootstrap methods for
such large-scale data with complex dependence structures, as well as make
refinements on existing bootstrap methods for independent data. Additionally,
the project will provide research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first line of research this project aims at
is to develop novel bootstrap methods effective in high dimensions for i)
exchangeable arrays, ii) irregularly spaced spatial data, and iii) diffusion
(or, more generally, Markov) processes. Those new bootstrap methods have direct
applications to inference with high dimensional data such as simultaneous and
multiple testing and nonparametric inference such as the construction of
simultaneous confidence bands. The second line of research is to make
refinements on high dimensional bootstrap methodology with independent data. One
is to develop error bounds for the general exchangeably weighted bootstrap in
the high dimensional regime that are comparable to the Gaussian multiplier
bootstrap. The other is to develop error bounds for the nonparametric bootstrap
that can explain the superior performance in numerical experiments in the
increasing dimension setup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.