* 2014714
* SBIR Phase I:  Gestural/Haptic Tongue Interface Wearable: Hands-free, Heads-up, and Private Interactivity
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Dustin Kimmel, Wield LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 244,808.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the development of a new wearable
device, worn in the mouth like a dental retainer, mouthguard, or piercing. It
will enable new interactions in Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, and Mixed
Reality (AR/VR/XR), but also serve as an assistive device to the 63 million
people suffering from Carpal Tunnel Syndrome (CTS), Spinal Cord Injury (SCI),
and physical injuries blocking people from using computers effectively. This
will establish new markets for this type of wearable interface; unlock new
human-machine interactions, both as a standalone device and paired with Head
Mounted Display (HMD) systems; and expand new interfaces that are private,
hands-free, heads-up, and taking better advantage of natural human
intraoral/mental abilities. This will have significant impact for SCI/CTS users
who will obtain the ability to use computers, as well as the large and emerging
AR/VR/XR industries using HMDs hands-free/heads-up with private gestural
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will advance the translation of a novel interface tool for the
human mouth and tongue via an intraoral wearable solution. It will exploit the
fact that the largest dedicated areas of the brainâ€™s sensory cortex and motor
cortex are for hand, mouth, and tongue function. This interface adapts these
already strong human oral abilities, connecting them to the digital world. This
project will create a device to be worn like a dental retainer, where the device
creates a haptic user interface with haptic patterns among which the user can
feel and move, analogous to a touch screen navigated by tapping and swiping
through visual icons and menus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.