* 2014003
* SCH: INT: Improving Care for Heart Failure Patients Using Tropical Geometry and Soft Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Harm Derksen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,012,386.00

The project will develop novel computational approaches for leveraging domain
expertise and electronic health data for the production of clinical decision
support systems with transparent recommendations. These techniques will be used
to identify the optimal timing of advanced therapies for patients with heart
failure (HF), such as heart transplantation and durable mechanical circulatory
support (MCS) devices. While such therapies have the ability to improve patient
survival and quality of life, clinicians’ abilities to identify appropriate
candidates and deliver optimally timed therapies remains limited. This project
will address this problem by creating a novel machine learning paradigm, using
mathematical formulations based on tropical geometry, that incorporates
approximate domain knowledge directly into model training, which can then be
optimized using a limited data set. Optimized rules extracted from the trained
model are interpretable by clinicians and can be used to guide treatment
decisions. Such tools offer the promise of improving patients’ lives while
reducing future costs. The project will also establish an interdisciplinary
learning platform for computer-assisted decision support systems that will
prepare students, postdocs, and early career clinical scientists to apply data
science techniques to medical decision support. The project will also include
groups underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) by recruiting new students and integrating the research training into a
highly diverse laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will apply the
emerging field of tropical geometry to soft computing methods. This approach
will avoid the disadvantages of conventional soft computing paradigms such as
fuzzy logic by: a) reducing the need for a large number of training examples, b)
allowing smooth and fast optimization during model training, and c) enabling a
systematic reduction in the size of the parameter space, thereby reducing the
likelihood of overfitting the data. Approximate rules will be collected from a
panel of cardiologists to determine candidacy for advanced therapies. Using the
planned method, these rules will be incorporated into a model to predict the
progression of HF and identify patients who are eligible for and most likely to
benefit from heart transplantation or durable MCS devices. Optimized rules will
be extracted from the trained model and verified by a panel of cardiologists for
correctness and clinical utility. Moreover, the proposed machine learning
paradigm will be able to generate novel and interpretable clinical rules that
add to our understanding of how best to manage patients with advanced
HF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.