* 2014972
* STTR Phase I:  A novel dual paraboloid mirror device for enhanced light collection in confocal and fluorescence microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Joel Smith, MIZAR IMAGING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to improve research in the life sciences. This research often
uses confocal and fluorescence imaging technologies to capture high-resolution,
high-contrast images of biological samples. However, these methods traditionally
require high levels of illuminating light, resulting in damage to tissues,
disruption of normal processes like cell division, and competing with the light
being measured in the experiment. The proposed solution will improve the
collection of light in these microscopes. This will allow researchers to
minimize damage to samples, thus removing current experimental constraints and
enabling the development of new and far-ranging applications on an already
powerful research platform. The proposed technology will be useful for disease
and pharmaceutical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
involve the development of a simple, add-on, mirrored sample chamber unit
capable of enhancing confocal microscopy capabilities by substantially
increasing microscope fluorescence collection efficiency limits. This will
require overcoming design challenges because the use of mirrors to collect and
refocus emitted light has rarely been attempted in confocal microscopy. The
proposed R&amp;D work includes: 1) sample chamber and mirror design and
prototyping, 2) design of mounting hardware and integration with an existing
confocal system, and 3) exploration of compatible modalities, including Total
Internal Reflection Fluorescence microscopy and Stochastic Optical
Reconstruction Microscopy. Completion of the proposed objectives will lead to
the development of a device that increases the light collection efficiency
beyond the current 40% limit, is compatible with any detection objective, and
does not require a separate optical path to the
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.