* 2014678
* STTR Phase I:  Long Stroke Micromachined Arrayed Cell Electrostatic Actuators for Highly Integrated Micro-Positioning
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Amin Abbasalipour, SILICON DYNAMIX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is to advance the development of a highly integrated power-
efficient micro-actuator technology. All electrically powered systems with
mechanical moving parts utilize actuators to convert electrical energy into
mechanical motion, including robots, surgical/medical micro-devices, precision
micro/nano-positioning systems, and optical systems like the Compact Camera
Modules (CCM) in smartphones and tablets. The market for electromechanical
actuators embedded in compact camera modules was an estimated $2+ B in 2018. The
proposed project will advance a technology for these CCM optical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
Phase I project aims to explore commercialization of arrayed cell electrostatic
(ACE) actuators. Arrangement of individual micro-scale actuator cells,
resembling that of biological muscle cells, allows addition of force and
displacements of a large number of cells, leading to large actuator
displacements of hundreds of microns. Submicron electrostatic transduction
airgaps within the actuator cells between electrodes tens of microns tall are
realized via a bulk micromachining fabrication process utilizing a sacrificial
layer technique. Submicron transduction gaps lead to large work output per
actuator volume and lower operating voltage, both of which are major limiting
factors for electrostatic actuators. This project specifically focuses on micro-
lens manipulators to replace conventional Voice Coil Motors (VCM) in compact
camera modules for Auto-Focus (AF) and Optical Image Stabilization (OIS)
functions. The targeted actuators can lead to more compact CCMs with improved
auto-focus and image stabilization performance, lower power consumption, and
without the VCM heat deteriorating the image sensor performance. The technical
efforts will focus on design, fabrication, and characterization of a chip-scale
low-power 5-degree of freedom (DOF) micro-lens manipulator suitable for use in
compact camera modules. Comprehensive long-term reliability and durability tests
will be performed on the fabricated prototypes to determine the limitations and
viability of the actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.