* 2014624
* STTR Phase I:  A Roadside Marijuana Breathalyzer to Rapidly Screen for Cannabinoid Sobriety
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,04/30/2022
* John Cowart, SEACOAST SCIENCE, INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be an affordable, portable breath analysis device to detect
marijuana intoxication. First responders, law enforcement, medical
professionals, cannabis users, and the general public will benefit from an
analytical tool that allows fast and accurate screenings of cannabis impairment.
An estimated 37,000 people died in vehicle crashes in 2016; 54% of the victims
were tested for drugs and alcohol, and 38% of those tested positive for
marijuana. The proposed device will enable objective determination of cannabis
impairment, improving road safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
based on engineering detectable, reproducible interactions between an array of
biomimetic polymer coatings trained to detect gas-phase molecular components
that are markers of cannabis intoxication. Drawing inspiration from the
principles and chemical features of nature’s cannabinoid receptors, polymers
will be molecularly engineered for enhanced molecular recognition of
cannabinoids. These materials will be rationally designed to strongly bind
cannabinoids and create changes measurable with Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems
(MEMS) sensors, while simultaneously affording a functional handle that can be
utilized to monitor gas-phase cannabinoids in real-time. The biomimetic polymers
will be solution-deposited onto MEMS sensors and evaluated in a controlled
environmental chamber for responsiveness to a panel of cannabinoids. Volatilized
gas-phase cannabinoid concentrations will be screened, mapped against MEMS
resistance and capacitance measurements, and analyzed to develop proprietary
chemometric pattern recognition algorithms that uniquely identify each molecular
target. The simultaneous use of chemicapacitive and chemiresistive MEMS sensors
coupled with multiple molecular recognition strategies will be exploited to
enhance the sensor’s molecular discriminating power, adding signal diversity
across the sensor array. This approach will distinguish gas-phase cannabinoids
in breath via chemometric “fingerprints” across a diversified biomimetic MEMS
sensor array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.