* 2015273
* Statistical Approaches for Spatio-Temporal Stochastic Population Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ephraim Hanks, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

Mathematical models are used to describe and explore complex processes in many
fields, including the study of disease dynamics in a population and the study of
the wind-born spread of pollutants from power plants. Continuing advances in
remote sensing and data collection have made it possible to collect data on
similar processes at resolutions that were impossible a generation ago.
Statistics and Data Science are fields focused on the analysis of data to inform
decision making and scientific inquiry, but the most common methods used, such
as linear regression or machine learning methods, cannot easily use mathematical
models in their analysis approach. In this work, the PI will develop methods
that make it easier to analyze data from systems where mathematical models are
useful to describe the process in question. The methods developed include
statistical approaches for modeling data in common forms, such as yearly
averaged pollution concentrations over space, or the current number of
individuals hospitalized with a disease. These methods will improve our ability
to understand and predict complex behavior in spatial epidemiology, disease
modeling, and ecology. Potential results include better estimates of
epidemiological parameters such as the rate at which individuals contract a
disease but do not show symptoms, which is critical for predicting the future of
an epidemic. The project will provide research training opportunities for
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of mechanistic process models,
like ODEs, SDEs, and PDEs, is central to the mathematical analysis of ecological
and epidemiological processes. However, their use in statistical inference is
relatively limited. In this work, the PI will develop statistical methods useful
for analyzing data when the governing process is scientifically known to follow
a mechanistic process model. As part of this work, the PI will develop methods
for joint inference of individual-level data (like individual animal movement
data) with population-level data (like population-level counts of animal
abundance) with formal links between these two data streams and a single process
model. In addition, the PI will develop methods for modeling data that come from
an assumed stochastic process, like a diffusion model or a spatial disease
spread model, but are collected as either a snapshot in time or an average over
time (i.e., yearly average pollutant concentration). Together these projects
will provide increased ability to specify and fit mechanistic statistical models
to data common in a wide variety of scientific disciplines. This work will
advance the ability of scientists to model data obtained in a variety of common
formats using mechanistic models with interpretable
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.