* 2015608
* Towards an integrative model of cell adhesion and self-recognition in sponge (Porifera) tissues
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Scott Nichols, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

The transition from unicellularity to multicellularity initiated the evolution
of animals, one of the most important and least understood events in the history
of life. From the study of traditional research models like flies and mice we
have learned that myriad mechanisms have evolved to meet the demands of the
multicellular condition, such as cell-cell attachment, cell-cell communication,
and the ability to distinguish one’s own cells from those of other organisms
(self-recognition). The goal of this project is to broaden this body of research
to include sponges, which are hundreds of millions of years divergent from all
other animals. To the extent that sponges and any other animal use the same
molecular mechanisms for mediating cell-cell interactions, unifying design
principles, both common and ancestral to all animals, may be inferred from the
study of sponges. The available evidence indicates that sponge cell-attachment
and self-recognition depend upon a molecular complex termed the ‘Aggregation
Factor’ that is not found in other animals. However, the composition of the
Aggregation Factor is incompletely known; it is unclear whether all sponges
produce this complex; and it is entirely unknown how it relates to molecular
systems in other animals. The goal of the proposed research is to understand the
role of aggregation factor and other associated proteins in aggregation,
adhesion, and communication. Beyond the immediate scientific goals, the impact
of this research will be extended through: 1) development of a citizen science
program to document the diversity and distribution of freshwater sponges in
North America, 2) development of an open-access repository of newly developed
tools and techniques for cultivation and experimental manipulation of sponges in
the laboratory, and e) training of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-held
view is that, unlike any other animal, sponge tissues are loosely organized,
with cells embedded in a common extracellular matrix composed, in part, of the
Aggregation Factor (AF). The AF is thought to cross-link adjacent cells and to
serve in self/non- self-recognition. But, an important caveat to this view is
that the Aggregation Factor has predominantly been studied in vitro (in cell
aggregation studies), whereas more recent studies of intact tissues have
revealed an important role for cadherin- and integrin-based cell junctions, much
like epithelial tissues in other animals. The proposed research will use 1)
proteomic methods to comprehensively determine AF composition in diverse sponge
lineages, 2) immunostaining to determine the relative distribution of the AF and
cell junctions in tissues, 3) co- immunoprecipitation and pull-downs to test for
endogenous interactions between the AF with cell junctions, and 4) small
molecules and peptides to perturb integrin signaling in AF-mediated processes of
cell aggregation and self-recognition. Conceptually, these results will clarify
how multicellular integrity is maintained in sponges and increase the
understanding of the evolutionary origin of multicellular integrity and tissue
organization in animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.