* 2015153
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable Decentralized Greywater Recycling System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Nicholas Sund, SANITARY GREEN INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
develop an affordable and sustainable solution for treating and recycling
household greywater. It is vital to conserve fresh water and reduce water waste.
Household greywater recycling can reduce water consumption by treating gently
used water and reusing it for everyday cleaning and personal hygiene. This
project will develop and optimize several configurations of a novel plant-based
greywater treatment system for household use. The system uses compact, modular
containers to be deployed anywhere for easy scaling, and it uses embedded
sensors to monitor water quality and system performance remotely. The treated
water will meet drinking water standards and the plant-based system can also
serve as a private garden or public green space. This technology can improve
community resilience to water scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
product advances the translation of a system using compact, modular containers
that can be deployed where water infrastructure is expensive, scarce, or
compromised. The system protects people from pathogenic bacteria and reduces
nitrogen and phosphorus run-off, helping to prevent algal blooms and
eutrophication of waterways. Water quality and system performance are monitored
remotely using wireless sensors. Research and development for this project will
include: 1) optimizing treatment performance to operate at a household scale; 2)
prototyping specialized, modular containers; and 3) testing integrated sensors.
To optimize treatment performance, key plants commonly used for wastewater
treatment will be grown in a natural filtration media composed of various sizes
of pumice, then subjected to various types and volumes of greywater. Within the
modular containers, various configurations of plumbing, weirs, and air pumps
will be tested to optimize oxygenation, filtration, and flow rates. During
operation, a combination of sensor readings and professional laboratory testing
will be used to analyze and validate water quality, as well as identify water
quality parameters most critical for field operation and remote
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.