* 2015088
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a low-cost Silicon Carbide Power Switch Technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Vipindas Pala, LOGISIC DEVICES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the adoption of silicon carbide
power semiconductors for energy efficient power electronics. The technology
developed in this Phase I proposal will build an intelligent, low-cost, high-
performance, silicon carbide power switch. The proposed technology can
potentially increase energy efficiency by up to 10% and reduce power electronic
energy dissipation by 5X for a wide range of applications, including industrial
power supplies, motor drives, solar inverters, battery chargers, adapters for
consumer electronics and in electric vehicles. In addition, the proposed
technology is also an enabler for efficient power delivery in future
applications such as electric aircraft, space flight and quantum computing.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a novel four-terminal silicon carbide field-effect transistor that, when
combined with a silicon metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor in a
novel topology, will create an innovative wide-bandgap switch. The proposed
device innovations will allow 50% die-size reduction compared to existing
silicon carbide solutions, with similar or better switching losses, and with the
potential to achieve cost parity with silicon technology in high-volume
production. Moreover, the proposed switch has excellent gate reliability without
the need for tight controls on the gate or drain overshoot. By combining the
power of advanced silicon technology with silicon carbide the proposed research
presents an opportunity to enable a truly intelligent power-switching platform
with high power density and high efficiency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.