* 2015606
* Collaborative: BEE: Ecological and evolutionary processes affecting the co-existence of close relatives
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Chris Blackwood, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 448,635.00

When communities are more biodiverse, they tend to be more stable and more
productive. A key factor affecting biodiversity is the number of species that
can live in the same place at the same time. However, not all species can co-
exist, and the rules regulating co-existence are not completely understood. This
project investigates the factors governing the co-occurrence of closely related
wildflower species in habitats throughout eastern North America. Closely related
species are likely to have similar traits and similar ecological needs. On one
hand, similarities may result in close relatives being more likely to live in
the same environments. On the other hand, similarities may cause close relatives
to compete or interfere with one another during growth and reproduction, making
it difficult for close relatives to co-occur in the long term. The long-term
view is important. Relatively recently, glaciers in eastern North America forced
species to migrate southward. This migration changed species’ geographic
distributions after glaciation and likely increased co-occurrence. This research
will improve our understanding of how ecological and evolutionary processes
affect co-existence and biodiversity. The project will provide broad training
for students. Public outreach will include creation of a museum display on
biodiversity and species co-existence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will locate and sample from multiple populations and herbaria records of 24
native Lobelia species across their ranges in eastern North America to document
where they live and how often they co-occur. The study will determine how
present-day patterns of co-occurrence are affected by both ecological and
evolutionary processes, such as degree of relatedness, trait similarity, habitat
characteristics, or historical migration. Investigations will include
determination of species relationships via phylogenomics, key components of each
species’ niche via microsite and trait characterization, and the degree to which
species interfere with one another’s growth or reproduction. Whether
interference affects their likelihood of co-existing will be determined using
field measurements of reproductive traits, experimental crosses, and transplant
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.