* 2015529
* Travel Grants for US Participants in the Mathematical Congress of the Americas, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 19 - 24, 2021
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Sarah Bryant, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/29/2024
* USD 160,000.00

To support participation in the Mathematical Congress of the Americas (MCA), to
be held July 19 – 24, 2021 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, the American Mathematical
Society (AMS) will administer a travel-grant program for mathematicians based in
the United States (US)—those who are students or faculty in US institutions or
employees of US organizations or companies. The Society will strive to draw a
robust and diverse applicant pool by utilizing its infrastructure of
communications and its connectivity in the mathematical community, and it will
work to ensure that mathematicians from groups historically underrepresented in
STEM areas receive particular attention. In the selection process, AMS expects
to give priority to early-career applicants. MCA is a quadrennial gathering,
initiated in 2013, with the goal "to internationally highlight the excellence of
mathematical achievements in the Americas and foster collaborations among
researchers, students, institutions, and mathematical societies in the
Americas." The conference is administered by the Mathematical Council of the
Americas, a network of over twenty societies, institutes, and agencies
throughout North America, South America, Central America, and the Caribbean
nations. This third Congress will draw top-tier mathematicians from around the
Western Hemisphere and the rest of the world. It will provide an excellent
opportunity for exchange of ideas in a broad array of mathematical areas and for
the US to be well represented in the international arena. The US sustains its
highly-regarded research endeavor, in part, by fostering the participation of
its citizens in international conferences. MCA presents an excellent opportunity
for such participation, both by established researchers as well as those who
will become the research leaders of the future. Those traveling to Buenos Aires
will be able to share in person the results of their research and garner new
ideas from their counterparts from across the Americas, thereby enriching the
hemispheric and worldwide endeavor of mathematical discovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers of MCA 2021 anticipate
approximately one thousand attendees from around the Western Hemisphere and the
rest of the world. The six plenary speakers are Ian Agol (University of
California, Berkeley, USA), Julia Chuzhoy (Toyota Technological Institute at
Chicago, USA), Carlos Kenig (University of Chicago, USA), Allan Sly (Princeton
University, USA), Claire Voisin (Collège de France, France), and Miguel Walsh
(Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina). Twenty-two Invited Speakers represent
such topical areas as algebraic geometry, analysis, probability, ergodic theory,
differential geometry, partial differential equations, relativity and
gravitation, numerical analysis, graph theory and combinatorics, applied
computational analysis, complex analytic geometry, dynamical systems, Riemann
manifolds, algebraic topology, geometry, stochastic calculus, fractal geometry,
number theory, model theory, statistical mechanics, and neuroscience. The
conference will include a wide array of special session topics, and it is
anticipated that the schedule will include multiple panel and poster sessions as
well as social and cultural events. The MCA is also the occasion for awarding
the MCA Prize, the Americas Prize, and the Solomon Lefschetz Medals. The
Congress presents a splendid opportunity for early-career mathematicians to
share their knowledge, garner new ideas, and interact with counterparts and
luminaries on the international stage. Current information about MCA 2021 is at
www.mca2021.org, and the AMS travel grant program is detailed at
https://www.ams.org/programs/travel-grants/mca.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.