* 2015935
* Theory of polymer crystallization, melting, and interlude of metastability
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education to advance understanding of polymer crystallization.
Very long and thin chain-like gigantic macromolecules make up the class of
materials, called polymers. These materials have redefined our contemporary
civilization, through clothing, building materials, automobile, and aircraft
parts, and much more. One of the key features required in polymeric materials so
that they will be useful as end-products with market value, is the ability to
make crystals from them. But this macromolecular process must be an impossible
task as can be easily envisaged by considering a large number of long and
intermingled wires which are all tangled up. How can they organize neatly into
crystals? In fact, the molecules do indeed form crystals, at least partially. In
spite of the prevalence of such partially ordered polymeric crystals in the
multi-billion-dollar industry of polymers, this process is not understood. A
molecular understanding of the crystallization process of polymeric materials is
one of the longstanding research challenges in the world of materials. The
multitude of puzzles collected phenomenologically over many decades in this
field demands a rational conceptual foundation, which will facilitate
discoveries of new materials in addition to understanding the known facts. This
research program is aimed to develop fundamental concepts to understand how
polymers crystallize and melt, using theory and computer modelling. In addition
to advancing the field of polymer crystallization, the proposed activities
include strong support of diversity and training a new generation of graduate
students enabling their future participation in the multi-billion-dollar
industry of semicrystalline polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research,
and education to advance understanding of polymer crystallization.
Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is one of the longstanding
research areas in polymer science with tremendous industrial value. Due to
enormous number of conformations that can be taken up by flexible
macromolecules, their crystallization and melting behaviors exhibit a broad
range of puzzling phenomenology which has been challenging to understand. These
puzzles emerge from rich structural hierarchies at multiple length scales and
time scales often involving long-lived non-equilibrium states. This research
program is aimed to develop new theories of polymer crystallization, melting,
and the interlude of hierarchy of metastable states. Building on new insights
into the role of long-lived metastable states and memory effects in
semicrystalline polymers, the proposed research will be performed using
statistical mechanics, field theory, and several simulation techniques.
Specifically, the PI plans to address: (i) interlude of metastable states in
crystallization, melting, and memory, (ii) vertical crystallization by lamellar
stacking, (iii) spontaneous selection and amplification of chirality, and (iv)
instability of interlamellar amorphous regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results from the research program are expected to have significant impact in
numerous industrially relevant areas such as polymer processing. Most of the
materials today are made from processed semicrystalline polymers, which form the
focus of the proposed work. These materials constitute a multi-billion-dollar
industry. A fundamental understanding of this important class of materials will
help to design and process novel polymeric materials with enhanced benefits to
our society. Training of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in this
challenging research area is a strong educational component of the research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.