* 2015622
* Neural and cellular basis of fluid homeostasis during hibernation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Elena Gracheva, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,300,000.00

Mammalian hibernation is fascinating. During a short period of time, hibernating
animals undergo dramatic adaptive changes, including reduction in heart and
respiration rate and decrease of core body temperature from 37째C (98.6째F) to 4째C
(39째F), yet they do not experience cold-induced pain, and their organs continue
to function despite being cold, non-functional, and deprived of oxygen for eight
months out of the year. Moreover, during hibernation, animals do not drink;
therefore, hibernators must rely solely on the management and utilization of
internal resources for long-term survival. This project seeks to understand the
molecular mechanisms that allows hibernators to survive for months without
water, using a range of cutting-edge tools and approaches not been previously
used for hibernation research, such as optogenetics and fiber photometry. The
outcomes of this study will have broad scientific implications, including a
better understanding of general mechanisms that regulate internal water and
ionic balance common to all mammals. This project also involves educational and
outreach efforts in the context of an extracurricular educational program
(Sensory Physiology Club) that promotes scientific knowledge in human and animal
physiology among school students from middle- and high schools from Connecticut,
New York, and Massachusetts. The efforts are designed to spark interest in
biological science through lectures and interactive experimental activities that
go beyond the science curricula of most schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
scientific goal of this study is to broaden our limited understanding of fluid
homeostasis in mammals at the cellular, molecular, and circuit levels by
studying ground squirrels during hibernation. This project tests the hypothesis
that ground squirrels endure long-term water deprivation in part by modifying
the hypothalamic axis, which controls thirst and mediates the release of
antidiuretic hormones. Specific aims of this proposal include investigation of
the neuronal mechanisms that support the release of vasopressin and oxytocin
from the posterior pituitary, and suppress water-seeking behavior during
hibernation. This project combines cellular, molecular, and organismal levels of
research and uses tools and approaches from a spectrum of disciplines: state-
specific biochemical analysis of neuropeptides and hormones, quantitative
analysis of hormonal production, differential transcriptomics, electron
microscopic and morphometric analyses of hormonal release, and behavioral
analyses of drinking behavior. A major innovative aspect of this project is the
use of optogenetics, fiber photometry, and electrophysiological tools, which
have not been used previously with hibernating animals. The outcomes of this
study will delineate general principles of fluid-ionic balance fine-tuning,
suggest a strategy to sustain life when water is unavailable, and predict
whether hibernation can be induced in other mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.