* 2015618
* Coherent Precipitation Extremes in a Supermodel of Future Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Jeffrey Weiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2023
* USD 506,733.00

There is no single best way for a model to represent elements of the climate
system such as clouds and ocean mixing, and climate models behave differently
depending on the representations they use. As a result each model has its own
strengths and weaknesses, for instance a model could produce a very good
simulation of Arctic sea ice but generate El Nino events which are too strong
and too frequent. The mixed quality of climate model simulations poses a
challenge for their use in understanding the climate system, predicting short-
term climate variability, and planning for the consequences of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award pursues a novel strategy
to take advantage of the strengths of different climate models while minimizing
the effects of their weaknesses. The strategy involves running a group of
climate models interactively, so that each model influences the behavior of the
other models. Previous research shows that interacting models tend to
synchronize their behavior, so that a group of models run interactively behaves
like a single "supermodel". Earlier results also suggest that such a supermodel
can be trained using real-world observations so that its simulation is better
than the simulations produced by any of its constituent models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supermodel developed in this project combines the
Community Earth System Model (CESM) developed at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research, the Max Planck Institute Earth System Model (MPIESM), and
the Norwegian Earth System Model (NorESM). The work focuses specifically on the
ability of the supermodel to improve representation of upper-level jet streams
and blocking highs. The extent to which improved representation of these
features in turn improves the supermodel's ability to simulate extreme
precipitation in the middle latitudes is examined. Assuming successful results
in the present-day climate, the supermodel will be used to investigate changes
in circulation features and associated precipitation extremes in warmer climates
produced by greenhouse gas increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of
societal as well as scientific interest given the potential of the supermodeling
strategy to improve predictions of weather and climate variability and
projections of climate change. Blocking is a particular challenge for weather
and climate models and poor performance in blocking adversely affects
predictions of precipitation extremes. The work also promotes international
collaboration in geoscience as it is conducted in partnership with the Norwegian
Synchronisation to Enhance Reliability of Climate Predictions (STERCP) project.
The project also supports a postdoctoral research associate, thereby developing
the next generation workforce in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.