* 2015375
* Collaborative Research: AIM &amp; ICERM Research Experiences for Undergraduate Faculty (REUF)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Ulrica Wilson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2024
* USD 165,103.00

Enabling more Americans to earn undergraduate and graduate degrees in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) is important to improving
American innovation capabilities. Participating in research as undergraduates
improves retention in STEM majors and encourages students to pursue graduate
degrees. Faculty at colleges and universities that focus on undergraduate
education are critical to this mission, yet in many cases such faculty receive
little support to do research with the students they teach or to continue their
own research. To address this national need, with the support of this NSF award,
the American Institute of Mathematics (AIM) and the Institute for Computational
and Experimental Research in Mathematics (ICERM) will conduct a series of four
annual Research Experiences for Undergraduate Faculty (REUF) workshops during
the summers of 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024. Each REUF workshop and ongoing
activities will provide a new group of faculty participants at undergraduate
institutions that have limited research support with a research experience
investigating open questions in the mathematical sciences and equip them to
engage in research with undergraduate students at their home institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At each REUF workshop five senior mathematicians (leaders)
who have experience doing research with undergraduate students will present
problems in a variety of areas. Then the 25 undergraduate faculty participants
and the leaders will divide into groups and work on the problems together. The
workshop will conclude with group presentations of each project. Most of the
time will be spent doing research, but there will also be whole group
discussions about topics such as best practices in undergraduate research led by
the (co)-principal investigators, who also meet daily with the leaders. There
are opportunities to continue work on the projects started in the workshop, and
some participants will become involved in long-term research collaborations with
other faculty at the workshop. The recruitment efforts for REUF will target
faculty at undergraduate colleges and universities that serve a large proportion
of students who are underrepresented minorities, person with disabilities, or
first generation college students, as well as faculty who are themselves
underrepresented or have disabilities. The REUF project will lead to more and
better undergraduate research experiences for the students of the faculty
participants, and greater engagement in mathematical research by the faculty
participants, thus expanding and diversifying the mathematical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.