* 2015930
* Physics-based Control-oriented Multiscale Modeling of Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Qian Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 546,806.00

Laser powder bed fusion additive manufacturing processes are one important
category of additive manufacturing processes for metal parts. They are used for
the production of high-value components with complex geometries across the
medical, aerospace, and automotive industries. This award will support
fundamental research that contributes to new models of the laser powder bed
fusion additive manufacturing process, which can be used to improve the real-
time control of the processes on commercial systems. Outcomes of this project
will improve part quality and process consistence, reduce part rejections and
material waste, and thus have the potential to increase economic competitiveness
of the manufacturing industry of the United States. This award will support the
integration of education and research, and outreach activities to help bridge
the gap between academic research and industrial end uses of additive
manufacturing processes, and to train the next generation of workforce for
innovations in the manufacturing industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
contribution of this project lies in the novel first-principle, control-oriented
multiscale model for the laser powder bed fusion additive manufacturing
processes, from the fine scale to the layer scale and then to the part scale.
This multiscale model is able to capture the essential physics of the laser
powder bed fusion additive manufacturing processes, but with a significantly
reduced computation complexity compared to finite element models. More
importantly, it enables the derivation of an analytical expression of feed-
forward or feedback controller of laser power to regulate the melt-pool geometry
and thus to improve the build quality. In addition to developing the multiscale
model, the research team will also perform experimental validation of the
modeling effort and demonstration of the control implementation on a commercial
laser powder bed fusion additive manufacturing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.