* 2015012
* STTR Phase I:  Applying real-time data streams to predict operating room resource allocation with neural networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Westin Hill, MENTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2022
* USD 244,954.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to reduce the cost of surgical operations.
Instrument tracking enables hospitals to optimize the supply chain, with a
potential annual benefit to the US healthcare system of $8.5 B. Predictive
scheduling can save $500k per operating room (OR) by closing gap times between
procedures. Similarly, instrument prediction assistance can save an OR an
estimated $14 per minute. The project will gather procedure and tool data from
the operating room and apply artificial intelligence to optimize OR processes.
This project has the potential to improve the overall function of the surgical
team by anticipating surgical instrument needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project advances the fields of
medicine and artificial intelligence by leveraging intraoperative data gathered
by surgical instrument tracking. This unique data stream offers one of the first
quantitative windows into a surgical operation. The objective of this project is
to create computational tools to improve operating room scheduling and
instrument supply, and test them with real clinical data. Transformer networks,
commonly used in natural language processing tasks, will be adapted for this
application and leveraged as an autoregressive tool to predict parameters of
interest. The system will generate data regarding variations among surgeons,
procedures, and patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.