* 2015947
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Analysis of the Cell Biological, Biomechanical, and Physiological Dynamics of Stomatal Guard Cells in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Joseph Turner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 307,395.00

In plants, stomatal guard cells influence both photosynthesis and water
transport and are thus essential for growth and efficient water use. However,
our understanding of guard cell function at the cellular and molecular levels is
limited. This project studies how guard cells dynamically expand and shrink to
open and close stomatal pores, controlling the uptake of carbon dioxide and the
release of oxygen and water by the plant. Understanding how guard cells function
will aid in the development of resilient, high-yielding crops that can grow in
hot, dry environments and more effectively remove carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. The image analysis and modeling tools created in this project will
allow researchers to predict the behavior of a wide range of mechanical
behaviors and responses by cells. This multidisciplinary project will train
three PhD students as future leaders across the topics of cell biology,
computational image analysis, and mechanical testing and modeling of biological
systems, and will spread knowledge of guard cells and plant biology using
learning modules and research experiences for K-12 and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of research interest, the
molecular and biophysical mechanisms by which stomatal guard cells function
remain incompletely understood. In particular, the roles of the cell wall and
water flux in guard cells and neighboring cells in stomatal mechanics are not
fully defined. This project combines molecular genetics, cell biology, advanced
microscopy, computational image analysis, nanoindentation, and computational
modeling to measure and model turgor pressure and wall mechanics in wild type
and mutant stomatal complexes of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. These
analyses will be used to examine the biomechanics of guard cells and the dynamic
mechanical and functional relationships between guard cells and their
neighboring cells. Another major goal of the project is to use super-resolution
microscopy to develop a clear picture of the molecular composition and
architecture of the guard cell wall, and to use these data to construct
detailed, accurate, and experimentally testable finite element and multiscale,
multiphysics models of stomatal guard cells. Together, this work will enable the
prediction of stomatal dynamics across a range of species, wall compositions,
stomatal geometries, and signaling inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.