* 2015404
* Exploring the genomics of convergent snout elongations in deep-sea fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Richard Broughton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,062.00

Explaining how similar traits have independently evolved in distantly related
organisms is a central goal of evolutionary biology. Among vertebrates, fishes
are one of the few evolutionary systems that provide repeated cases of
adaptation to deep-sea marine environments, one of the most extreme and
underexplored environments on earth. Transitions from shallow to deep-sea
habitats have occurred multiple times, resulting in a variety of remarkable
adaptations, from the presence of bioluminescence and small body size to a
diverse array of morphological specializations. However, detailed comparative
studies investigating the origin and genomic bases of specialized phenotypic
novelties that have repeatedly appeared in the deep-sea continue to be poorly
understood. This project aims to develop a comparative approach to study
convergent morphological evolution and its underlying ecological and genomic
bases in the deep-sea spikefishes (Triacanthodidae, Tetraodontiformes), which
are distributed around the tropical and temperate upper slopes of the worldâ€™s
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spikefishes provide an outstanding system for
investigating convergent evolution as lineages in the group have independently
evolved at least twice the most extreme tubular snout elongation in the Fish
Tree of Life, have some of the smallest vertebrate genomes, and included well-
preserved fossil species from the Eocene and Oligocene. The integration of
state-of-the-art genomic and morphological data with the study of extant and
fossil species will allow new ways of exploring convergent morphological
evolution in a genomic and ecological framework. Moreover, understanding the
determinants of deep-sea convergence at the molecular level has the potential to
inform general principles of adaptation and morphological predictivity along
ocean depth gradients. Overall, this project will contribute whole-genome
resequencing data, CT-scans for extant and fossil taxa, and a well-resolved
phylogeny of triacanthodids and allies. This project will also provide online
videos, tutorials, interactive apps, museum exhibits, undergraduate and graduate
training, and a series of integrative research papers exploring the links
between phenotype and genotype and the associations of genomic regions involved
in morphological adaptations in fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.