* 2015957
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Infrastructures, Social Transformations and Resource Extraction in Contested Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Jason Cons, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

This research investigates how social change occurs in communities economically
dependent on the extraction of natural resources. Social scientists have found
that areas with large deposits of natural resources are prone to conflict. Yet,
as episodes of conflict garner news attention, less is known about the everyday
ways that community members navigate the resource extraction infrastructures
(security walls, shipping ports, conveyor belts) with which they live. This
project investigates how communities make infrastructure a platform for
demanding economic benefits, legal rights, and/or territorial control. It
examines if and how these efforts, in turn, effect communities’ economic and
social wellbeing. Through a focus on extractive infrastructures, this project
improves understandings of resources and societal change. In addition to
providing training for a graduate student training in methods of scientific data
collection and analysis, the findings will be valuable to policy researchers and
policy makers interested in conflict resolution and natural resource
extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted in a community
facing questions of who controls local natural resources in an effort to
qualitatively understand how community members navigate infrastructures. Methods
will include participant observation and rigorous documentation of (1) community
life, daily work, and activities among these communities and (2) of the
corporations carrying out the extraction. The doctoral student will augment
these qualitative techniques with extensive formal and informal interviews, oral
histories, media analysis, and archival research. By investigating how
extractive infrastructure effects community members and how communities, in
turn, engage those same infrastructures when demanding socio-economic change,
this research generates critical knowledge of social change and conflict in
resource rich regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.