* 2015968
* Long Term Development of a Macroeconomy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Adler, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 101,670.00

In most parts of the world, wide-scale adoption of agricultural practices and
associated settlement did not herald the end of mobile hunting and gathering
traditions. Foragers persisted for centuries—in some cases, for millennia—
alongside farmers, building new political, economic, and social relationships
with their more sedentary neighbors. In the North American Southwest, the rise
of large farming villages played a key role in stimulating a new fluorescence of
bison-hunting traditions on the neighboring Southern Plains, as well as a
concomitant intensification of interregional networks of economic exchange,
military alliance, intermarriage, and opportunistic raiding. This “Plains-Pueblo
macroeconomy,” challenges simple evolutionary storylines about the replacement
of foraging with farming, and it redirects our attention towards the adaptive
diversity of human lifeways. This project has also been developed in close
collaboration with the descendant community at Picuris Pueblo, with plans to
feature the results of the research in the Picuris tribal museum. This endeavor
is part of an effort to increase cultural heritage tourism at the pueblo and to
educate the public about Picuris’ rich history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines the historical development of the Plains-Pueblo macroeconomy.
This project seeks to test a specific, two-part hypothesis: namely (1) that the
onset of exchange relations with Apachean groups from the Southern Plains
triggered the expansion and intensification of agricultural practices and (2)
that this agricultural transformation was undertaken to produce maize surpluses
that could be traded for meat, hides, and other goods from the Plains.
Researchers will lead a team of tribally-enrolled youth interns, PhD students,
and undergraduate students in an intensive field-based project that combines
pedestrian survey, landscape mapping, test excavations, micro-botanical studies,
and oral histories with tribal members, designed to establish the extent and
content of agricultural field systems. To refine chronological understanding of
the initiation of trade and the pace of agricultural intensification, the team
will further employ AMS dating of both agricultural features and bison bone
samples from previously-excavated midden contexts, as well as a
dendrochronological study of the forests now covering the ancestral field
systems. This research will produce the first large-scale account of this
economic history, and it will serve as a key archaeological case study in our
wider understanding of the evolution of farmer-forager
mutualism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.