* 2015099
* SBIR Phase I:  Creating a Master Transformation Recipient Line for Chloroplast Engineering of Maize
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Jeffrey Staub, PLASTOMICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop environmentally sustainable, higher yielding, pest-
resistant biotech crops. Crops of the future need dozens of traits to achieve
higher yields and protect themselves against insects, pests, diseases and
changing environmental conditions. The proposed technology will enable efficient
production of crops engineered with multiple trait genes, higher efficacy of the
desired traits, and faster breeding and seed production to accelerate
distribution. Unlike current solutions, the proposed technology ensures that
traits will not be transferred to weeds or native plant species via pollen. The
initial application is corn, the most valuable commercial crop in the US, with
insights expected to enhance other crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to create a chloroplast (plastid) transformation platform for
engineering corn. Although chloroplast engineering (transplastomic) technology
has been developed successfully in a number of dicot crop species (i.e.,
tobacco, potato), a reproducible technology has not been developed for any
monocot crop (i.e., corn, sorghum). The available evidence indicates that the
rate-limiting step is the need for a strong selection system to enable the
identification and amplification of rare transformed plastids in the embryogenic
tissue culture systems typical for monocots. This project will create a Master
Transformation Recipient Line (MTRL) of corn for use in a chloroplast
engineering platform. The MTRL will contain a targeted genome deletion in a
chloroplast-encoded photosynthetic gene, allowing for development of a new
selection system that can lead to successful chloroplast engineering of monocot
crops. Ultimately, the corresponding wild-type chloroplast photosynthetic gene
will be delivered to the MTRL with other desired traits, facilitating an elegant
selection of transformed plastids with the deleted photosynthetic gene restored
and as well as carrying the new traits of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.