* 2015010
* STTR Phase I:  Use of Hydroxycinnamic Acids and Their Oligomers as Substitutes for Synthetic Growth Promoting Supplements in Livestock Feeds
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Rajai Atalla, Cellulose Sciences International
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to enhance the health of livestock without addition
of synthetic antibiotic and antioxidant compounds. The proposed technologies are
corn kernel fiber byproducts of ethanol production from corn. The need for such
compounds has grown as livestock is now more often raised in concentrated animal
feeding operations that confine animals and result in abnormal oxidative stress.
The program is based on extracting these naturally occurring compounds from
agricultural residues. These extracts can be used in place of antibiotics and
synthetic supplements currently in livestock feeds. The process proposed will
enable production at a cost competitive with synthetic
supplements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR project proposes to assess the
biological activity of hydroxy cinnamic acids and their oligomers (HCAs) as
beneficial supplements in livestock feed. They are ester-linked to a
hemicellulose known to occur in seed crop brans. The linkage is hydrolyzed
during pretreatment of corn bran fiber to prepare it for conversion to ethanol
and the HCAs dissolve in the pretreatment solution. As free acids they recover
their character, which includes antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
properties. The project will provide kilogram quantities of HCAs for use in
feeding trials with young swine, wherein they will be compared with naturally
sourced feed supplements currently in use in Europe, as well as un-supplemented
feed. Components of the extract will be identified and comprehensive biochemical
analyses performed, including study of the gastrointestinal physiology and
intestinal permeability. Studies will also be performed of gut microbiomes and
how the processes involved are influenced by substitution of HCAs as the primary
feed supplement. Successful completion of these studies will provide a basis for
more comprehensive studies of the use of HCAs as supplements in the diet of
other livestock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.