* 2015795
* Heterojunctions as the Weakest Link: A Fundamental Investigation of Damage Evolution in Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Md Haque, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 04/30/2024
* USD 375,056.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:&lt;br/&gt;Heterojunctions
as the Weakest Link: A Fundamental Investigation of Damage Evolution in
Electronic Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Reliability of microelectronic devices, such as transistors,
is critical to applications. Typically, this is studied by loading the
transistors to failure and then analyzing the electrical characteristics of the
data. Post-mortem microscopy is also performed to visualize the damage inside
the device. However, care must be taken to recreate the failure events. In this
research, a novel concept is introduced where the transistor is tested inside
microscopes that allow near-atomic resolution mapping of defect evolution and
the role of local heat and current transport. Special consideration will be
given to the interfaces between various layers inside a transistor, whose
important role in device reliability has been difficult to study using
conventional approaches. Such high-resolution access to mechanical, electrical
and thermal domains will remove the existing challenge of identifying the local
weak spots in the transistor and the fundamental mechanisms behind their impact
on the global or device level failure. This unique approach will be applied to
the study of high-power transistors that will be used in next generation all-
electric transportation, energy storage and radio-frequency communication
technologies. Success of this research will lead to transistors that will reduce
the size and weight of relevant equipment in these applications while increasing
power and reliability. In addition to the advancements in the fundamental
science of high-power transistor reliability, the project will ensure training
of the graduate and undergraduate students with cutting edge and multi-
disciplinary science and technology. Outreach activities will be performed to
attract K-12 students, who are the workforce of the next
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to investigate the role of heterojunctions in overall device
reliability for power transistors. The research is motivated by the gap between
the predicted and actual reliability of high power and high frequency devices
touted to enable next generation all-electric transportation, energy storage and
RF communication technologies. Gallium nitride based high electron mobility
transistors (HEMT) will be studied to answer two fundamental questions: (a) what
is the weakest component in a transistor in terms of defect nucleation and (b)
is it defect nucleation or atomic diffusion that is more viral in device
degradation. This research hypothesizes that diffusion across and along
interfaces could be the answers and lays out a unique in-operando microscopy
based validation approach. Transmission electron and thermo-reflectance
microscopy will be used in real time to map and monitor the structural and
transport characteristics of the devices during the onset of degradation. The
high resolution, both spatially and temporally, shifts the current paradigm of
looking for failure signatures in device data from the device-level to the
atomic interface level. Realtime investigation of the atomic structure and
chemistry of defects and interfaces, along with an understanding of their
influence on electron-phonon interactions, will eliminate the roadblock of
accurately identifying the dominant mechanism and quantifying its impact. The
proposed research elaborately designs non-thermal experiments after isolating
the various components of mechanical stress (residual, thermo-elastic and
inverse piezo-electric). The outcome of this research will provide fundamental
insights on GaN HEMT failure and suggest paths towards performance and
reliability improvements. It will also train graduate and undergraduate students
in both class and laboratory settings. The project will also reach out to the
next generation workforce, the K-12 students, to attract them toward science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.