* 2015983
* Control of Aeroelastic Structures via Prescribed Upstream Aerodynamic Disturbances
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ashok Gopalarathnam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2024
* USD 454,209.00

This grant will advance the national prosperity and security through a
scientific understanding of fluid-structure interactions that will advance the
fields of aerodynamics, structural dynamics, and vibration control favorable for
future high-efficiency aircraft, extended endurance in swarms of swimming or
flying robots, enhanced wind and hydrokinetic energy generation, and protection
of infrastructure like bridges and pipelines from fatigue damage due to wind and
water flows. This award supports fundamental research on modifying and
controlling fluid-structure interactions by way of introducing prescribed flow
disturbances from an upstream disturbance generator. Depending on the
application, it may be desirable to suppress a flutter instability or attenuate
oscillations (as in an aircraft wing or turbine blade), increase the amplitude
of oscillations (as in an oscillating flow energy harvester), or reshape an
oscillation to beneficially affect fluid-structure energy transfer (as in a
swarm of swimming or flying robots synchronizing to minimize energy
consumption). The approach studied here will enable any of these distinct
behaviors to be generated on-demand. The multi-disciplinary approach, and the
education activities at the middle school through doctoral levels, will help
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to enable distinct aeroelastic system behaviors including equilibrium
stabilization / destabilization or limit cycle oscillation amplitude increase /
decrease to be created, controlled, and modified on-demand by prescribing
aerodynamic disturbances that interact with a target aeroelastic wing. The
project aims to understand, model, and formulate control approaches for
aeroelastic wings being affected by canonical flow disturbances such as
convecting vortices. The first goal is to understand and map the spatiotemporal
relationships between incoming flow disturbances and the unsteady aerodynamic
forces and moments on a wing using a custom discrete vortex method with a model
for external flow disturbances (LDVM-Disturbance) and wind tunnel experiments
for validation. A second goal is to establish the effects of incoming flow
disturbance topology, strength, frequency content, and phasing on the stability
and nonlinear oscillation behavior of an aeroelastic wing. This will be
investigated in simulation by coupling the LDVM-Disturbance model with an
aeroelastic structural dynamics model, and in validation experiments by
measuring the response of an aeroelastic wing section downstream of an actuated
disturbance generator. A third goal is to create a sequence of feed-forward
system inversions that allows required disturbance generator motions to be
determined to produce desired responses in the downstream aeroelastic wing. The
results will be used to demonstrate open-loop control of aeroelastic stability
and oscillation phenomena in wind tunnel experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.