* 2015668
* EAGER: Combining van der Waals heterostructures and superlattices: new approach to 2D tunable optoelectronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Federico Capasso, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2023
* USD 202,000.00

Optoelectronic devices bridge optics to electronics and they are ubiquitous in
our society. They include solid state light sources such as light emitting
diodes and laser diodes, as well as modulators (that can encode an electrical or
radiofrequency signal onto light) and detectors (which can convert light back
into an electrical signal). Many modern optoelectronic devices rely on quantum
confinement effects, and more in general on mesoscopic quantum structures which
can be realized, for instance, by growing a sequence of thin layers of
semiconductors (with thicknesses in the order of few nanometers). These
structures possess new electrical and optical properties which the bulk
semiconductors lack and are widely used for lasers (e.g. in quantum cascade
lasers and quantum well laser diodes), modulators (e.g. in electro-absorption
modulators) and detectors (such as in quantum dots and quantum well based
detectors). New materials and technologies are very actively investigated by the
scientific community to create faster, smaller and low-cost optoelectronic
devices, and integration on silicon is often a must for telecommunications and
imaging applications. 2D and van der Waals materials have attracted a lot of
attention for optoelectronics, since they host new physical effects and can
often be tuned electrically, by applying a voltage between the 2D material and a
substrate via a gate oxide. However, the creation of large-scale quantum
confinement in these materials is prohibitive since it is limited by the
resolution of the lithographic and etching processes used to pattern either the
2D materials or the electrical gates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;So far, quantum
engineering of 2D materials has been achieved mostly using heterostructures,
including the realization of Moiré patterns. But these approaches have limits
for large scale production and typically show weak effects. This EAGER research
project aims to explore a new technique to create large scale quantum confined
effects in 2D materials and to demonstrate devices based on this new technology.
The approach is based on a new gate oxide fabrication technology. The gate
consists of alternating layers of different oxides that are used to create a
variable electrical potential on 2D materials when a voltage is applied on the
gate. Unlike their bulk 3D counterparts, these quantum confined structures are
widely tunable since the depth of the quantum wells is proportional to the
applied gate. The PI plans to use these new effects to realize new types of
modulators and photodetectors. Modulators can be realized by creating arrays of
coupled two-dimensional quantum wells (also known as superlattices), which
absorb light in different ways accordingly to the applied voltage. Both
interband and intersubband absorptions in the 2D materials can be engineered
using this new approach. Because these structures can be gated with highly
conductive electrodes, the modulation speed is expected to be at least one order
of magnitude greater than today’s modulators based on 2D materials. Furthermore,
these devices will benefit from the possibility of quantum-engineering the
excitons in 2D materials which appear at room temperature in the visible and
near infrared ranges even when no quantum confinement is used. In addition to
its obvious technological relevance, this project will advance understanding of
2D materials and associated quantum phenomena and offer opportunities for
integrating this new knowledge in several courses on materials and devices at
Harvard University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.