* 2015838
* IIBR Informatics: An integrative study of distal gene regulation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Xiaoman Li, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2024
* USD 584,296.00

Understanding the factors regulating complex gene expression is essential in
biological research. The temporal and spatial activities of protein coding genes
are controlled by genome sequences which are in general far from their
corresponding controlled target genes. The controlling regions interact with
their corresponding target genes and significantly strength or repress the
activities of these target genes. Despite of decades of endeavor towards
studying these distal controlling elements, knowledge of their target genes
under specific experimental conditions is still limited. This project thus
proposes to create computational methods and tools to fill this gap by
identifying distal controlling switches of protein coding genes in the mammalian
genomes. The project will involve graduate students, undergraduates, and high
school students, disseminate research results through seminars, conferences,
papers, tools, websites, etc. The developed methods and tools will be essential
for the annotation of mammalian genomes and understanding of human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given experimental methods tend to be costly and
performance of available computational methods is still suboptimal, this project
will develop novel computational methods and tools for the identification of the
target genes of distal regulatory regions in mammalian genomes through achieving
the following two main research goals: (i) creating computational methods and
tools to infer the constraints of interactions between distal regions and their
target genes; and (ii) creating computational methods and tools to predict the
target genes of distal regulatory regions. The fulfillment of these goals will
significantly advance the studies on gene transcriptional regulation and the
annotation of mammalian genomes. The project also has educational goals
including: (i) mentoring minority high school students; (ii) educating graduates
and undergraduates; and (iii) disseminating research discoveries. These
educational activities will be well integrated with the proposed research
activities. The results from this project can be found at
http://www.cs.ucf.edu/~xiaoman/ET&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.