* 2015828
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Role of Cytosolic One-carbon Metabolism in Photorespiration
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sanja Roje, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 790,192.00

This project explores the intersection between photorespiration and one carbon
metabolism, two plant biochemical pathways that are of critical importance to
plant growth and consequently human nutrition. Photorespiration is a plant
process that recycles toxic products created as a byproduct of photosynthesis
and is an essential process of plant growth. Rates of photorespiration are
linked to elevated temperature and carbon dioxide concentration, meaning that
future rates of photorespiration will change with changing climates. One carbon
metabolism is similarly vital to plant growth, and also is the source for
essential vitamins like folate. The goal of this project is to generate models
predicting how current and future climatic conditions influence plant
performance and yields. These models would inform breeding and engineering
approaches to optimize plant productivity and the production of plant compounds
important for human nutrition and health. During this interdisciplinary project,
high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral trainees are taught
integrative approaches to plant biology, broadening their education and learning
opportunities in collaborative scientific research. The aim of this activity is
to instill positive attitudes towards science, and encourage creative and
critical thinking by providing trainees with greater access to the scientific
process early in their educational training. Underrepresented undergraduate and
graduate students participate in several university programs designed to provide
information on existing research opportunities to underrepresented groups at
Washington State University and Michigan State University. The main public
facing outreach activity of this project is a Sounds of Science performance at
Washington State University, a unique collaboration between plant scientists and
musicians resulting in a TED-talk styled event aimed to increase awareness of
the importance of plant science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally,
photorespiration has been considered well defined with little metabolic
flexibility. However, the PIâ€™s recent work suggests that photorespiratory flux
can alternatively be partitioned into the metabolism of tetrahydrofolate-bound
one-carbon (C1) units in the cytosol. This may provide an overflow for the
traditional photorespiratory pathway and has important implications for the
energetics and carbon balance of photorespiration, photosynthesis, and foliar
nitrogen assimilation. Therefore, it is important to define the contribution of
cytosolic C1 metabolism to photorespiration, particularly in response to
conditions that influence rates of photorespiration (e.g. drought and high
temperature). The goal of the project is to determine the role of cytosolic C1
metabolism in photorespiration. It is hypothesized that two cytosolic C1
enzymes, formate-tetrahydrofolate ligase and serine hydroxymethyltransferase,
participate in processing of formate and serine generated during
photorespiration. Reverse genetics, leaf gas exchange, metabolite analyses, and
labeling-assisted metabolic flux analysis are used to test the role of these two
enzymes in the coordination of carbon metabolism between the C1 and
photorespiratory pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.