* 2015313
* An AGEP Historically Black Universities Model with Community College Teaching as a Platform for Advancing Underrepresented Minority STEM Doctoral Candidates in Faculty Careers
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2027
* Hongtao Yu, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2027
* USD 29,974.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Alliance Model will
develop, implement, study, evaluate and disseminate an AGEP alliance model to
increase teaching self-efficacy and develop a strong faculty identity in
historically underrepresented minority (URM) STEM doctoral candidates attending
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, for completion of their PhD degree
and advancement in the professoriate. Three of the nation’s premier HBCUs,
Howard University, Morgan State University, and Hampton University, top
producers of African American STEM PhDs, will work on this project with the
Community College Network (CCN) comprised of Prince George’s Community College,
Community College of Baltimore, Thomas Nelson Community College, and the
Community College of Rhode Island. The Alliance team will work together to
support doctoral candidates at the HBCUs in developing teaching self-efficacy
and faculty identity to improve the likelihood of URM STEM doctoral candidates
choosing and persisting in an academic career. Doctoral candidates will
participate in webinars and workshops focusing on foundational and conceptual
aspects of the professoriate as well as pedagogical skills. Their training will
culminate in a one year apprenticeship at a community college, spending one
semester observing a faculty mentor and then teaching a course the second
semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AGEP HBCU Alliance Model was created in
response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance
knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of
URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM
disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Alliances develop,
replicate or reproduce, implement, and study, via integrated educational and
social science research, Alliance Models to transform the dissertation phase of
doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and
transitions within and across the pathway levels, for URMs in STEM and/or STEM
education research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for students to learn
from, work with, and emulate. Despite the compelling need for increasing the
number of URM faculty to ensure the success of URM students, the percentage of
URM STEM faculty remains at only about 6% of tenure-track science and
engineering faculty members at universities and two-year colleges. The
integrated research project will investigate the interest and commitment of URM
STEM doctoral students, across multiple degree-granting HBCUs, to careers in the
professoriate. This project will not only lead to URM STEM doctoral students
advancing to the professoriate, but also will provide insight into how to
increase the numbers of these students in choosing academic careers through an
understanding of the motivation for this choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation
of project progress and goal completion will be monitored through the leadership
team self-study and with the contributions of an external evaluator. The
Alliance will also receive input from two advisory boards. The Institutional
Advisory Board (IAB) will be focused on the institutional level work of the
project and developing means for integrating the project activities and outcomes
into institutional policies and procedures. The External Advisory Board (EAB)
will provide input for strengthening project activities and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three collaborative awards for this AGEP HBCU
Alliance Model were funded by the NSF's AGEP program and HBCU-Undergraduate
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.