* 2015829
* Collaborative Research: Further Investigations from the Seeded and Natural Orographic Wintertime clouds: the Idaho Experiment (SNOWIE)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Katja Friedrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 697,428.00

Precipitation enhancement through cloud seeding has taken place in the Western
United States and other regions around the globe for several decades. One of the
main weather regimes where cloud seeding is attempted is in mountainous terrain
in areas where there is a significant amount of liquid water in the clouds.
Direct observational evidence of the chain of events from the release of cloud
seeding material to the formation of precipitation was shown in data from a
recent NSF-supported field campaign. This award will provide researchers with
the opportunity to further analyze data from that campaign to answer additional
questions about the science behind cloud seeding. The research represents a
public-private partnership between NSF-sponsored scientists and a utility that
provides hydroelectric power. The next generation of scientists will also be
trained during this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will expand
upon the analysis of field campaign data from the Seeded and Natural Orographic
Wintertime clouds: the Idaho Experiment (SNOWIE) that was conducted in 2017.
Initial results have shown that cloud seeding in orographic regions can initiate
snowfall in certain situations. The research team will move beyond the obvious
cases of cloud seeding impacts to analyze every case during the campaign,
including those where cloud seeding was conducted while natural snowfall was
also occurring. The overarching goal of the project is to provide estimates,
with uncertainty limits, of precipitation enhancement from glaciogenic cloud
seeding for all SNOWIE seeding events. This will involve coupling data analysis
using the SNOWIE data set and state of the art modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers have identified a set of questions to
address the following research hypotheses: 1) Mesoscale and microscale updrafts
observed in mostly stratiform orographic clouds are focal areas for the
production of supercooled liquid water and sometimes natural ice particles, 2)
Airborne seeding of orographic clouds, under the right conditions, will produce
changes in microphysical properties of clouds and precipitation detectable with
in-situ and remote sensors, even in conditions where natural precipitation is
occurring, and 3) For all SNOWIE cases, seeding impacts on precipitation over a
mountain basin can be estimated quantitatively, and uncertainties established,
through numerical simulations employing seeding parameterizations improved
utilizing analyses from the observations. NSF-supported researchers will
collaborate with researchers at the National Center for Atmospheric Research and
the Idaho Power Company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.