* 2015077
* SBIR Phase I:  Absolute protein quantitation in in vitro diagnostics for gut inflammation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Sunyoung Kim, CHOSEN DIAGNOSTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 224,758.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the determination of the most accurate method of measuring protein
abundance in patient samples. The answers obtained will address a fatal neonatal
gut disease, necrotizing enterocolitis, that disproportionately affects African-
American preterm infants and lacks disease-modifying treatments. The proposed
technology will serve as a clinically-deployable diagnostic for hospitals,
reference labs, and drug companies, particularly high-acuity neonatal intensive
care units. The proposed project will advance the development of a diagnostic
for an underserved population. In addition, the development team will include
underrepresented innovators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
optimize the choice of reference standard and detection method for protein
abundance. Absolute quantification is a prerequisite for data interpretation and
validation between experiments, laboratories, and testing platforms. Current
clinical practice exploits only a single type of mutation that gives rise to
disease; rarely do they address a target protein with extensive polymorphic
variation that is age- and race-dependent. The goal of this proposal is to
develop reference clinically robust standards to enable use of a new candidate
biomarker in hospital pathology settings. Research objectives include: (1)
identification of optimal reference standard composition for two common methods
to quantify biomolecules in clinical settings and (2) understanding usage
limitations of these reference standards in the background of high sequence
variation in the human population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.