* 2015160
* SBIR Phase I:  Focal Plane Array for Active Coherent Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Kam Wai Chan, OAM PHOTONICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable a cost-effective high-performance
imaging technology with widespread commercial opportunities for industrial
applications, such as autonomous navigation. The technology has the potential to
greatly enhance the performance of autonomous navigation systems, enabling more
precise detection of objects at further distances and enjoying greater
robustness against environmental conditions. These capabilities help increase
the safety of autonomous driving. The proposed technology is designed for
manufacturability at low cost and high volume. Applications will benefit the
defense, industrial, medical and scientific sectors, potentially bringing new
opportunities in the areas of surveillance, security, remote sensing, machine
vision, material surface characterization, biomedical imaging, as well as novel
areas such as quantum imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at developing a multi-pixel
optical focal plane array (FPA) capable of coherent detection by leveraging
photonic integrated circuit technology. Current conventional FPA technologies
operate by direct photon detection wherein the incoming photons are converted
into electron charges directly at each detection pixel. The measured signal is
thus proportional to the intensity of the incident light. However, coherent
detection measures both intensity and phase, with advantages including near-
shot-noise-limited performance, background light rejection, and additional
object information contained in the phase. The proposed technology will enable
thousands to millions of coherent detection pixels to be fabricated
monolithically on a photonic chip, enabling mass production. This research will
result in a design of the coherent FPA with optimal detection performance and
small form-factor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.