* 2015693
* Investigations into the Design Rules for the Control of Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Duck Bong Kim, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,916.00

This award advances the understanding of defect formation in wire arc additive
manufacturing, leading to improved processing and greater process control. This
research addresses surface waviness and nonuniform wall thickness challenges in
wire arc additive manufacturing, making it acceptable for many U.S. industries,
including aerospace, defense, and automotive, and thereby benefiting the
nation’s economy and well-being. Wire arc additive manufacturing uses a welding
arc as the energy source in making three-dimensional objects with high
throughput. This process can be easily integrated with existing computer-
numerical-control routers, or robot arms. Thus, the knowledge and methodology
developed through this project can be directly transferred to small- and medium-
sized enterprises interested in making or repairing metallic parts.
Additionally, this project develops the professional skills of K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students, including women and underrepresented
minorities, by training them through a unique set of integrated education and
multidisciplinary research opportunities in the areas of wire arc additive
manufacturing and data analytics. Accordingly, students are familiarized with
emerging technology-intensive manufacturing and data science disciplines,
thereby preparing a future workforce equipped with these new skills and
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two overarching research goals of this
project are to (1) gain fundamental knowledge about surface waviness and
effective wall thickness formation mechanisms in wire arc additive manufacturing
and (2) investigate the design rules for the monitoring and control of the
manufacturing process. An integrated experimental-characterization and
theoretical-modeling framework are considered to achieve these goals. The
surface quality of wire arc additively manufactured structures is controlled by
fine-tuning and balancing the surface tension, arc force, droplet impact,
gravity, buoyancy, and friction for different manufacturing conditions. The
project framework consists of four components: (1) measurement and analysis of
real-time process signatures (e.g., voltage and current) and visualization data
of the arc, droplet, and weld pool features; (2) data measurements and analysis
of defect (e.g., balling effect and voids) generation and propagation as a
function of process parameters, wall thickness and inclination, and multi-
bead/multilayer deposition; (3) characterization of the surface tension-based
computational fluid dynamics model and its verification and validation through
experiments; and (4) establishment of design rules using data-driven, low-
fidelity surrogate models. Machine learning algorithms (e.g., convolutional
neural network, AnoGAN, transfer learning, and reinforcement learning) are
developed in detail for defect detections and classifications as well as process
control. This integrated framework provides unique, transformative, and
efficient opportunities to synergistically understand the arc, droplet, and weld
pool characteristics and defect formation in wire arc additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.