* 2015299
* Student Travel Support for The Web Conference 2020 (TheWebConf2020)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Ben Steichen, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 01/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides support for 15 U.S.-based students to attend The Web
Conference 2020 (TheWebConf 2020), held in Taipei, Taiwan, April 20-24, 2020.
The students attend the conference to present their own work, get the
opportunity to learn and discuss current research topics with leaders in the
field, as well as to further their career through the numerous additional events
and networking opportunities provided by the conference. Events at the
conference include Research track sessions, Demonstration sessions, Workshops,
Tutorials, Exhibition sessions (including booths by industry sponsors), as well
as events specifically geared towards students, including a PhD Symposium. As
part of The Web Conference’s wider effort to champion diversity, a particular
emphasis is on the inclusion of underrepresented minority students, women, and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Web Conference (formerly known
as the WWW conference) is the premier international conference on the topic of
the future directions of the World Wide Web. The conference series began in 1994
at CERN. The conference brings together researchers, developers, users, as well
as commercial ventures, and provides an open forum in which all opinions can be
presented, subject to a strict process of peer review. The location of the
conference rotates among North America, Europe, and Asia. The 2020 conference
will celebrate the 30th anniversary of the Web. The proceedings will be
published in the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Digital Library. The
website for The Web Conference 2020 (https://www2020.thewebconf.org) provides
additional information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.