* 2015157
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Production of Platform Chemicals from Inedible Biomass and CO2
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Aanindeeta Banerjee, RESOURCE CHEMICAL CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is enable the production of sustainably-sourced
plastics offering superior performance at lower cost than conventional
petroleum-sourced plastics. The technology in this project produces materials
from CO2 and inedible biomass. It dramatically lowers the manufacturing cost by
eliminating more than half the steps required by traditional methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop process
chemistry conditions for the continuous oxidation of furfural to furoic acid
using air as the oxidant. Furfural is a feedstock chemical produced industrially
from diverse inedible (lignocellulosic) biomass sources. Furfural oxidation is a
key step in the process for producing FDCA. The proposed project will advance
the translation by demonstrating that oxidation can take place under continuous
flow at high rates and conversions using operating conditions (flow rate,
concentration, pressure, etc.) amenable to high-volume production. This project
will evaluate a suite of reaction parameters and a collection of catalysts under
continuous liquid and air flow to find optimal conditions. A preliminary
assessment of catalyst stability under high-performance conditions will also be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.