* 2015081
* SBIR Phase I:  BioSense AMD - A Point-of-Care Device for Monitoring Airway Inflammation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Miguel Quimbar, BioLum Sciences, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2021
* USD 224,808.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
point-of-care biomedical device for the rapid and quantitative measurement of
airway inflammation. Currently, methods to measure airway inflammation and
disease control are difficult. Recent innovation in breath analysis has provided
opportunity to better understand airway disease. However, the reach of these
innovations has been limited due to cost and availability. Chronic lower
respiratory diseases including asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), emphysema, and pulmonary hypertension are the fourth leading cause of
death in the United States and a leading cause of death worldwide across all
countries and income levels. There is an urgent need for methods to better
monitor and manage these chronic lower respiratory diseases to improve survival
and patientsâ€™ quality of life. Using an advanced chemical system, the proposed
technology will measure a biomarker of inflammation in exhaled breath condensate
(EBC). Success of this project will deeply impact fundamental pulmonary research
and create broad societal value by improving health and reducing burdens on the
healthcare system. This will be particularly valuable to underserved urban
communities where poor air quality leads to increased severity of respiratory
diseases. This product also has significant commercial potential, with the
ability to reduce costs and streamline treatment in an industry valued over $100
B annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop and implement an advanced proprietary automated
chemiluminescent reagent mixing and detector system for instantaneous
measurement of airway inflammation by real-time breath analysis. Hydrogen
peroxide reports on airway inflammation, which is a critical factor in
respiratory diseases like asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), but is difficult to accurately measure at the point-of-care. The current
methods of choice include highly invasive bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), time-
consuming and costly laboratory hydrogen peroxide assays, or fractional exhaled
nitric oxide (FeNO), which provides an incomplete picture of airway
inflammation. This project will fill this analysis gap and provide a valuable
solution to monitoring airway inflammation in patients at the point-of-care. The
proposed aims for developing a system to measure exhaled hydrogen peroxide in
Phase I will include: a cartridge-based reagent delivery and mixing designed to
optimize limit of detection and reproducibility; a robust and compact reader
equipped with optimized photon detection technology and built-in vortex mixer;
and careful analysis of sensitivity and selectivity for hydrogen peroxide versus
potentially interfering analytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.