* 2015229
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/UNOLS Fleet: The future of marine gravimetry for geophysical research by the UNOLS academic research vessel fleet
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Masako Tominaga, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2022
* USD 348,146.00

The Potential Field Pool Equipment (PFPE) operated out of Wood Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) provides marine gravimeter expertise,
instrumentation and support to the United States oceanographic community,
specifically the Academic Research Fleet (ARF). They propose to acquire a new
DgS high-resolution advance technology (AT) marine gravimeter and integrate this
new gravity acquisition system into the fleet of BGM-3 marine gravimeters
currently in use. PFPE is funded by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and
has been operating for several decades in support of academic potential fields
measurements on research ships. Current BGM-3 gravimeter systems used in the ARF
are between 30-40 years old. While these gravimeters produce excellent data,
they contain electromechanical sensors that require extensive maintenance and
care in handling/shipping, and they are ITAR (International Traffic in Arms
Regulations) classified. New-generation gravimeters will provide significant
advantage in operations and maintenance over time and are not subject to ITAR
controls. One meter is proposed here:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DgS AT gravimeter
$348,146 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.