* 2015459
* Modifying the floral microenvironment: elevational divergence in floral thermoregulatory mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Koski, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2024
* USD 468,789.00

Highly mobile animals can relocate to microhabitats that suit their thermal
requirements when ambient temperatures are either extremely hot or cold, called
thermoregulation. Plants however, are subject to ambient temperature conditions
which can be detrimental to their reproductive success. This investigation will
test whether high elevation populations of a wild perennial plant in the
southern Colorado Rockies are locally adapted to cool temperatures, with
mechanisms that increase flower temperature, whereas low elevation populations
have adaptive mechanisms to lower flower temperatures under high ambient
temperatures. The work will pinpoint the mechanisms by which flowers warm and
cool their internal floral temperatures and test how variation in
thermoregulatory ability impacts plant reproductive fitness and plant-pollinator
interactions. This award will involve undergraduates at Clemson University in
research in STEM fields through studies on how floral warming in local,
charismatic spring ephemeral flowers impacts reproductive performance and
pollination at the South Carolina Botanical Garden. As climates are changing
globally and flowers continue to emerge earlier, this research will inform how
plants will ameliorate thermal stress to maintain reproductive success. This
work has important implications for the future of plant reproduction in both
wild and economically important crop species. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Angiosperms
have evolved various mechanisms to achieve floral temperatures that deviate from
ambient conditions, ameliorating damage to pollen and ovules and promoting
pollinator visitation. Research to date is biased towards examining mechanisms
of floral warming in cold environments, limiting the understanding of local
adaptation in floral thermoregulation across thermal gradients and providing few
examples of floral cooling. Additionally, studies linking variation in
thermoregulation with variation in both gamete viability and pollinator-
attraction in field conditions are scarce. This study will first test for
differences in floral thermoregulation between high and low elevation
populations of a widespread perennial distributed across a large altitudinal
gradient in the Southern Rocky Mountains. Using growth-chamber experiments,
thermal performance curves for pollen and ovule performance will be generated,
and mechanisms of floral warming and cooling will be pinpointed using a
combination of time-lapse photography and reflectance spectrometry. Finally,
geographic variation in selection on thermoregulatory ability will be determined
by linking pollen viability, seed set, and pollinator visitation with variation
in floral temperature in both high and low elevation populations. This work will
elucidate the complex mechanisms of floral thermoregulation and the impacts of
thermoregulatory ability on plant fitness. It will shed light on how flowering
plants may cope with changing temperatures and advancing phenologies in changing
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.