* 2015674
* CSBR: Living Stocks, Operation of a Culture Collection of Algae
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* David Nobles, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 803,253.00

The Culture Collection of Algae at the University of Texas at Austin (UTEX) is
one of only a handful of curated, public, biodiversity collections of living
algae. UTEX is a repository and distribution center for algal biodiversity. The
UTEX Collection is of the most genetically diverse assemblages of organisms
available to the public and many of the algae UTEX maintains are unique and
irreplaceable. Every year UTEX distributes thousands of living algal cultures,
at modest cost, to scientists, educators, and students throughout the U.S. and
the world. The great interest in microscopic algae as sources of transportation
fuel, human food, animal feed, pharmaceuticals, and many other uses makes UTEX
algae and services essential resources for hundreds of research projects. UTEX
provides hands-on workshops on managing algal cultures, an informative
interactive web site, species identification services, chemical composition
analysis, and extensive correspondence with students engaged in algal research.
UTEX personnel give presentations at public schools, conduct tours of UTEX
facilities, assist teachers and students in conducting high school science
projects, and provide presentations on the scientific importance of algae to
hundreds of children every year at local open house
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTEX currently maintains more than 3,000 unique
living algal strains representing all major taxa, including over 450 type
species. The UTEX mission is to promote, support, and enable the use of algae
for research, education, and practical applications. In order to fulfill its
mission, UTEX provides living algae to a user community at modest cost; serves
as a permanent public repository of newly discovered and recently described
algal species of potential value representing a broad range of genetic,
morphological and biochemical diversity; acts as a source of information
regarding algae to practicing scientists, other professionals, and the
interested public; promotes and supports local science teaching and hands-on
scientific activities by school children; and provides practical training
services, support services, and supplies that facilitate culturing of algae at
other sites. UTEX provides living algae starter cultures, bulk cultures, growth
media, photobioreactors, photometers, genomic DNA and digital images. Services
include identification of algae by morphological and DNA-sequence methods,
physiological and biochemical characterization of algae, and cryogenetic storage
of proprietary strains. UTEX maintains active research on cryopreservation
technology, biochemical characterization, genomic sequencing, and taxonomic
identification of accessioned strains. Algae-based research within the local
institution is actively supported through the provision of cultures and by
consultation with UTEX staff. Every year hundreds of published research articles
reference the use of UTEX strains, many of which also recognize NSF support. In
addition, many UTEX strains are used in research leading to the development of
microalgae-based technologies for the production of biofuels and many other
products. A comprehensive web site (www.utex.org) facilitates a secure means for
ordering goods and services, provides links to resources elsewhere pertaining to
algae, and includes diverse algae-related information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.