* 2015653
* UNS: Interfacial Properties of Nanoconfined Ionic Liquid
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Younjin Min, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2021
* USD 167,168.00

#1511626&lt;br/&gt;Min, Younjin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids (ILs) are a
relatively new class of liquids that consist only of cations and anions. Some of
the useful properties of typical ILs are their negligibly low vapor pressure,
fire resistance, excellent chemical and thermal stability, wide liquid
temperature ranges, and wide electrochemical windows. Given these excellent
properties, ILs have been used or considered for use in organic synthesis,
catalysis, chemical separation, and fuel and solar cells, and their applications
continue to expand. Despite a plethora of emerging processes involving ILs,
however, an understanding of the interfacial properties of ILs under
confinement, such as rheological properties and glass transition temperatures,
remain very limited compared with that of other confined material classes, such
as polymers, electrolyte solutions, and liquid crystals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed work is twofold: (i) to
obtain relationships describing how the structure, viscosity, and glass
transition temperature of ILs depend on degree of confinement (separation) and
(ii) to obtain a fundamental understanding of how the molecular parameters of
confined ILs, such as the relative sizes and shapes of cations and anions and
the surface properties of confining surfaces, such as surface potential and
degree of hydrophobicity, affect the abovementioned properties under
nanoconfinement. Our main hypothesis is that when the dimension of confinement
becomes comparable to the Debye screening length of ILs, the confined glass
transition temperature deviates from the bulk glass transition temperature. This
hypothesis will primarily be tested with the surface forces apparatus technique,
which is a unique technique that can link molecular studies to meso-scale
studies and also to bulk-scale studies. This work will be first of its kind to
directly measure the viscosity and glass transition temperature of ILs under
dynamically controlled nanoconfined environments. From a fundamental science
perspective, the proposed work represents an important step in understanding the
structure/property relationships of ILs under confinement. Such an understanding
may ultimately lead to new fundamental insights into a systematic method to
select an ion pair(s) for the rational design of ILs operating under
nanoconfined environments and with the desired physical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will first provide pivotal guidelines to
select desirable types of ILs on demand on the basis of their important
interfacial properties under nanoconfinement. Such knowledge will be useful to
optimize and design applications involving confined ILs, such as batteries,
solar cells, and lubricants. The educational plan consists of three main
components that will focus on the research supervision of students, teaching,
mentoring, and outreach to interface with the research components of the
project. These components include the (i) development of a new graduate course
on the interfacial phenomena of soft matter to be taught by the PI, (ii)
mentoring of underrepresented undergraduate students in research, and (iii)
dissemination of the project outcomes to the general public in the Akron area,
where the minority constitutes 25% of the total population, by reliance on the
connections established with local high school teachers through an educational
electronic device development grant funded by NSF.