* 2015386
* Collaborative Research: Capturing Salient Features in Point Process Models via Stochastic Process Discrepancies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Thomas Loredo, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 135,361.00

In the 21st century, mathematical modeling has emerged as a primary tool for
scientific investigation. Scientists construct mathematical and computer models
intended to capture the important features of a complex physical phenomenon, and
learn more about the phenomenon by exploring what values of any uncertain model
parameters lead to model predictions that mimic closely what is observed in
nature. Still, at best the models typically cannot capture all of nature's
complexity – or, as George Box famously put it, "All models are wrong, but some
are useful." This is really a good thing for discovery – often scientists can
get new insights and develop deeper understanding by studying precisely why
their models fail to match reality. In this research the PIs will develop a new
approach to quantifying this "discrepancy" between mathematical models and
observations, intended specifically for problems in which the data are numerical
counts of events or objects. Examples arise in nearly every scientific field –
counts of volcanoes or earthquakes or disease cases; of galaxies or stars or
exoplanets; of photons or gamma ray burst pulses or neutrinos. This project will
specifically address two classes of problems in astronomy. One class concerns
how astronomers can convert raw data measuring light from astrophysical objects
(such as stars and galaxies) into estimates of properties of the sources (such
as brightness and color) with accurately quantified uncertainties, even when the
precise shapes of the objects are not known, and their images overlap. A second
class concerns using astronomical survey catalogs to learn the dominant
demographic properties of stars, galaxies, or minor planets (such as asteroids),
such as the distribution of their luminosities or masses. The NSF-funded Vera
Rubin Observatory will produce data for both types of problems. The research
will include developing fast, open-source&lt;br/&gt;computational algorithms
implementing the new approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is motivated
by application areas in which salient feature discovery is threatened by model
misspecification. In applications with real-valued magnitude data with additive
Gaussian errors, statisticians have addressed misspecification by introducing
additive discrepancy processes into models, often using Gaussian processes. The
two problem areas addressed here require analysis of discrete count or point
process data: photon counting data comprising images and time series from cosmic
sources, or demographic data in astronomical survey catalogs. Both areas rely on
Poisson point process models, with an intensity function describing, say, the
photon arrival rate (per unit area) as a function of direction and time, or the
density of galaxies as a function of spatial location and luminosity. Additive
discrepancy models are not applicable to such discrete-data settings. The team
will develop new semiparametric methods that supplement parametric salient
feature models with nonparametric discrepancy processes that flexibly model the
departure of salient models from the true data generating process. An approach
serving as a starting point represents the true underlying intensity function as
the product of the salient feature model and a stochastic multiplicative
discrepancy process. The salient feature model will be a parametricintensity
function (e.g., with location, amplitude, scale, and shape parameters),
sometimes in a superposition of multiple components (e.g., stars in an image,
pulses in a transient burst, or population components). To model discrepancy
from the salient model, a natural choice with appealing theoretical properties
is a multiplicative gamma discrepancy process; composition with the Poisson
point process leads to an overall negative binomial point process for the
observations. The team will implement this approach, and generalize it in
several directions. For demographic models, the discrepancy models will be
embedded in a hierarchical model that accounts for measurement error and
selection effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.