* 2015373
* Repro Sampling Method: A Transformative Artificial-Sample-Based Inferential Framework with Applications to Discrete Parameter, High-Dimensional Data, and Rare Events Inferences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Minge Xie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 258,589.00

In the era of data science, statistical inference is the cornerstone of
extracting useful information from complex data sets. Despite significant
progress made in statistics, there remain many challenges in uncertainty
quantification in confronting the complex and high-dimensional data. For
instance, inherently discrete parameters and model structures are routinely
encountered in data science and machine learning problems. For these
intrinsically discrete structure problems, conventional statistical inference
approaches do not apply. This project aims to develop a new inferential
framework addressing the statistical inference questions for those difficult
problems in high-dimensional and also rare events data analyses. The development
of the framework will be transformative, since it will greatly expand the reach
of statistical inference and uncertainty quantification and greatly improve our
thinking and approach of making inference for many data science problems. The
PIs will actively use the project to recruit and train students, especially
underrepresented students, and also integrate the research output into teaching
through developing topic courses to senior undergraduate students and graduate
students at their home university. The obtained results will be disseminated in
journal publications and conferences to enhance the understanding of the results
in different communities. R packages for the proposed methods will also be
released to the public.The graduate student support will be used on
interdisciplinary research and writing codes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Inherently
discrete parameters and structures are prevalent in data science, for example,
model indices in model selection problems, number of clusters and membership in
classifications, number of layers and structure in deep neural network models,
connectivity, membership and structure questions in network data, etc. Making
inference for discrete parameters and structures is known to be a difficult
task. A major challenge is that the large sample central limit theorem (CLT) no
longer holds, and a Bayesian analysis is very sensitive and heavily impacted by
the prior choice on the discrete model structure. This research project is aimed
to develop a novel and general artificial-sample-based inferential framework,
termed as, repro sampling. The idea of repro sampling is to create and study the
performance of artificial samples that are generated by mimicking the sampling
mechanism of the observed data; the artificial samples are then used to help
quantify the uncertainty in estimation of model and parameters. The repro-
sampling will guarantee the coverage property in finite sample and also can be
extended to large sample. The proposed approaches are expected to be broadly
applicable, efficient and computationally feasible. The main research goal is to
fully develop the novel inferential framework of repro sampling. Three specific
topics tailored to important and difficult inferential problems in data science
will also be investigated: (A) Model selection and inference in high dimensional
regression, nonparametric and deep learning models; (B) Predictive inference for
high dimensional regression and data science; (C) Finite sample inference and
fusion learning for rare events data. The research work will significantly
advance the statistical methodology for the important yet challenging inference
problems for discrete parameters, and broaden the applicability of uncertainty
quantification to advanced machine learning methods. In addition, the research
projects involve real databases and are ideally suited for engaging and training
students and new researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;_______
_________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.