* 2015798
* Collaborative Research: The role of branching complexity in driving food chain length in rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jacques Finlay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 09/30/2024
* USD 44,718.00

The origin of variation in food chain length - the number of feeding links from
producers to apex consumers in a food web - has intrigued ecologists for
decades. Understanding controls of food chain length is important because it
influences energy flow through ecosystems and contaminant concentrations in top
predators that humans often consume. The prevailing thought has held that food
chain length is determined by the size of an ecosystem. Large ecosystems can
provide greater amounts of basal resources, support larger population sizes of
constituent species, and/or mitigate the impact of environmental changes.
However, while ample empirical evidence for the ecosystem size hypothesis exists
in spatially simple systems (e.g., oceanic islands and lakes), there is less
clear support in more spatially complex systems, such as branching river
networks. The mixed results for the ecosystem size hypothesis in spatially
complex systems imply the existence of overlooked factors that control food
chain length. The project will explore the role of ecosystem complexity that is
emerging as a key factor in ecosystem dynamics. Specifically, researchers will
focus on the branching complexity of river networks and investigate its
importance in driving food chain length. The broader impacts of this project
include the following components. First, researchers will participate in
outreach events through formal partnerships with K-12 schools. Second, the
project will provide research training opportunities for underrepresented
minorities and a postdoctoral scientist. Lastly, researchers will distribute
open-source software through online repositories to facilitate the application
of research products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine theoretical
and empirical approaches to test the following hypotheses: (1) complex river
networks, with greater levels of branching, support long food chains because
having more branches (i.e., tributary systems) with distinct geological and/or
climatic backgrounds may provide diverse habitats that buffer the impact of
environmental fluctuations; (2) ecosystem size in rivers (watershed area) has
weak effects on food chain length due to the context-dependent association
between environmental heterogeneity and ecosystem size. Researchers will develop
a series of mathematical models to generate predictions for the association
between food chain length and branching complexity/ecosystem size. Theoretical
predictions will be validated by meta-analyses of existing datasets of food
chain length and environmental covariates across the globe. Overall, the project
will provide important insights into how ecological communities are structured
in spatially complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.