* 2015317
* NeuroNex: Communication, Coordination, and Control in Neuromechanical Systems (C3NS)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Hillel Chiel, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2025
* USD 5,390,474.00

Despite the apparent differences between animals and their behaviors, they all
are subject to the same constraints. All animals use a nervous system to control
their motions, which must follow the laws of physics. Therefore, this NeuroNex
Research Network seeks to understand how animals move by studying animals of
different sizes and with unique evolutionary histories: Vertebrates (mice, rats,
and cats), mollusks (sea hares), and insects (fruit flies). The differences
between these species will inform how physics and evolution have shaped the
nervous system. Understanding motion across different organisms and scales may
lead to robots with more graceful, coordinated motion. Additionally, this
Network enhances the training of American engineers and scientists by exchanging
post-doctoral trainees and students between laboratories, providing them
opportunities to work with different model organisms, and broadening the
trainees’ education. The activities of this Network enrich existing outreach
programs through interactions with international, interdisciplinary
collaborators and allow for new, larger initiatives. Public demonstrations, day
camps, and internships carried out as part of this project expose K-12 students
to interdisciplinary research and international collaborators’ ideas and
culture. This Network also constructs exhibits at natural science museums in its
major cities and develops an interactive website describing how very different
animals solve similar problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals move to seek food,
mates, and shelter. In the phyla Arthropoda, Mollusca, and Chordata, the nervous
system cephalized towards a higher-level brain and lower-level sensorimotor
network. The brain would not exist without a body, and yet little is understood
about how the nervous system controls and coordinates distributed body parts.
Many fundamental questions remain unanswered: How is neural information encoded
and communicated? How does the system correct for environmental perturbations?
How do passive biomechanics affect the neuronal control of behavior? This leads
to the foundational question: How do nervous systems control and execute
interactions with the environment? This international Network of
interdisciplinary research groups consists of modelers, engineers, and
experimentalists to explore the Communication, Coordination, and Control of
Neuromechanical Systems (C3NS). This NeuroNex Network investigates a
foundational question in model genera from three phyla: adult Drosophila from
Arthropoda, Aplysia from Mollusca, and small mammals from Chordata. Each
interdisciplinary research group studies the control of a behavior in which the
body interacts with the environment. Investigators explore how higher-level
command centers (HLCCs) generate descending commands to lower-level motor
centers (LLMCs), how LLMCs control the body to produce desired behavior, and how
LLMCs generate ascending signals back to HLCCs. The animal models of C3NS allow
the investigation of these questions across degrees of nervous system complexity
and ranges of dynamic scale (i.e., size and speed) using the same conceptual
modeling framework. This effort will create a bottom-up theory for how nervous
systems control movement during environmental interactions. This project is co-
funded by Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
Robust Intelligence in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.