* 2015861
* AGU Chapman Conference on Distributed Volcanism; Flagstaff, AZ; March 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Charles Connor, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This is an award to support the participation of 20 U.S. graduate students,
post-doctoral fellows and early-career investigators in the American Geophysical
Union (AGU) Chapman conference that will take place in Flagstaff, AZ on March
16-20, 2020 to discuss, develop and test conceptual models of distributed
volcanism. Focus by the scientific community is especially important now because
of continuing growth of cities, communities, and critical infrastructure within
sparsely monitored volcanic fields. Most sub-aerial volcanoes are found in
widely distributed volcanic fields made up of tens to hundreds of vents, which
comprise a huge range of eruption-styles and landforms – from scoria cones to
calderas – and which are situated in a variety of tectonic settings. The
conference will provide needed background and focus on the problem of
distributed, monogenetic volcanism, summarizing current research directions. In
the western U.S., widely distributed volcanic fields are virtually unmonitored.
Internationally, many cities (e.g., Auckland, Mexico City) are built on
geologically active distributed volcanic fields. Great strides have been made in
understanding the origins of magmas in these volcanic fields, their large- scale
transport across the lithosphere, and statistical models of their eruption have
been developed. Yet very fundamental questions remain about this most common
style of volcanism. The conference is structured to provide networking
activities and related discussions as well as to introduce early career
participants to some of the most fascinating volcanic fields in the western U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AGU Chapman conference on distributed volcanism is
structured to encourage interdisciplinary contacts and thinking, in diverse
fields such as geochemistry, geophysics, and volcano science. Themes to be
address are whether the geophysical monitoring techniques and models (e.g.,
robust seismic and deformation monitoring) developed to monitor unrest elsewhere
will work in volcanic fields. Also, of interest, the conference will touch on
how scientists can couple geochemical and geophysical models for magma ascent in
small-volume systems. Currently, there is no community consensus on the
appropriate response to unrest in volcanic fields and associated hazards, and
how these differ from arc composite volcanoes. It is expected that this
conference will be of great benefit to early career scientists. It is expected
that they will contribute substantially to all phases of the meeting, including
giving invited talks, posters, participating in workshop break-out sessions and
discussions during the post-meeting field trip to the nearby Springerville
volcanic field. Specifically early career scientists will benefit in three ways:
(1) at the conference they will participate in discussions and presentations
about the cutting-edge science happening to understand volcanic fields, (2) they
will learn about collaboration opportunities with USGS colleagues, who are
deeply involved in the organization of the meeting, and with international
colleagues, (3) they will learn how their disciplinary research fits with other
science agendas related to volcanic fields, broadening the scope and impact of
their own investigations. The discussions and outcomes of the conference will
have direct impact on communities living with distributed volcanism throughout
the western U.S. and the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.