* 2015899
* Roundtable on Systemic Change and the Future of Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Kerry Brenner, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,642,369.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by coordinating and catalyzing
national efforts to improve undergraduate STEM education so that learners are
better prepared to be scientifically informed members of society and participate
in the future STEM workforce. The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine’s Board on Science Education and Board on Higher Education and
Workforce will utilize the Roundtable on Systemic Change in Undergraduate STEM
Education to harness and accelerate on-going, evidence-based efforts to improve
undergraduate STEM education while at the same time developing strategies for
responding to the major transformations that face higher education in the coming
decades. Through a series of interconnected projects and convenings, the
Roundtable will help the field anticipate STEM teaching and learning needs in
light of the rapidly changing social and economic environment. The projects and
convenings will engage experts with diverse roles within higher education (such
as classroom teaching, laboratory instruction, research on education,
professional development for faculty and instructors, department chairs, deans,
provosts, and presidents) as well as experts from different sectors within and
around higher education.. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Roundtable is designed to
identify gaps in current efforts, establish priorities for key next steps, and
connect people and projects in the service of improving undergraduate STEM
education. This work will be enacted through workshops, conferences, planning
meetings, targeted work group efforts and through a suite of engagement and
communication activities that both collect and disseminate information as well
as facilitate information sharing and relationship development. The Roundtable’s
mechanism of action is based on the research on networks, literature on the
spread of innovations, and research on evidence use. The Roundtable is designed
to serve as a network of networks linking key stakeholders and representatives
of groups from academia, government, professional societies, and industry. This
has the potential to allow for more coordinated advances that improve students
learning experiences in undergraduate STEM education and leverage existing work
to increase impact across the higher education ecosystem. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.