* 2015619
* Collaborative Research: Scales and drivers of variability in dissolved organic carbon across diverse urban watersheds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Krista Capps, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 163,590.00

Most ecosystems are impacted by human activities to some degree, but this can
vary considerably beteween locations. For example, cities differ in their
impacts on streams and rivers depending on age, storm water infrastructure,
amount of green space, and other factors of the built environment. Natural
factors such as climate (temperature and precipitation) and geology also affect
how different cities influence water quality and quantity at different times of
the year. In this project, differences in urban impacts on carbon inputs and
outputs in streams will be evaluated across cities in the U.S. that have
different urban and climate contexts. This research is critical for
understanding ecological patterns and processes in urban streams. Broader
impacts of the work will include training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, workshops, and an innovative
training and internship program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will take a novel approach to jointly
consider how the human and ecological dimensions of ecosystem ecology interact
to control the quality, quantity, and timing of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) –
the largest flux of carbon in streams – entering watersheds across the
continent. This project will assess how urbanization affects DOC, focusing on
how urbanization affects stream ecosystems in regionally-specific ways.
Researchers will test the hypothesis that human activities introduce novel
sources of DOC and affect the spatial and temporal scales and variability of
ecological processes in different geographies and urban contexts. The hypothesis
will be tested using a comparative approach to understand urban effects on DOC
in five urban study areas – Miami, FL, Boston, MA, Atlanta, GA, Salt Lake City,
UT, and Portland, OR. Extensive synoptic sampling of DOC concentrations and
quality will be combined with intensive sensor networks to develop a multi-scale
understanding of the quantity and quality of DOC in urban systems. Spatial
statistics and time-series analyses will identify key spatio-temporal
characteristics of human development (e.g., wastewater infrastructure, housing
density) and biophysical factors (e.g., discharge, precipitation, canopy cover)
that control the concentration, characteristics, and bioavailability of
DOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.