* 2015841
* Collaborative Research: Functional morphology and ecological implications of ant adhesion in the tropical forest canopy
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephen Yanoviak, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,607.00

Many organisms use specialized adhesive pads, claws, and similar features to
achieve reliable and repeatable attachment to substrates. Ants are the dominant
animal in the tropical forest canopy. Worker ants do not have wings, thus
effective adhesion is essential for survival. This project will provide the
first detailed, comparative evaluation of the mechanisms and consequences of
adhesion in tropical ants. Field work will be conducted in lowland forests of
Panama and Peru, and the results will have broad implications for ant behavior
and ecology globally. This project establishes a formal collaboration among five
professionals with complementary skillsets working in distinct fields, from
ecology to mechanical engineering. The results will be unprecedented in scope;
data collected for more than100 species will provide the most comprehensive
evaluation of adhesive performance and behavior in any animal group to date.
This project will also provide a framework for the development of advanced
industrial adhesives that mimic the chemical, material, and physical properties
of ant adhesive pads. These adhesives may be used for medical and industrial
applications where strong but reversible adhesion in dynamic conditions is
required. Results of this project will be made publicly available in multimedia
formats. Project participants will coordinate with Panamanian tour guides to
present results to international tourists who visit the field site each year.
This project will also improve public understanding of science through formal
and informal outreach efforts aimed at K-12 students and their teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objectives of this study are to quantify the
fundamental physical and chemical properties of tarsal adhesion in tropical
rainforest canopy ants, and to relate adhesive performance to ant behavior and
ecology. The central hypothesis is that adhesive failure determines
interspecific differences in ant foraging behavior, local distribution, and
frequency of falling. This work will integrate information from field ecology,
functional morphology, chemistry, and materials science to answer three basic
questions: 1) How do ant adhesive morphology, material properties, and chemistry
differ among species, trophic groups, and clades?; 2) Does adhesive versatility
(sustained functionality over a range of local environmental conditions) shape
ant behavior in the tropical forest canopy?; and 3) What are the ecological
patterns and consequences of adhesive failure in tropical arboreal ants? This
work will provide the foundation for understanding the ecomorphology and
evolution of the ant adhesive system by quantifying adhesive performance under a
broad range of natural and experimental conditions. This research employs the
latest high-technology chemical, material, and biomechanical analysis methods.
As a whole, this project will provide the first comprehensive evaluation of the
functional morphology of adhesion in any taxon, with a focus on the ecological
consequences of adhesive failure in a lowland tropical forest. During this
research, the PIs will provide cross-disciplinary, international education and
training for a postdoctoral associate, and undergraduate and graduate students.
The results of this work will be used to inform the general public about the
ecology and bio-inspired application of ant adhesion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.