* 2015320
* Collaborative Research: Shape-Based Imputation and Estimation of Fragmented, Noisy Curves with Application to the Reconstruction of Fossil Bovid Teeth
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Ofer Harel, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 02/29/2024
* USD 269,577.00

Statistical analysis of shape data is relevant to a wide array of fields
including biology, anthropology, chemistry, and medicine, to name just a few.
Current methods for analyzing shape data generally focus on shapes that are
fully observed. This project will develop methods for analyzing shapes that are
only partially observed. Traditional missing data techniques are not applicable
in the shape setting when 1) shapes are defined by functions and 2) shape-
preserving transformations (e.g. translation, rotation, scaling, re-
parameterization, etc.) must be accounted for. This project will formalize and
harness this perspective for data obtained from fragmentary fossil tooth images
of the Family Bovidae (antelopes and buffaloes) as partially observed curves,
representing the outlines of imaged objects, possibly with measurement error.
The resulting taxonomic identifications will generate more robust estimates of
the ecologically sensitive bovids. These improved estimates, in turn, afford
novel insight into the paleoenvironmental context of early human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to develop
statistical methods for the analysis of partially observed shapes (i.e.,
fragmented curves). This goal will be accomplished via two different approaches:
1) developing computational methods for imputing a fragmented curve by matching
and completing it based on a template or donor curve obtained from a sample of
fully observed curves, and 2) developing Bayesian model-based methods for
estimation and classification of the shape of a noisy, fragmented curve using an
empirical prior on the overall shape of the curve. Both approaches will be built
using Riemannian geometric tools for shape analysis that ensure proper
invariance to shape preserving transformations including translation, scaling
(when appropriate), rotation, and re-parameterization. These methods will be
developed with the motivating application of the analysis and taxonomic
classification of fractured and complete fossil teeth from the Family Bovidae.
By generating a proxy for paleoenvironmental conditions, the project seeks to
advance our understanding of the relationship between environmental change and
hominin evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.