* 2015194
* Modeling and Analysis of Fluid-structure Interaction in Biomimetic Undulatory Swimming
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Brian Feeny, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 498,861.00

This grant will support fundamental research in aquatic propulsion mechanisms.
This study will benefit science and engineering fields such as exploration,
transportation, and defense, by boosting the development of bio-inspired
locomotion based on the fundamental principles that make fish-swimming highly
efficient and agile. Accurate modeling of the interplay between a flexible body
and the surrounding fluid is crucial to understanding and optimizing energy
consumption, speed, and maneuverability. Existing models of undulatory swimming
are restrictive in the forms of motion and the flow conditions they can describe
accurately. This study will help to overcome those restrictions by introducing
more realistic body motion and flow conditions. A novel body-fin dynamical model
will be developed that includes previously ignored key elements important for
swimming performance. This research combines vibration theory, fluid and solid
mechanics, and both numerical and experimental analyses, offering
interdisciplinary research for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
creative activities for K-12 outreach including fish-design
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undulatory swimming is a result of the
nonlinear interaction between the body and surrounding fluid. Subtle changes in
internal forcing and body deformation may induce significant differences in
swimming performance. This award supports research that will address the
fundamental challenges of accurate fluid-structure modeling under variable body-
fin configurations with diverse swim gaits and conditions. A reduced-order model
of undulatory swimming motion of a slender body as a forced hydroelastic
oscillator will be developed to connect internal muscle forcing, external fluid
forces, and body motion in an efficient approach based on state-variable modal
analysis. Nonholonomic constraints on fins will be used to bypass the fluid-
force prediction based on classical hydrodynamic models, which are restricted to
idealized geometry and flow conditions. The use of nonsynchronous modes will
enable the description of general body waves with longitudinally-varying
properties. High-fidelity computational fluid-structure simulations, and
innovative water-tunnel measurements based on refractive index matching, coupled
with the structural analysis, will be used to investigate detailed features of
the interactions between the fluid, structure, and neuromuscular activation and
improve the reduced-order model. Then, the model will be used to evaluate
optimized morphology and internal forcing patterns in viscous to inertial swim
regimes, for uniform and complex background flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.