* 2015557
* Designing Tough Composite NanoFibers using Brittle Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Yunfeng Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2024
* USD 380,857.00

Designing Tough Composite NanoFibers using Brittle
Glasses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education on composite
materials, which are mixtures of two or more pure substances. Composites are
ubiquitous in everyday life and can be found in commercial airliners, electric
cars, consumer electronics and medical equipment/devices. The common wisdom of
composite design is that a property, say ductility, of a final composite mixture
must be within the range of values taken by the constituent pure substances.
Therefore, in order to toughen a brittle material, the general practice is to
incorporate a ductile material to form a composite. The research goal of this
NSF project is to seek a new composite design paradigm such that the resulting
composite can be superior to any of the pure constituent substances. That is,
can one design a tough composite using only brittle constituents? The research
team will conduct large-scale atomic-level simulation of thousands of potential
composite designs and apply state-of-the-art machine-learning algorithms to
optimize such composite design. With this new composite design, brittle
materials can potentially be used in load-bearing structural composites, while
functional materials can sustain higher stresses without mechanical failure. The
educational efforts will include outreach in collaboration with the "New
Visions: Math, Engineering, Technology &amp; Science (METS)" high-school program
and developing interactive learning modules using the Wolfram Computable
Document Format (CDF) environment for core engineering undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on designing composite materials. Most materials lack
highly desirable work-hardening mechanisms, so that oxide glasses and superhard
solids generally cannot be used as structural materials, and silicon-based
electronics cannot bend or survive impacts. The primary motivation is to devise
a general toughening scheme to impart work-hardening to brittle materials by
combining them into composites by exploiting stiffness disparity. To accomplish
this goal, the research team will carry out large-scale molecular-dynamics
simulations exploring the design space of the composite nanofibers, which will
be used as a training dataset for state-of-the-art machine-learning algorithms.
The composite nanofiber designs from this project, capable of work-hardening,
can be used to synthesize tough nanofibers as reliable probes for
characterization, data-storage or nano-fabrication, as well as building-blocks
for macroscopic fibers, fabrics or scaffolds. In addition, the design strategy
and toughening mechanisms for composite nanofibers can be applied to toughen
bulk composite, which could open-up a new paradigm for structural materials.
Importantly, with the new composite designs, brittle materials (low-cost
silicate glasses, as well as superhard materials) can potentially be
incorporated into structural composites. Using the tough fiber design,
functional materials and devices can tolerate both local strains (volume
expansion in lithiation or thermal shock) and global strains (service strain in
flexible electronics or accidental drops).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.