* 2015053
* STTR Phase I:  Design and development of novel oral drug formulations by leveraging the food effect
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Rebecca Carrier, MECHASIM INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2023
* USD 224,761.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of novel food-based oral
dosage forms of pharmaceutics potentially superior to traditional tablets as
they can be administered at lower doses without compromising therapeutic
benefits. Currently tablet form preparations require administration at high
doses to achieve desired therapeutic effects, motivating improved oral delivery
systems. The proposed dosage forms may have the ability to mitigate food
restrictions in drug labels and particularly helping oral drugs with significant
gastrointestinal toxicities. Patients could benefit from the flexibility of
taking medications irrespective of food to ease complex drug regimens and
ultimately improve compliance. The near-term commercial focus will be to advance
development toward a general platform with two proposed test drugs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project seeks to develop more bioavailable dosage forms by exploiting the effect
of food in enhancing drug absorption. As more than 40% of marketed drugs and
about 90% of drugs in development pipelines suffer from poor solubility and
associated low bioavailability, the proposed technology will serve as a platform
for drugs showing enhanced absorption when taken with food. This project will
effectively enable the use of food ingredients (e.g., lipids, proteins) to
develop more bioavailable dosage forms of marketed oral drugs. Activities
include use of computational modeling tools to quantitatively estimate the
effect of specific dietary food ingredients in increasing the efficiency of drug
absorption. Ultimately this process will inform rational, efficient design of
novel food-based formulations a priori rather than by a trial-and-error
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.