* 2015030
* Disentangling liquid-liquid phase separation and aggregation of intrinsically disordered proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Wenwei Zheng, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,915.00

Proteins and nucleic acids can physically partition without the help of
membranes. These assemblies behave like liquid droplets and provide a dynamic
environment for biomolecular reactions requiring specific protein
concentrations. Some of these proteins are also known to aggregate and cause
neurodegenerative diseases. This raises the key question how the functional
liquid droplets transform into the pathological solid aggregates. In this
research, advanced computational methods will be used to view how the structures
of these proteins differ in the liquid droplets and aggregates. The knowledge
learned from this project will be essential in designing novel strategies that
can disrupt pathological aggregates but do not disrupt functional droplets. The
concepts of computational modeling will be introduced into both the
undergraduate research and high school biophysics apprenticeship programs at
Arizona State University (ASU), a university with a significant underrepresented
student population in a location that is home to a large number of individuals
from underrepresented groups in STEM. The PI will pay specific attention to
promoting a variety of dissemination approaches through the ASU expert database
to introduce the concepts of biophysics and to facilitate the dissemination of
materials to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intrinsically disordered
proteins, proteins that lack a well-defined folded structure, have been shown to
participate in both liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) and aggregation. The
former is reversible, providing important intracellular functions, whereas the
latter is often irreversible and disease-related. There has been increasing
interest in showing how droplet formation could induce aggregation, but little
is known regarding the structure properties capable of distinguishing these two
assembly states. One major challenge is the lack of high-resolution modeling
methods for integrating observations from multiple experimental techniques. In
this work, the PIs will develop a novel computational modeling framework to
integrate multiple technologies. Specifically, all-atom explicit-solvent
simulations will be used to investigate the structure properties of disordered
proteins in both dispersed and condensed phases and how these properties are
influenced by their interaction partners. Coarse-grained models will further be
used to investigate both the formation of liquid droplets and aggregates. The
impact of droplet formation on its aggregation preference will be quantitatively
assessed. The project will leverage computational tools to establish fundamental
physics principles that govern the structural (dis)similarities between LLPS and
aggregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.