* 2015924
* Status Differentiation within the Context of Subsistence Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jose Capriles Flores, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 118,178.00

The study of intergenerational wealth transmission as a key component in the
development of social inequality constitutes a major advance in recent
anthropological theory. Using this body of work, archaeologists have begun to
investigate how institutionalized social differentiation became widespread. The
research team will reconstruct the social dynamics of foraging communities at
the cusp of making the transition to food production, a critical stage for
understanding later emergent sociopolitical complexity. Whereas archaeologists
have devised various ways to quantify material wealth, this project will
contribute bioarchaeological, isotopic, and paleogenomic lines of evidence to
approach embodied and relational wealth, thus, providing new approaches to
measuring and understanding the multiple dimensions of social and cultural
change. Moreover, at a local level and in close collaboration with local
institutions and organizations the project will carry out an active outreach
program focused on fostering the preservation of cultural heritage and promoting
sustainable eco-tourism. By involving research specialists and multiple
undergraduate and graduate students this interdisciplinary investigation will
provide key insights into how egalitarian mobile hunter-gatherer communities
transitioned into increasingly hierarchical sedentary food-producing societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutional mechanisms for facilitating wealth
transmission are fundamental for reproducing social inequality leading towards
increasing sociopolitical complexity. The project focuses on a period during
which many mobile foraging egalitarian communities adopted an increasingly
sedentary and institutionally hierarchical lifestyle based on food production.
How intergenerational wealth transmission facilitated this process remains an
open question. By collecting data about multiple dimensions of wealth from
mortuary remains and using multivariate methods, this study will characterize
the factors involved in institutionalizing social differentiation among foraging
communities. Specifically, material wealth will be assessed by measuring the
quality and quantity of burial investment and offerings, embodied wealth by
directly examining skeletal indicators of nutrition, stress, and social
identity, and relational wealth by analyzing the provenience of the offerings,
isotopic signatures of mobility, and within and between group associations using
ancient DNA. Finally, these results will be compared using multidimensional
scaling and generalized linear models to determine the structure and degree of
social differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.