* 2015466
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forest Ecosystem Recovery After Catastrophic Wind Disturbance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Justin Hart, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 12,824.00

This study will investigate the impact of salvage logging and controlled burning
on ecosystem recovery after tornados. Strategies to manage naturally disturbed
forests are critical to support the sustained supply of ecosystem goods and
services. Salvage logging is commonly applied after natural disturbances to
partially reclaim the economic value of wood products in damaged or dead trees,
and to reduce risk and severity of future disturbances to the environment.
Despite its widespread social and economic importance, little is known about how
salvage logging impacts non-woody plant communities or the continued application
of prescribed fire. Strategies to conserve biodiversity and provide the natural,
renewable wood products that society needs requires data collection and analysis
in areas where salvage logging and controlled burning take place. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a graduate student to establish an independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing frequencies and severity of natural
disturbances has motivated increasing interest in research on multiple
interacting disturbances that alter rates and trajectories of forest recovery.
This project investigates (1) how salvage logging alters woody and herbaceous
plant assemblages after catastrophic wind disturbance, and (2) how prescribed
fires influence forest ecosystem recovery in sites differentially impacted by
wind disturbance and salvage logging. Five seasons of field data collection on
permanent plots enable a comprehensive assessment of changes in biophysical site
conditions across multiple forest strata and sampling unit sizes. Results of
this study can be used to guide the management of other disturbed forests,
especially fire-adapted forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.