* 2015932
* Collaborative Research: Formation of new cooperative relationships in vampire bats - individual traits, partner choice, and network dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Elizabeth Hobson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2024
* USD 376,514.00

Cooperation is everywhere in nature. Cells work together to form bodies,
bacteria exchange nutrients with plants, and cooperating individuals form
societies. How does cooperation emerge among self-interested units? Answering
this question involves studying how cooperation is promoted by individual
behaviors such as rewarding, punishing, choosing, or switching partners. These
behaviors occur within the larger context of the social network—the partner
‘market’ defining the supply and demand of particular kinds of partners. To test
hypotheses about cooperation, it is useful to study an organism that forms long-
term social relationships and that makes complex decisions about which partners
to help. The work will use common vampire bats as a model organism because they
cooperate by grooming and sharing regurgitated food with related and unrelated
long-term partners. Lab experiments with vampire bats will simulate their
natural social environments, manipulate their cooperative interactions over
time, and test how ‘strangers’ develop into food-sharing partners that help each
other at a cost to themselves. Understanding how vampire bats form social
networks can provide general insights into how individual behaviors shape
relationships, social structure, cooperation, and the spread of information or
disease as vampire bats often feed on the blood of cattle. By attaching tiny
wireless sensors on both bats and cattle, the research team will also track the
dynamics of the “bat network” and the “bat-cow network” in minute-by-minute
detail. These large datasets are useful for modelling network-based processes,
such as how viruses would spread through a population or transmit across species
(e.g. bats to livestock). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral ecologists disagree
about the relative importance of factors like fitness interdependence, partner
choice, and partner control for stabilizing cooperative social relationships.
The research aims to resolve these longstanding debates by experimentally
manipulating the formation of new cooperative relationships over time. The work
addresses four levels of increasing complexity: individuals, relationships,
networks, and dynamic multi-layer networks. First, how and why does
cooperativeness vary among individuals? The team will study of the
neuroendocrine causes and consequences of individual variation in allogrooming
and food sharing in vampire bats. Second, how do nonkin strangers form new
cooperative relationships? The experiments will resolve a decades-long debate
about a textbook example of cooperation: reciprocity in vampire bats. Third, how
well do different social interaction networks influence each other? The work
will link within-roost cooperation to social foraging and will generate rich
datasets enabling studies of social structure, social learning, and pathogen
transmission. Finally, how does variation in partner availability and quality
influence the success of different cooperation enforcement strategies over time?
The work will generate new analytical and computational models that will
incorporate new forms of social complexity into models of social evolution.
Recent work suggests that vampire bats vary in cooperativeness, maintain similar
social networks in the lab and field, and form new cooperative relationships by
conditionally escalating low-cost grooming investments before investing in
higher-cost food sharing (“raising the stakes”).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.