* 2015208
* RUI: Hydropowered Plants: How Primitive Land Plants Reproduce by Harnessing Mechanical Energy from Water
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Katharine Jensen, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2024
* USD 254,148.00

Liverworts are believed to have been the very first land plants, and Marchantia
polymorpha has for a long time been a modern representative of its primitive
ancestry. Recently, this plant has emerged as an important new model system in
plant biology, both as a candidate for genetic manipulation and other questions
in evolutionary and molecular biology. Yet despite all of this study,
investigating how these plants harness mechanical energy from water, and
capillary interaction energy in particular, opens a new area of biophysical
research. The principle goal of this project will be the investigation of the
fundamental physics underlying these mechanical interactions between land plants
and water, with particular emphasis on the essential, minimal physical features
of the botanical systems that enable function and promote both reproductive
fitness. Beyond the specific example of Marchantia polymorpha, the experiments
are also designed to further our fundamental understanding of how plants can
evolve to harness different mechanical energy sources. It also opens the door to
new studies of the behavior of botanical particles adsorbed to liquid
interfaces. The project will also have a significant impact on the education and
training of the next generation of young scientists at Williams College.
Students working in the research lab will have daily opportunities to build upon
coursework and gain practical experience working with materials, microscopes,
data acquisition, image analysis, and more. Over the past two years, the PI has
supervised 18 undergraduate students for full- or part-time research, including
several URM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, located at an
undergraduate institution, will study how botanical systems harness mechanical
energy from water to facilitate their reproductive processes. The PI will center
the study on the reproduction mechanisms of the primitive land plant Marchantia
polymorpha, a common liverwort. The work will particularly focus on how these
plants effect motion and direct self-assembly using surface energy through
capillary interactions, as well as the interaction of surface tension and
splashing mechanics to facilitate distribution of reproductive material. The
physics is critical to the reproductive fitness of Marchantia polymorpha, and to
study the physical mechanisms will use systematic experiments, theoretical
modeling, and whole-plant studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.