* 2015859
* Collaborative Research: Designing Soluble Inorganic Nanomaterials for Flowable Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2023
* James McKone, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,398.00

The widespread adoption of renewable energy technologies like solar and wind
power depends critically on the ability to store massive quantities of
electricity in rechargeable batteries. The purpose of this project is to design
a new generation of high performing materials for liquid-phase energy storage
systems like redox flow batteries, which are especially suitable for storing
electricity on a large scale. Experiments will be undertaken to learn how the
molecular properties of soluble, earth-abundant nanomaterials influence their
practical performance in liquid-phase battery systems. The continued progress
toward a sustainable energy system will only be possible through training of a
globally competitive STEM workforce prepared to innovate and deploy new
technologies. In pursuit of this goal, the project integrates several activities
centered on the training of competitive undergraduate and graduate students.
Alongside the research activities, this program includes a new educational
effort directed at training undergraduate students to synthesize, test, and
critically evaluate liquid-phase battery materials. The project includes the
creation of resources for teaching laboratories—encompassing new curricular
materials and designs for low-cost experimental hardware—aimed at teaching the
core concepts of electrochemical energy storage to students at three different
institutions across the mid-Atlantic region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of this collaborative project is to build a framework for
the design of soluble inorganic nanomaterials for liquid-phase, flowable
electrochemical energy storage (EES). This objective will be addressed through
hypothesis-driven studies targeting two families of nanoscale metal oxide
assemblies: polyoxometalate clusters and solubilized metal oxide nanoparticles.
These charge carriers each feature a high degree of tunability via compositional
modifications of their metal oxide cores and solubilizing ligands. This project
will probe the overarching hypothesis that control over these molecular
characteristics will enable the design of soluble inorganic nanomaterials that
exhibit fast electron-transfer kinetics, high solubility, and long-term
stability over a wide range of electrochemical potentials. A series of studies
focused on targeted synthetic modifications of vanadium- and titanium-oxide
nanomaterials is planned; these materials will be characterized in detail using
a unique, multimodal analytical approach that affords simultaneous measurements
of their fundamental redox chemistry and device-level figures of merit. The
research will contribute to the advancement of EES by enabling the rational
design of soluble, redox-active inorganic nanomaterials. Successful completion
of this work will ultimately result in the validation of a new class of
inorganic charge carriers based on transition metal oxide architectures for flow
batteries and related EES technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.