* 2015722
* Nonlinear Semiconductor-Metal Phase Transition Induced Frequency Modulation (FM) based Mid-Infrared Detection at Room Temperature
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Debashis Chanda, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear
Semiconductor-Metal Phase Transition Induced Frequency Modulation (FM) based
Mid-Infrared Detection at Room
Temperature&lt;br/&gt;(2015722)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research intends to develop a novel infrared
detection scheme that takes advantage of the ultrafast resistance change in
self-resonant vanadium dioxide film at the semiconductor-metal transition. The
optical antenna patterned composite film absorbs strongly across a wide incident
angle effectively working like a light funnel. The phase transition and strong
infrared absorption process results in large change in the resonance frequency.
The proposed infrared detection scheme provides solutions to overcome
limitations arising from thermal memory that has been a major bottleneck in
operating vanadium dioxide-based detectors and promises much higher detectivity
comparable to the cryogenically cooled detectors. The localized absorption and
low thermal mass promise faster response compared to bulk absorption based
present uncooled infrared detectors. The optical antenna pattern will be encoded
in a master pattern. One such master produces 100’s of polymeric imprinting
stamps, and one stamp can produce 1000’s of imprints without any noticeable
pattern degradation for low cost uncooled infrared detection and imaging
schemes. In this context, the proposed work is revolutionary because it promises
uncooled, tunable and low-cost infrared detection. The program provides a good
platform for interdisciplinary research and graduate education. The research
will generate exciting scientific contents for enriching graduate and
undergraduate teaching. The proposed project will also serve to train graduate
students in nanolithography and optoelectronic device fabrication to prepare a
qualified work force for US manufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A deterministic
infrared absorption induced phase transition seems to be a plausible option for
high-sensitive infrared detection at room temperature. This opens the
opportunity to explore phase transition of vanadium dioxide in the context of
this proposal where light localization on a nanostructured thin-film promises
high-sensitive infrared detection. The optical antenna behaves as perfect light
collector to couple light to the active vanadium dioxide film with ~100%
efficiency where, in a unique way, the majority of the absorption takes place in
the vanadium dioxide film instead of the gold optical antenna, required for high
sensitive detection. This proposal will generate new scientific knowledge by (1)
providing fundamental understanding of phase transition of nanostructured
vanadium dioxide in presence of strong light localization, (2) the phase
transition mechanism promising to create low-loss, long life-time plasmons on
the interfaces of semiconductor-metal grains over a specified range of
semiconductor-metal transition edge, resulting in high signal to noise ratio,
(3) the detector time response measurements will shed light on the dominant
phenomenon (Hubbard correlation or Peierls transition) of the phase transition
of the nanostructured vanadium dioxide film, and (4) in the self-cascaded
scenario, the central oscillation shifts over several kilo-hertz as the infrared
radiation changes the local temperature. Tracking the change in the oscillator
frequency with respect to change in local temperature, while the vanadium
dioxide system is electrically biased in the phase transition edge promises
higher sensitivity. All present detectors function based on amplitude modulation
and the performance is limited by the amplitude noise. The proposed frequency
modulation-based detection scheme offers noise resistance and higher photon
detection sensitivity. Overall, frequency tunable high-sensitive infrared
detection ability will add an unexplored dimension to room temperature infrared
detection and imaging techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.