* 2015431
* Collaborative Research: Internship Network in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2026
* Richard Laugesen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,147,741.00

This project addresses a key challenge in graduate education in the mathematical
sciences. While employment opportunities in academia are decreasing or constant
in number, the annual number of PhDs awarded in the mathematical sciences has
increased significantly in the past two decades. Most mathematical sciences PhD
recipients now pursue careers in business, industry, or government (BIG) jobs.
Opportunities for students to learn about potential BIG careers during graduate
study rather than afterward would facilitate much more eﬃcient deployment of the
nation’s scientiﬁc and intellectual capital. The need is great to provide
training and career experiences to graduate students that intentionally prepare
them for mathematically meaningful career paths in business, industry, and
government. This project aims squarely at this unmet need, while simultaneously
aiming to strengthen the competitiveness of participating BIG organizations by
providing them access to highly knowledgeable people able to apply advanced
techniques from the mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish
these goals, hub-and-spoke internship networks will be created in two geographic
regions. The spokes connect the hub universities to nodes, which are nearby
institutions having sizable mathematical sciences graduate programs. The hubs
will organize systematic training programs on technical and professional skills,
to prepare students for productive internships in BIG. Students will be
carefully matched with internship projects created through the efforts of
specialist Project Developers based at the hubs. The impact of the project will
be substantial for the participating BIG organizations. Interns will create new
R&amp;D tools that lead to greater eﬃciency, productivity, and proﬁtability.
Conversely, questions arising from industry can initiate new academic research
directions in mathematics and statistics. Educational and life impacts will be
felt as internship experiences empower graduates to pursue wider ranges of
employment opportunities. Engagement of students from under-represented groups
will increase diversity in BIG and open doors for the students toward high-
ranking positions, where they can serve as role models. Further, BIG employers
will come to appreciate the talents oﬀered by graduate programs in the
mathematical sciences. The network structure enables sharing of resources and
best practices and lays the groundwork for scaling up in future. Anticipated
lasting impacts include (i) the establishment of enduring industry-university
collaborations with ongoing internship placements and (ii) the creation of a new
departmental culture in the mathematical sciences in which graduate career paths
to industry and government are visible, valued, and
viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.