* 2015750
* Fundamental Study of Fatigue Life Enhancement in Hierarchical Carbon-Fiber/Epoxy/Nanoparticle Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nikhil Koratkar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 397,537.00

Carbon-fiber reinforced composites, with their favorable strength-to-weight and
stiffness-to-weight ratios, are replacing their metal counterparts in a variety
of high-performance structural applications. However, the principal limitation
of such composite materials is their brittle failure and insufficient fatigue
life. A new concept for fatigue-resistant carbon-fiber composites features a
modified epoxy resin matrix that is infiltrated with nanoparticle additives.
These nanoscale particles will be engineered to interfere with or disrupt crack
propagation processes and thereby significantly prolong the fatigue life of the
composite material. The ability to combat fatigue is critical for safe and
reliable operation as well as reduction in the operational and maintenance costs
for structural components. This will be of great benefit to the aerospace,
defense, energy and automotive industries which extensively use carbon-fiber
reinforced plastics. One of the emerging industries where such new fatigue-
resistant materials can have high impact is in wind energy. Wind is one of the
fastest growing energy technologies on the globe and enhancing the fatigue
properties and the operating life of carbon-fiber composite materials used in
wind turbine construction is therefore of great practical
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
fundamental mechanisms by which the nanoparticle additives enhance the fatigue
life of the composite material and to reveal how these mechanisms are affected
by the geometry, interface strength, loading fraction and dispersion of
nanoparticles. To accomplish this, investigators will employ an integrated
modeling, simulation, manufacturing, characterization and experimental fatigue
testing approach to understand and optimize the underlying mechanisms that are
responsible for fatigue life improvement. To be consistent with industrial
practices, researchers will manufacture pre-pregs in which microfiber plies are
pre-impregnated with nanoparticle-laden epoxy resins, or in which nanoparticles
are pre-dispersed on the microfibers which are then impregnated with neat
resins. The fundamental knowledge gained from the above tasks will be applied to
establish processing-structure-property relationships that will be used to
manufacture proof-of-concept carbon fiber-reinforced composites with optimized
nanoparticle geometry, loading, dispersion and interface strength. These
composites will be tested to quantify and benchmark the fatigue-life
improvements that can be achieved relative to the traditional composites used by
industry. This project will lead to an in-depth understanding of the role of the
nanoparticle geometry, surface chemistry, loading fraction and dispersion in
fatigue life improvements for the next generation of carbon-fiber reinforced
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.