* 2015380
* Meetings of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Alexander Volfovsky, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The Committee on New Researchers of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics
will hold its 2020, 2021, and 2022 conferences at the University of
Pennsylvania, the University of Washington, and George Mason University,
respectively, on the three days prior to the Joint Statistical Meetings. Each
participant will give a brief introduction to his/her research, as well as a
poster presentation. Plenary talks will be given by established researchers.
There will be panel discussions on teaching and mentoring, publishing, funding,
and finding collaborators. The other workshops supported by this grant will
include oral and poster presentations by new researchers, plenary talks by
established researchers, and open discussions of future directions for
statistics, probability, and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Pennsylvania, the University of Washington, and George Mason University, will
host a conference for new researchers in statistics and probability on the three
days prior to the Joint Statistical Meetings in 2020, 2021, and 2022,
respectively. The meeting is organized by the IMS Committee on New Researchers
and held for junior researchers working in different areas of Statistics and
Probability. The primary objective of the conference is to provide a platform
for interaction among new researchers, as well as opportunities to seek
mentorship from leading researchers in the field. This conference series is
explicitly aimed at training the future leaders and researchers in probability
and statistics. This funding will further support new researcher participation
at the Preparing for Careers in Teaching Statistics and Data Science Workshop,
an annual workshop for early career educators in statistics and probability, to
be held the day prior to the Joint Statistical
Meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.