* 2015016
* SBIR Phase I:  Incorporating High Dielectric Constant Materials into clinical imaging: A Novel Approach for Accelerating 1.5T MRI
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Sebastian Rupprecht, HYQ RESEARCH SOLUTIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,966.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will target clinical Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) scanners where there is limited MRI access to a larger patient population.
Enhanced spatial resolution and reduced scan time are in urgent demand for
investigating a comprehensive range of biological systems from single cells to
humans. Long scan times reduce the efficiency of radiology department processes
and increase the overall cost to clinics and patients. In the research
community, high-resolution MRI is a powerful tool for understanding metabolic
activity. This project will pioneer an entirely different solution to the
fundamental problem of long scan times by introducing special materials into the
clinical MRI scanners most commonly used to address the challenge of signal
strength versus patient safety, which ultimately limits the throughput for
research studies and clinical tests. The proposed materials developed under this
SBIR program will have an immediate impact on animal and human health studies
where neuroscientists are using MRI techniques to monitor brain activity and
cognition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SBIR Phase 1 project will advance
the development of a new approach to MRI, an indispensable clinical imaging
modality for radiology and one of the most powerful research instruments for
life science. However, it has an inherently low signal-to-noise ratio, limiting
both imaging resolution and scan speed. Development efforts will focus on
incorporation of high permittivity dielectric materials into MRI scanners to
increase the signal-to-noise ratio by over 40%, thereby cutting the scan time by
half. The dielectric materials would be placed near the patient to increase the
MRI signal through stronger electromagnetic coupling. Materials with dielectric
constant values between 4,000 and 6,000 will be synthesized and incorporated
into clinical 1.5 Tesla MRI scanners. Oxide materials with the optimized
dielectric properties will be synthesized and characterized before fabricating
the final device. The project will pursue an integrated systems approach
including electromagnetic simulation, ceramic processing and testing. The
magnetic field strengths will be optimized by simulating a range of dielectric
materials in the MRI scanner and ultimately tested in clinical scanners with a
phantom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.