* 2015954
* Collaborative Research: High-order Phonon Scattering and Highly Nonequilibrium Carrier Transport in Two-dimensional Electronic and Optoelectronic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,812.00

Semiconductor research and development over the past several decades have
enabled widespread use of electronic devices in society. However, the
semiconductor industry is facing significant challenges, such as the difficulty
in dissipating the large amount of heat generated in silicon electronic chips.
The challenges have motivated the investigation of emerging two-dimensional (2D)
electronic materials because of their superior electronic and thermal
properties. One representative 2D material is graphene that is made of a single
layer of carbon atoms. However, compared to the abundant knowledge of silicon
electronics, there is only limited understanding of heat dissipation in 2D
electronic materials. Therefore, the goal of this project is to establish an in-
depth understanding of the distinctly different heat generation and dissipation
processes in 2D materials and devices. The obtained knowledge will be used to
develop open-source simulation tools, enhance online courses and classroom
instruction, and develop hands-on outreach activities to improve the recruitment
and training of a diverse population of next-generation workforce in thermal
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
unique fundamental mechanisms underlying heat generation and conduction
processes in emerging 2D electronic and optoelectronic materials, including
graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD). Specifically, three
outstanding questions that are relevant to the performance and thermal
reliability of 2D electronic and optoelectronic materials will be addressed: (1)
the importance of four-phonon scattering processes in graphene and other 2D
materials; (2) the length scales for different phonon polarizations and
electronic excitations to establish local thermal equilibrium in 2D
semiconductors; and (3) the phonon mode conversion and transmission processes
across the dimensionally mismatched interfaces between a 2D layer and its 3D
support. The questions will be addressed via first principles and atomistic
theoretical calculations that resolve the modal scattering and coupling
behaviors of phonons and electrons, in conjunction with thermal transport and
inelastic light scattering measurements of graphene and TMD. Improved
understanding of the three specific questions helps to build the foundation for
modeling and controlling heat dissipation processes in 2D materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.