* 2015397
* Generative Models for Complex Data: Inference, Sensing, and Repair
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* John Lafferty, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The research in this project lies at the boundary of statistics and machine
learning, and is focused on studying new families of statistical models. A
generative model is an algorithm that transforms random inputs into synthesized
data to mimic data found in a naturally occurring dataset, such as a database of
images. The research will explore theory, algorithms, and applications of
generative models to gain insight into phenomena observed in practice but poorly
understood in terms of mathematical principles. The work will also pursue new
applications of generative models in computational neuroscience, at scales from
the cellular level to the macro level of human cognition. Anticipated outcomes
of the research include development of software that implements new methodology,
training of graduate students across traditional disciplines, and the
introduction of modern statistics and machine learning to undergraduates through
research projects based on this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives of the project include four interrelated aims. First is to
investigate the statistical properties of variational programs that are widely
used in deep learning, and to develop new approaches to building generative
models for novel data types. The second aim is to explore new algorithms to
solve inverse problems based on generative models. Third, a new form of robust
estimation will be studied where a model is corrupted after it has been
constructed on data. Model repair is motivated from the fact that increasingly
large statistical models, including neural networks, are being embedded in
systems that may be subject to failure. Finally, the project will develop
applications of generative modeling and inversion algorithms for modeling brain
imaging data, including the use of simultaneous recordings in different
modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.