* 2015550
* Field of Dreams: Growing a Diverse Mathematics Community
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2023
* David Goldberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,270.00

This award will partially support the November 2020 and November 2021 Field of
Dreams Conferences, to be held on the University of Minnesota campus. The Field
of Dreams Conference is organized by the Math Alliance, an organization whose
goal is to increase the number of students from backgrounds underrepresented in
the mathematical sciences who earn doctorates in those fields, and the Institute
for Mathematics and its Applications. Approximately 200 undergraduate and
terminal MS students will attend the conference, and about 80% of those will be
underrepresented minorities. All funds from this award will be used to pay the
cost of attendance for some of these students. The conference coordinates with
the Math Alliance's Facilitated Graduate Admissions Process (F-GAP), which has
helped place an average of about 80 Math Alliance Scholars per year in graduate
programs the last six years with very good retention to this point. The
conference is an essential part of a program to produce a more diverse
professional mathematical workforce. In addition, there are events at the
conference which assist faculty in mentoring practices and help academic
departments transform their cultures to be more inclusive and supportive of
student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Field of Dreams conference has several
purposes, including: providing information about all aspects of the mathematical
sciences professions to students wishing to pursue doctoral studies; providing
information about summer research programs and opportunities at the NSF-funded
Mathematical Sciences Institutes; facilitating appropriate placement of Math
Alliance students in graduate programs; providing professional development in
mentoring and cultural competence for our Math Alliance faculty; and serving as
a clearinghouse for employment opportunities for new (and recent) Math Alliance
doctoral recipients. More information about the Math Alliance is available at
www.mathalliance.org. Material from previous years' conferences, are available
at https://mathalliance.org/field-of-dreams-conference/, and the page for the
2020 conference is https://mathalliance.org/2020-field-of-dreams-
conference/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.