* 2015603
* Collaborative Research: Joint Control of Hydraulics and Water Quality Dynamics in Drinking Water Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ahmed Abokifa, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 258,446.00

After leaving water treatment facilities, drinking water is delivered to
consumers through an intricate network of pipes. Recent studies have
demonstrated that the quality of treated drinking water deteriorates during the
journey from treatment plants to consumers’ taps; this has significant
implications for public health. Operating under limited budgets, water utilities
adopt different degrees of water quality monitoring that are geared towards
regulatory compliance but are unbefitting for rapid detection and mitigation of
contamination events. Furthermore, utilities typically lack targeted, real-time
control strategies and often respond to contamination events by issuing utility-
wide advisories (e.g., “boil water” or “do not consume” advisories). Such
advisories have significant socio-economic impacts and are typically slow in
improving water quality. In contrast to this, this project creates new methods
for real-time water quality management in urban water networks by controlling
hydraulic pumps, valves, and disinfectant dosing stations in response to
contamination events. To this end, this research harnesses recent advances in
water sensing technologies while investigating control algorithms through
interdisciplinary research from environmental science, optimization, network
control, and aquatic chemistry. This research enables real-time monitoring and
control of hydraulics and water quality, allows water utilities to adopt
strategies in response to contamination events, and broadens participation of
underrepresented groups in research and education at UT San Antonio, UT Austin
and the University of Illinois at Chicago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
puts forth a novel mathematical framework that couples the hydraulic equations
governing water flow and pressure with dynamic water quality models depicting
the transport and decay of disinfectant residuals, which act as a proxy for
contamination event detection in drinking water distribution networks. The
resulting framework faithfully describes the network operation under regular
conditions and contamination events. This framework also enables the development
of scalable optimization algorithms that are amenable to real-time
implementation for control of pumps, valves, and disinfectant booster stations,
thereby ensuring compliance with water quality standards. The algorithms are
designed to deal with a variety of water system applications such as flow
modulation, response and recovery from contaminant intrusion events, and
reliable network-wide disinfection. The theory is evaluated on realistic water
network models in addition to data from fixed and mobile sensors that collect
hydraulic and water quality data from a real-life water
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.