* 2015802
* Integrating engineering theory and biological measures to model stress resilience, damage, and fitness-related consequences
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Haruka Wada, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,961,854.00

How organisms respond to a stressful situation varies greatly among individuals
and partly depends on prior experience with the stressor. This variation makes
predictions of how an individual or population of individuals will endure
stressful events extremely difficult. Historically, studies on stress focused on
stress responses rather than the consequences of variation in responses. Using a
comparative approach with individual birds that have had prior exposure to mild
heat stress, and those that have not, this project will integrate biology and
engineering approaches to develop a model to predict when stressful events
negatively impact reproduction. Further, the investigators will examine how
stress resistance and resilience can be transmitted to the next generation. This
project will integrate biology and engineering in research and educational
activities for students in Alabama. First, to highlight the connection between
biology and engineering, the project will teach high school students about
technologies inspired by nature in a summer program. Second, this project will
organize a career fair, showcasing careers that integrate science and
engineering degrees and giving opportunities for the participants to meet
professionals from diverse backgrounds. Finally, this project will develop a
hands-on workshop where students in biology and engineering learn how to turn
data into mathematical models and active learning courses on functional genomics
and epigenetics. By incorporating physiology, genomics, and engineering through
research and education, the project will provide training, mentorship, and
opportunities to nurture interdisciplinary mindset in early-stage scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms across taxa can increase stress resilience when
conditioned to a mild stressor during development. At the same time, severe
levels of stress may decrease fitness. This context-dependency makes it
difficult to predict how a shift in an environment alters the fitness outcome of
an individual and success of a population. Several theoretical models have been
put forth to characterize responses to a stressor, yet predictive models and
reliable biomarkers of stress resistance and resilience are still lacking. To
bridge this gap, the goal of this project is to utilize path analysis and
Damage-Healing Mechanics from material engineering to develop mechanistic and
predictive mathematical models, linking developmental and adult environments,
epigenetic modifications, stress-induced molecular and cellular damage, and
fitness indices. Specifically, this project will test the hypotheses that
persistent damage, such as DNA damage and lipid peroxidation, lowers
reproductive output and that stress conditioning increases stress resistance
through epigenetic regulation of genes controlling damage protection, repair,
and removal. Using a previously established protocol of heat conditioning in
zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata), the present project will assess 1) whether
mild heat conditioning in juveniles turns on damage protective mechanisms such
as heat shock proteins, antioxidants, and DNA repair, reduces accumulation of
damage induced by heat stress in adulthood, and minimizes the negative effects
of heat stress on reproductive output, and 2) whether heat conditioning in the
F1 generation causes epigenetic modification of genes regulating damage
protection, repair, and removal in the F2 generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was co-funded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology and the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics programs in Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.