* 2015964
* Transduction of Substrate Mechanical Cues via Piezo1 Ion Channels
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Zonglu Susan Hua, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 390,529.00

This award will advance our fundamental understanding of how cells sense and
react to diverse mechanical inputs from their environments. Cells utilize local
environmental cues from the extracellular matrix (ECM), adhesive molecules, and
local stiffness to make decisions about growth and movement. The process of
converting mechanical stimulus to electrical energy at the ECM is commonly
thought to act via adhesion proteins such as integrins. Emerging research on
Piezo ion channels reveals that these channels can also respond to changes in
the substrate mechanical properties. Therefore, these channels may serve as
additional force sensors. This work will explore the role of a novel cell
sensor, called Piezo1, in detecting ECM forces. The results may ultimately
impact on human health. For example, the bodyâ€™s mishandling of these mechanical
signals results in a variety of diseases, including chronic kidney disease and
cancer. The results of this work may lead to new types of treatment for these
conditions. The outcome has the potential to be broadly applicable, since Piezo1
is found in many cell types and organs where the mechanical environment plays a
major role in proper function. The research findings will be integrated into
outreach activities through an Education through Experimentation (E2E) platform
that involves graduate, undergraduate, and local high school students in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the hypothesis that Piezo1
is the primary force sensor in epithelial cells, and that it detects the
substrate mechanical cues translated into membrane tension. This occurs through
a feedforward mechanism: local tension activates Piezo1 channels and calcium
influx, which stimulates calcium-dependent contractility and cell spreading; the
changes in cell geometry in turn, promote more Piezo1 activity and the migration
of Piezo1 to regions under stress, causing further growth in the same direction.
This hypothesis will be tested with substrate modulation as mechanical stimulus,
a FRET-based fluorescent probe to report opening transitions in Piezo1, and a
wound healing assay to screen cell mobility. There are three primary objectives.
First, to identify ECM force sensors in cells by inhibiting Piezo1 activity and
by knockdown of Piezo1. Second, to investigate how substrates alter Piezo1
responsiveness by visualizing the location and opening of channels during cell
reshaping. Third, to test the hypothesis that functional Piezo1 expression level
determines the identity of leader cells guiding collective cell migration. Taken
together, the results of this work have the potential to transform our
understanding of the mechanisms of various disease states that affect epithelial
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.