* 2015708
* CAREER: Dynamically Tuning 2D Semiconducting Crystals and Heterostructures for Atomically-Thin Signal Processing Devices and Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Philip Feng, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,526.00

Non-Technical Description: Atomically-thin semiconducting crystals can be
derived from layered materials bonded by weak van der Waals interactions. They
offer a wide spectrum of &lt;br/&gt;attractive properties and enable new two-
dimensional nanostructures and building blocks for functional devices, promising
a new route to future electronics and optoelectronics beyond the scaling of
mainstream devices that are top-down nanofabricated from conventional materials.
Yet, many intriguing effects in two-dimensional crystals, and their translations
into device platforms for realizing important signal processing functions,
remain unexplored. Further innovations require systematic studies of coupling
and tuning mechanical, electronic, and optoelectronic properties in two-
dimensional semiconductors. The objective of this project is to investigate
these fundamental phenomena across different signal domains (mechanical,
electrical and optical) in two-dimensional crystals and heterostructures, and to
harness such effects to innovate signal processing functions (such as filtering,
mixing, timing, function generation and amplification), with new features and
benefits. This research advances the current frontiers of two-dimensional
materials and devices. The results will elucidate the essential device physics
and potential of transforming the attractive two-dimensional crystals into
applicable devices. This project will advance scientific knowledge in areas
including two-dimensional nanoelectromechanical systems, electronics,
optoelectronics, multiphysics analysis and modeling, and two-dimensional device
fabrication. This project will generate extraordinary educational materials and
inspirations for students at all ages, from K-12 to graduate students. The
outreach programs will broaden participations from underrepresented and
disadvantaged groups. The PI has initiated collaborations with Cleveland
Institute of Music and Children's Museum, developing innovative programs at the
crossroad of science and arts, featuring the fascinating nature of
nanostructures enabled by two-dimensional crystals and heterostructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The objective of this project is to
directly probe and understand the fundamental electromechanical and
optoelectromechanical behavior in two-dimensional semiconducting crystals and
heterostructures with designed mechanical degrees of freedom. Furthermore, such
understandings of the coupling effects will be harnessed to derive and validate
signal processing functions, and directly tested in rationally designed
nanostructures. An experimental approach will be emphasized, and will be
reinforced by analytical modeling and computer simulations. The research
activities include designs and experiments on suspended-channel field-effect
transistors, radio-frequency resonant-channel devices with dynamically tunable
electromechanical interactions, investigations of tuning, nonlinear, parametric
behavior and optoelectronic functions, all in two-dimensional crystals and
heterostructures. This project directly aims at investigating new device
fundamentals and developing novel technological precursors. The experimental
measurements, device prototypes, theoretical analysis and simulations will
provide an in-depth, integrated understanding of how to dynamically tune some of
the key properties of two-dimensional crystals, and how to efficiently exploit
the electromechanical and optoelectromechanical effects to innovate new two-
dimensional devices for ultralow-power, ultrasensitive signal transduction. The
research activities and the approaches will establish two-dimensional
nanoelectromechanical systems as a new branch in parallel to two-dimensional
electronics and optoelectronics, paving the way toward future research in a new
paradigm of information technology with two-dimensional devices and systems.