* 2015573
* Hardware Friendly Machine Learning Integrated Circuits and System for Low Power Wearable Wireless Electrocardiogram Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Wei Tang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,999.00

Future wearable wireless biomedical sensors demand novel technologies to
overcome the increasing challenge in implementing intelligent signal sensing and
processing, the shortage of battery lifetime, as well as latency and security
issues. For instance, one major problem with the current U.S. health care
systems is that sensing and processing medical data require significant and
costly resources. To alleviate this problem, wearable medical devices are
expected to provide automatic monitoring and processing of physiological signals
and be capable of identifying abnormal signals and contacting medical systems if
necessary. Such devices are the key components in the future "unmanned medical
nursing systems". The goal of this project is to ultimately address the
challenges of next-generation wireless wearable biomedical sensors by
systematical efforts, which include interrelated studies in low power circuit
design, hardware-friendly algorithm design, and communication system analysis.
The project also covers the integrated circuit design and characterization of
the overall wearable sensor with the power budget estimation of each individual
building block. Since the power-efficient smart wireless device is a critical
component for a wide range of existing and emerging mobile sensing systems, the
outcomes of this project can result in a direct technological and societal
impact on the quality of our lives. To validate the benefits, the project plans
to directly explore the research impact of the proposed systems in elderly care
applications, which is a particularly important topic for the state of New
Mexico. In addition to training undergraduate and graduate students via the
proposed research projects, the educational impact of the activities outlined in
this project includes increasing participation of minority students and
attracting high school students to STEM college programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable Electrocardiogram (ECG) sensors are one of the
important wearable medical devices for arrhythmia detection, as continuous ECG
monitoring is needed by patients and even by normal people with uncomfortable
heart feelings. A Wearable ECG sensor with wireless body sensor networks is one
of the best candidates. Recently, machine learning has become a promising
solution and has been applied to continuous monitoring of physiological signals
for on-sensor processing. Due to latency, security, and privacy requirement, on-
sensor processing rather than sending the raw data to the cloud is preferred in
medical devices. Therefore, a machine learning algorithm that can accommodate
real-time processing without too much data storage and movement is preferred in
wearable sensor applications. This project addresses the fundamental computing
issue of the above-mentioned technical challenges in wearable wireless
biomedical sensors, especially ECG sensors. The goal is to find an alternative
sensing and processing circuit architecture to enable low-computing overhead
machine learning algorithms for power-limited wireless sensors with local
processing capability. The research aims to significantly advance the state-of-
the-art in low-power wireless wearable biomedical sensor architecture by
employing ideas in a cross-disciplinary fashion from integrated circuits,
hardware-friendly machine learning algorithms, and power-efficient wireless
communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.