* 2015662
* NSF-BSF: Uncovering how links between social and spatial interactions affect ecological processes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Noa Pinter-Wollman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 833,604.00

Understanding how societies form and operate requires the processes that shape
social interactions to be uncovered. Interactions occur in many different
situations, for example, individuals can be in physical proximity, have
negative, or positive interactions, etc. Each of these situations provides a
different contribution to the structure of a society, yet often such situations
are studied separately. Furthermore, physical constraints, such as geographical
barriers and man-made structures can impact who interacts with whom. Such
physical features are seldom considered when examining social interactions. This
work will develop tools to integrate different social situations and physical
constraints into a single framework, allowing us to uncover the causes and
consequences of social interactions. The researchers will implement these new
tools to study how social and physical features impact disease dynamics in
griffon vultures. In the study population nearly every individual can be
monitored to obtain information on their movements and social interactions. The
investigators will make new tools widely available to the general public and the
scientific community. This study system has conservation importance because
vultures are an umbrella species that provide ecosystem services (e.g.,
sanitation), and thus have financial and public health implications. A wildlife
tracking app will be developed to alert wildlife managers when tagged animals
perform unexpected behavior. Such a tool can be used in any system in which
wildlife can be tracked remotely. Thus, this work will have both conservation
implications and will develop analysis tools that will define how scientists
social interactions, including those of humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals
interact with their physical and social environments in ways that impact their
fitness. Social animals can benefit from associating with conspecifics to gain
knowledge about the location, availability, and quality of resources.
Furthermore, the physical environment influences animal movements and therefore
their social interactions. To integrate social and spatial processes and uncover
their feedbacks and consequences, this work will develop a novel conceptual
framework based on recent developments in multilayer network analysis.
Researchers will implement new methods to study the Israeli population of
griffon vultures (Gyps fulvus) which is heavily managed, here most individuals
in the population can be tagged and tracked. Using remote tracking that combines
GPS and accelerometers, experimental manipulations, and behavioral observations,
this research will study the links between the social and spatial networks of
griffons and their joint impacts on disease dynamics in the population. First,
research will uncover the role of different social situations in the global
social structure. Next, research will examine the relationship between social
interactions and the connectivity of spatial features to determine if
interactions are the result of spatial constraints on proximity and/or social
preferences. Finally, research will determine the effect of the relationship
between social and spatial interactions on disease dynamics â€“ a population level
process. This work will combine high resolution animal tracking with large scale
field based experimental manipulations and novel analytic developments in
network science. Researcher here will create the foundations for integrating new
analytic tools to investigate how social and ecological processes interact to
shape sociality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.