* 2015991
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Density Functionals for Predictive Excited-State Calculations of Solids  (NSF-BSF Application)
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Jeffrey Neaton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 334,332.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education to advance computational
methods for predicting the properties of materials from fundamental scientific
principles. The discovery and development of new materials for optoelectronic
applications is significantly limited by a detailed understanding of how
materials harvest light, transduce energy, and transport charge - all phenomena
involving electronic excited states where the configuration of electrons leads
to a higher energy than the lowest or ground state energy of the material.
Existing computational methods are predictive for such processes, but they come
at significant computational cost, and alternative approaches with similar
accuracy would enable predictions for increasingly complex materials and for
adapting such methods for materials discovery and design. This research project
lays important groundwork toward the development of more efficient predictive
theoretical frameworks that are complimentary to more computationally costly
existing methods for electronic excited states in real materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to this effort is mentoring of next-generation
computational materials theorists at all age levels, with focus on active
recruitment and promotion of women and other underrepresented-minority
undergraduate and graduate students; and outreach through tours of local
research facilities for undergraduate, elementary, and middle-school students –
as well as educators – in the Bay area and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education to advance computational methods for predicting the
properties of materials. The electronic band structure is a fundamental property
of crystalline matter. It serves as the basis for understanding charge transport
properties of bulk materials. Moreover, it is a prerequisite for understanding
optical properties of materials and for rationalizing the results of
spectroscopic measurements. In materials and condensed matter physics, the
formalism of choice for quantitative determination of the band structure has
long been many-body perturbation theory (MBPT). This formalism has yielded
excellent electronic structure predictions for many different classes of metals,
semiconductors, and insulators. However, these predictions come at significant
computational cost, and the ability to extract band structures from density
functional theory (DFT), based on the single-electron energies and orbitals
obtained from the solution of the Kohn-Sham equation, could alleviate this cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a binational theoretical and
computational collaboration to develop a robust framework for the first
principles computational prediction of the quasiparticle band gaps, band
structures, and optical spectra of complex solid-state materials with greater
accuracy and efficiency than existing methodologies, by combining optimally-
tuned range separated hybrid (OTRSH) density functionals with many-body
perturbation theory. The PIs’ work has shown that OTRSH functionals lead to band
structures and optical spectra for a broad class of molecular crystals and a set
of group IV and III–V semiconductors and insulators, with the accuracy of
leading-edge ab initio GW and GW-BSE approaches. Here, the PIs build on this
success by advancing two important fronts simultaneously. First, the PIs will
evaluate OTRSH as an effective starting point for GW and GW-BSE calculations for
solids. Second, building on prior work, the PIs will explore routes to determine
accurate DFT-OTRSH band structure and TDDFT-OTRSH optical properties without GW
calculations. Once validated, the PIs will use OTRSH starting points to
calculate the quasiparticle gap and band structure, as well as the linear
absorption spectra, of an array of complex materials, including halide
perovskites, important optoelectronic materials for which standard GW and GW-BSE
methods have been demonstrated to be inadequate or
inconsistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The progress made thus far with OTRSH for
band structure and optical spectra of solids is encouraging, as it suggests that
it is in general possible to fix one parameter to the orientationally-averaged
dielectric constant and then tune a single parameter – the range-separation
parameter – to yield band structures and optical spectra in agreement with GW-
BSE, partially or fully mitigating computational costs associated with MBPT.
Given the quality of the OTRSH band structure with a single parameter, could
OTRSH be an optimal starting point for GW and GW-BSE calculations of complex
structurally and chemically heterogeneous systems? Additionally, it remains to
be seen whether one can set this single parameter independent of GW-BSE
calculations and experiment. Can it be predicted from materials properties in a
computationally tractable manner, for isotropic and anisotropic materials alike?
The aim of this project is to address these questions, and ultimately develop
efficient approaches for understanding existing and predicting new excited-state
phenomena in complex materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.