* 2015526
* Randomized Trials with Non-Compliance: Extending the Angrist-Imbens-Rubin Framework
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lu Mao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 186,383.00

Randomized controlled trial (RCT) refers to a design commonly employed by
clinical and sociological studies where study participants are randomly assigned
to an investigational treatment arm, or to a control arm to serve as comparison.
With randomization as the unique device to eliminate systematic bias in
treatment choice, RCT has been rightfully enshrined as the gold standard for any
scientific inquiry, especially those involving human subjects. A challenging yet
pervasive issue arises, however, when some participants in an RCT do not comply
with the random assignment and instead self-select into the treatment of their
choice. This self-selection compromises the objectivity of treatment assignment
and thereby weakens the rigor of the experiment. A seminal paper by Angrist,
Imbens, and Rubin (1996) provided invaluable insight into the difficult task of
drawing valid causal inference in RCTs plagued by non-compliance. However, their
work is focused on the average of a quantitative outcome as the metric of
treatment effect and thus does not apply to other commonly encountered outcome
types such as ordinal data (for example, tumor grade). Moreover, it is unclear
whether their approach has utilized the available information on each
participant to the fullest extent. With the advent of modern
statistical/mathematical tools such as empirical processes, semiparametric
theory, and functional analysis, the PI seeks to extend the Angrist-Imbens-Rubin
(AIR) approach by targeting a much wider scope of effect size measures, or
causal estimands, and studying their efficient estimation under a unified
framework. The PI will also develop user-friendly software packages implementing
the corresponding inference procedures and involve graduate students in the
project. Successful completion of this project will equip investigators with
more versatile and powerful tools to address non-compliance in RCTs, the
mainstay of medical and sociological investigations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the general causal estimand is defined by an
arbitrary smooth contrast in the marginal (potential) outcome distribution
between the two arms. This formulation unifies seemingly disparate effect size
measures for all kinds of outcome types, such as the average treatment effect
(ATE), Mann-Whitney effect (i.e., probability of an outcome under treatment
being greater than one under control), quantile treatment effect, distributional
treatment effect, the win ratio, and so forth. Due to non-identifiability
associated with non-compliance, interest is focused on a “local” version of
treatment effects, that is, contrasts made on the sub-population of compliers.
These are natural extensions of the local ATE thoroughly studied by AIR. Under
standard assumptions, simple nonparametric plug-in estimators are constructed
for the local treatment effects based on nonparametric estimators for the
complier outcome distributions. The operating characteristics of testing
procedures based on these estimators will also be investigated. Finally, the
entire framework will be re-cast in semiparametric-theoretical terms to optimize
the statistical efficiency of both the estimation and testing procedures. This
research will lay the groundwork for future extensions to accommodate baseline
covariates, censored outcomes, and non-binary (and possibly time-dependent)
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.