* 2015376
* Multivariate Distribution-Free Nonparametric Testing Using Optimal Transportation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Bodhisattva Sen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Nonparametric methods have become increasingly popular in the theory and
practice of statistics in recent times primarily because of their fundamental
advantages over parametric methods: greater flexibility and more "data-driven''
features. In this project the Principal Investigator (PI) analyzes the
estimation, computation and uncertainty quantification in two important areas of
nonparametric statistics. Special emphasis is given to methods applicable to
multivariate data, an area that has received relatively less attention, though
often necessary in performing real data analyses. The methods developed will be
tuning-free, computationally feasible, and well-defined under minimal
assumptions on the underlying models. On the collaborative front, the PI will
continue interdisciplinary research in astronomy and in particular, some of the
methodology discussed in this project will address important scientific
questions arising from astronomy and will form the dissertation theses of two
PhD students at Columbia. The PI will also continue the tradition of mentoring
summer interns. The graduate student support will be used on interdisciplinary
research and writing codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI investigates
two core directions of research in nonparametric statistics with special
emphasis to multivariate data. The main trust of this project is to study
multivariate distribution-free nonparametric rank-methods based that generalize
the classical univariate rank-based procedures to multivariate data. This new
general framework crucially uses ideas from the theory of optimal transport – an
important and very active research area in applied
mathematics/probability/machine learning. The second part of the project is on
multivariate nonparametric (heteroscedastic) mixture models and is directly
motivated by astronomy collaborations involving the PI. Statistical inference of
stellar populations of interest is complicated by significant observational
limitations – in particular, by heteroscedastic measurement errors. Indeed,
almost all data sets in astronomy contain known (heteroscedastic) error
measurements on every observation. This naturally leads to data that can be
modeled as nonparametric (heteroscedastic) mixture models. The PI, along with
his collaborators, will investigate several aspects of this problem: (a)
estimation of the data distributions, (b) denoising the observations, and (c)
studying the associated deconvolution and manifold learning problems. For both
the above problems, a systematic theoretical study of the methods will be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.