* 2015825
* Aquatic N2-Fixation Research Coordination Network (ANF-RCN)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Robinson Fulweiler, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,700.00

Nitrogen is an essential element for all life. Although Earthâ€™s atmosphere is
mostly nitrogen, it is not readily available for plants and animals. Early in
the history of life, some microorganisms evolved the ability to convert
atmospheric nitrogen into a biologically useful form through a process called
nitrogen fixation. This process is a major component of the global nitrogen
cycle and has been extensively studied in open-ocean and terrestrial ecosystems.
Yet, nitrogen fixation rates and ecological controls remain poorly understood in
inland and coastal aquatic ecosystems. These ecosystems are critical as they
link terrestrial and marine biomes. They are also quite diverse. A general
understanding of aquatic nitrogen fixation requires strong integration between
scientists representing diverse perspectives. The Aquatic Nitrogen Fixation
Research Coordination Network will develop an ecological framework for
understanding aquatic nitrogen fixation by bringing together scientists studying
nitrogen fixation across the freshwater to marine continuum. Network activities
will improve the quality of scientific discovery and training for graduate
students and early career scientists across diverse fields of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Aquatic Nitrogen Fixation Research
Coordination Network will provide a platform to engage a broad community of
biogeochemists, computational modelers, ecologists, hydrologists and
microbiologists to address three Research Coordination Opportunities: 1) the
biodiversity and environmental controls on autotrophic and heterotrophic
nitrogen fixation, 2) the ecological stoichiometry of nitrogen fixation, and 3)
the upscaling of nitrogen fixation rates and fates. Three working groups focused
on these opportunities will coordinate over a period of five years through a
series of face-to-face and online meetings, as well as through the project
website (www.aquaticnfixation.com) to successively build upon the products from
each group. The project will advance ecosystem science by integrating the
framework of ecological stoichiometry with the hydrologic transport of chemical
resources to constrain nitrogen fixation rates and fixed nitrogen fates within
the ecological dynamics of inland and coastal waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.