* 2015417
* Multidimensional Latent Variable Models for Large and Complex Event History Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Zhiliang Ying, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The project consists of two parts which are motivated by and applicable to
educational assessment and health sciences. Advances in modern computer and
information technology enable educational assessments to measure comprehensive
problem-solving skills in virtual environments in which examinees experience
interactively with computers. The existing evaluation methods only look at the
final answers, ignoring vast behavioral data collected over the course of
interaction. The first part of the research explores the entire interactive
problem-solving processes by individuals so that comprehensive problem-solving
skills can be assessed efficiently and more accurately. The developed new tools
will have direct impacts on the design and analysis of large scale national and
international educational assessments such as the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP) and the Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA), which are the two most important assessment schemes on the
primary and secondary education. The second part develops novel statistical
approaches to analyzing large scale health system data. The new developments
could be used to ascertain efficacy and monitor side effects for drugs currently
used in healthcare management programs. They could also lead to new statistical
tools for analyzing behavioral data, which are common in social science studies.
The project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research develops latent variable models for
moderately high dimensional counting process data and dynamic regression models
for counting process data when both covariates and events are sparse. For latent
variable/factor models, the research addresses the fundamental and challenging
issue of identifiability by finding suitable constraints, which also lead to
more parsimonious and interpretable models. Valid inferential methods are
developed by establishing crucial asymptotic results under appropriate
regularity conditions. Stochastic gradient-based algorithms are constructed for
efficiently carrying out parameter estimation. For the multidimensional counting
process models with frailty and dynamic covariates, the research addresses the
challenging issue of sparsity, in terms of both events and covariates. By
exploring certain special structures inherent in such data, the research
establishes suitably normalized asymptotic theories for parameter estimation so
that valid inference can be conducted. The covariate sparsity and correlated
frailty make the asymptotic theory challenging as standard techniques used for
counting process models are no longer appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.