* 2015009
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a field diagnostic for the rapid detection of White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) in shrimp aquaculture
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Mary Larkin, GASKIYA DIAGNOSTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 224,980.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase aquaculture productivity by
reducing disease impact. Disease costs billions in losses each year to the
aquaculture industry and threatens the global food supply. The disease caused by
White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) can devastate a shrimp farm and costs over $1
billion in losses each year. Farmers are often unaware of a disease issue until
animals show advanced signs of disease or there are mortalities. Laboratory
diagnosis is expensive and results take days-to-weeks, which is often far too
long for results to be actionable. Early warning of white spot disease can
enable farmers to take immediate action to reduce losses, reducing costs and
increasing industrial robustness. This project advances a new diagnostic to
quickly, easily, and reliably detect WSSV in cultivated shrimp in a new easy-to-
use, on-site test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will advance
translation of a novel diagnostic for WSSV in a technology incorporating
engineered proteins with specific targets into a paper-based biosensor. Prior
studies demonstrated proof-of-concept with a paper-based immunoassay with
polymerization-based amplification for detection of protein-based biomarkers for
HRP2–the primary protein biomarker of malaria–with sensitivity as low as 70pM.
This project will bioengineer thermostable rcSso7d DNA-binding proteins to bind
the WSSV target and incorporate them into the paper testing format. Assay
sensitivity, reagent composition, and dynamic range will be explored as part of
an effort to understand the biological and functionally meaningful limits of the
developed assay. Tasks include a WSSV challenge study to evaluate the sampling
parameters and detection limits of the prototype in laboratory cultured shrimp.
The resulting prototype will rapidly and selectively bind the WSSV target and
yield stable, easily interpretable, colorimetric
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.