* 2015125
* SBIR Phase I:  Sensitive Nanoscintillators for Multiplexed Detection of Radioisotopes
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Colleen Janczak, SCINTILLATION NANOTECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 224,700.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of core-shell nanomaterials
for sensitive detection of low-energy radioisotopes commonly used as molecular
labels and tracers in quantitative biological, chemical and environmental
studies. These nanomaterials can be used in place of traditional methods for
measuring low-energy radioisotopes and offer greater sensitivity and better
sample compatibility, while also resulting in less hazardous waste. The
technology platform is expected to demonstrate several advantages over other
methods in particularly challenging, information-rich areas of research,
including detection of molecules within living cells. The nanomaterials
platform, with further development, will also allow for the simultaneous
detection of multiple compounds, an important factor in the study of complex
biological samples. These advances will provide critical new tools for
bioscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve the sensitivity of a novel core-
shell nanomaterial platform and develop a basic template for multi-color,
multiplexed assays as well as an accompanying first-generation instrument
capable of translating these advances to commercial application. Radioisotope
labels remain the gold standard in a wide range of quantitative biological,
chemical and environmental studies and have played a critical role in the
investigation of biological systems for almost a century. However, the low
energy and short penetration depth of the most commonly used radioisotopes
necessitate the use of liquid scintillation counting, solid scintillation
counting or scintillation proximity assays for detection. These assays are often
incompatible with living systems, are not readily multiplexed and/or provide
limited time-resolved measurement capabilities. The goals of this project are:
1) advance nanomaterial preparation to yield higher reproducibility and
sensitivity signals; 2) yield multicolor materials for simultaneous multiplexed
assays; and, 3) generate a dual color scintillation counter than enables and
demonstrates the utility of the platform for multiplexed assays. These goals
will be accomplished by exploring a variety of scintillant fluorophores and
polymer linkages in parallel with instrument design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.