* 2015819
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Fundamental Processes of Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* William Parkinson, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 22,653.00

Under the direction of Dr. William A. Parkinson at the Field Museum of Natural
History, William P. Ridge, a Ph.D. Candidate at the University of Illinois at
Chicago will conduct archaeological fieldwork to examine the social responses
and adaptations in small-scale societies to large-scale population shifts and
economic changes. The modern world is characterized by dense urban landscapes
and massive degrees of political and economic inequality, but these are recent
developments within the human experience. Since the end of the Pleistocene, most
humans have lived in small, autonomous, village societies. Through
archaeological research, archaeologists can examine extended periods of time –
centuries or millennia – and trace the emergent forms of characteristics that
have come to define the contemporary world, such as social differentiation,
economic inequality, the negotiation of cultural identities, and the
physiological effects of dense populations. Why do people come together to live
in ever larger populations? How are social relationships and cultural identities
reshaped by shifting populations? How and under what circumstances do such
aggregations fail? With global and domestic population movements more frequent
than ever before, such questions are increasingly
pertinent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student and colleagues will examine
how social structure and population changed in prehistoric village societies.
The research will consist primarily of targeted excavations at prehistoric
settlement sites. Excavations will take place at prehistoric villages that
belong to a period when there was a juxtaposition between, on the one hand, the
disappearance of large settlements, and, on the other hand, the establishment of
rich burial grounds. Combining excavation data from households with the high-
precision chronological data of radiocarbon dates the project will elucidate how
demographic and economic processes occurring at the regional level effected the
nature of local society and at what pace these changes took place. The research
team will generate models to explain human responses to population and economic
fluctuations. The project will focus on training and data generation and will
provide educational and research opportunities for both students and
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.