* 2015620
* Summer School and Workshops on Genome Architecture and Function
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Arup Chakraborty, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2022
* USD 306,936.00

Two workshops and a school will be hosted by MIT in Boston on the topic of
"Genome structure and function". In the Summer of 2020 an online workshop will
be held and in March, 2021 the school and workshop will be held. In the online
workshop students, postdocs and researchers will give technical talks and
discuss their current research. During the school and workshop leading experts
will teach and discuss how cells acquire their identity. What physical
mechanisms are responsible for cells with the same genome in an organism to
perform different function, e.g. neuron vs liver cell? The School will be
focused on a set of tutorials taught by leading experts in the field on the
cutting edge of the subjects pertinent to the research area noted above, and
will last two days. During the Workshop at least 20 leading experts from the US
and Europe will present talks based on their current research. The list of
invited speakers is comprised of both physicists and biologists. Ample time will
be provided for discussions. Aapproximately 75 trainees will be students in the
School, and the workshop will be attended by approximately 150 individuals from
academe and industry. The Summer School and Workshop will serve to help educate
the next generation of scientists (physicists and biologists) about an exciting
and important topic that requires work at the convergence of physics and
biology. The students in the Summer School will be drawn from both Europe and
the US, and potentially other countries. Moreover, many participants in the
Workshop will be trainees from the laboratories of the many universities in the
Boston area, thus broadening the educational outreach of the proposed meeting
further. It is important to note that, while the meeting will be focused on
fundamental science, mis-regulation of nuclear processes and genome architecture
impact many diseased states (e.g., cancer, autoimmunity, and ageing-related
diseases). Thus, there will be a number of participants in the workshop who are
scientists working in the vibrant biotechnology companies in the Boston area,
which will further enhance the broader impacts of the proposed Summer School and
Workshop on "Genome architecture and function". Special attention will be paid
to attracting students and participants from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identity and state of a cell determines its
phenotype, and thus how it interacts with other cells to regulate the functions
of complex organisms. A cell's identity is determined by which regions of its
genome are transcribed into proteins, and which regions are not. Cellular
identity is a collective emergent property that is determined by an interplay
between the structure (or architecture) of the genome inside the nucleus and
nuclear functions (e.g., transcription, DNA repair), both of which are
determined by cooperative interactions between many components. Thus,
understanding the basic science underlying how cell identity is determined
requires a convergence of approaches from physics and biology. In recent years,
there has been great interest in work at this crossroad of disciplines, with the
goal of developing fundamental new principles pertinent to processes that are
key to understanding how complex organisms function. New experimental tools
(e.g., chromatin capture methods) and theory and computer simulations (rooted in
statistical physics) have begun to reveal the determinants of chromatin
structure. Similarly, recent work using synergistic theory, computation, and
high and super-resolution microscopy has suggested that the transcription of
genes key to maintaining cell identity is regulated by the formation of active
phase-separated transcriptional condensates. It is an opportune time to bring
together leading physicists and biologists to discuss the most recent findings,
educate trainees on these topics, and chart a path forward. The proposed Summer
School and Workshop may become a landmark meeting for the field. The School and
Workshops are supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Physics
Division and the Molecular Biophysics and the Genetic Mechanisms clusters in the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.