* 2015292
* Bioinspired Antimicrobial Flexible Polymer Thin Films: Fabrication, Mechanism, and Integration for Multi-Functionality
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Qing Cao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Biofouling, the accumulation of unwanted biological matter on surfaces, is a
serious problem in many sectors of human society. The colonization of bacteria
on the surfaces of pipelines and ship hulls leads to severe efficiency loss and
thus higher operating cost. The problem is especially severe for medical
implants, as their surfaces are preferred sites for the adhesion of bacteria
from wound, operating room, or equipment contaminations, and post-operatively
via contact with bloodborne bacteria. The conventional approach to minimize the
risk of such infections typically involves coating the surface of the implants
with a layer of slowly releasing antibiotics or biocides. However, the sustained
release of antibiotics can lead to drug resistance and toxic side effects. The
goal of this project is to develop a novel antimicrobial coating to overcome
these limitations. The project’s design is inspired by the bactericidal
(bacteria killing) nanopillar arrays identified on cicada and dragonfly wings,
which are believed to be crucial for their survival in humid and bacteria-rich
environments. Such nanopillar arrays have the unique capability to kill a wide
spectrum of attached bacteria through purely physical (e.g. membrane rupture
causing) interactions, without releasing any harmful chemicals. Despite their
attractive antimicrobial properties, the nanopillar arrays on cicada and
dragonfly wings are quite challenging to mimic due to their nanometer-scale
dimensions and their high length to width ratios. To date, fabrication obstacles
have limited the capability to fully reveal the bactericidal mechanism or to
produce large-area nontoxic antimicrobial coatings for practical applications.
This project will overcome these obstacles by developing a cost-effective
approach to prepare such nanopillar arrays, with independently adjustable pillar
height, radius, and spacing, on various polymer substrates with a wide range of
elastic properties. A combination of experiments and computer simulations will
be used to provide insight into the bactericidal mechanism. This insight,
combined with fundamental engineering-design principles, will be used to design
bioinspired antimicrobial films that can outperform their natural counterparts
in terms of bactericidal efficacy and the number of bacteria species affected.
The educational goal is to prepare a sustainable, adaptable, and globally
competitive STEM workforce by exploiting the outreach opportunities and
knowledge generated in the project. Efforts include a summer research project
(involving training in microscopic techniques for measuring the surface topology
of collected cicada wings) for local high-school students from underrepresented
groups as part of the PhYSics Young Scholars program and by developing a
multidisciplinary module on electronic devices for biomedical applications that
will be incorporated into an undergraduate-level course on
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this project is
to significantly advance the prospect of bioinspired non-toxic and high-
efficiently bactericidal thin-film coatings for biomedical implant applications.
The work is inspired by surfaces formed in nature, such as cicada and dragonfly
wings, that have nano pillared structures that can kill attached bacteria
through rupturing their cell membranes in a purely mechanical stretching
process, and thus offer an attractive “chemical-free” and wide-spectrum strategy
to fight against bacteria-related infections and fouling. The objective will be
achieved by fulfilling two specific goals. The FIRST Goal is to develop a cost-
effective and large-area applicable approach to fabricate nanopillar arrays
(with sub-100 nm critical dimensions) with precisely adjustable pillar height,
radius, and spacing on various polymer substrates with a wide range of Young’s
moduli. The process starts from the fabrication of nanowell arrays on a Si
substrate as the master, using low cost and large-area-applicable nanosphere
lithography together with the anisotropic deep Si reactive-ion etching.
Precursors of polymers with different mechanical properties are then casted
against the master to yield the complementary replicas. Pillar height, radius,
spacing, and the Young’s modulus are controlled independently by adjusting the
nanosphere size, the etching time, and the choice of prepolymers. The fabricated
films will be used to elucidate the detailed correlation between the film
topology, mechanical properties and bactericidal efficacy through a combination
of experiment and simulation, which will provide critical insight into their
bactericidal mechanism. The SECOND Goal is to engineer nanostructured
bactericidal films, as guided by modeling, to outperform their natural
counterparts in terms of higher bactericidal efficacy against a broader
bacterial spectrum. The films can be combined with multiple bactericidal
approaches and functionalities. The nanostructured physical bactericidal coats
can be made electrically conductive to demonstrate the potential for the films
to be used as electrodes for biosensors. The films can be further integrated
with flexible electronic components, e.g. a Wheatstone bridge with strain-
sensing capabilities, as “smart” coatings on orthopedic implants to provide both
long-term antibacterial and structure-health monitoring
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.