* 2015056
* SBIR Phase I:  Detection of Ecoli O157:H7 in Ground Beef
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Javier Atencia, PATHOTRAK INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2021
* USD 249,885.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the reliable detection of food-
borne pathogens in meats in 4 hours. The time savings will dramatically reduce
holding costs for food manufacturers and bring food to consumers one day earlier
through an improved food-safety test. The proposed technology will address the
major bottleneck for rapid bacterial detection in food samples, which is not
detection itself but rather the sample preparation step known as bacterial
enrichment. In this step, the sample is incubated for 20 or more hours to allow
the bacteria to multiply and reach detectable levels. Bacterial enrichment has
been dubbed 'the 100-year problem in food-safety and microbiology,' and there is
currently no alternative. The proposed project will enable food-safety
monitoring tests at a lower cost, improving food safety, saving billions of
dollars in recalls, and reducing holding costs of food production. Moreover,
getting ground beef to retailers’ shelves a day earlier can reduce food waste in
ground beef by an estimated 50%. Because beef is so energy-intensive to produce,
this waste reduction would save trillions of gallons of water and prevent the
release of billions of pounds of methane and greenhouse gases every
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to explore
translation of a unique microfiltration-based enrichment technology to separate
and concentrate pathogens from ground beef. This will enable the detection of a
single pathogenic bacterium in 4 hours, with a limit of detection consistent
with regulatory guidelines. The proposed technology combines washing,
microfiltration and sedimentation with the addition of chemical agents to
separate and concentrate the bacteria from the sample. The research plan
includes optimizing the conditions and chemicals to stabilize and subsequently
digest protein aggregates in solution that are deleterious to the concentration
of the bacteria; demonstrating the technical feasibility by consistently and
reliably detecting 1 Colony Forming Unit (CFU) in 375 g of ground beef; and
exploring the performance-cost trade space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.