* 2015389
* ICBR: Establishment of an Ancient DNA and Paleoproteomics Laboratory at the American Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Ross MacPhee, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2023
* USD 472,408.00

An award is made to the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) to establish a
dedicated laboratory for the isolation of ancient DNA and proteins preserved in
biological tissues and environmental samples. Ancient, often poorly preserved,
tissues provide a treasure trove of previously inaccessible molecular
information on the history of life on Earth. The new AMNH facility will be a
national resource, providing the research community with an ultraclean lab in
which students, early career scientists, and established scientists can
undertake supervised extraction of degraded biological materials under best-
practices conditions. In addition to the physical laboratory, this award will
support activities to strengthen national expertise in ancient biomolecular
research through the production of training materials and a symposium in which
experts share their knowledge with novice and experienced practitioners. This
project will have broader educational impact through programs for students and
teachers, including open-access teaching resources that increase awareness
regarding the utility of ancient DNA and proteins in modern science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in DNA sequencing, proteomics, and
bioinformatics have enabled extraordinary advances in understanding the history
of life and its diversity on Earth. Yet the full impact of these tools has not
been fully realized in historical biology and related disciplines, such as
archaeology, paleontology, paleoecology, paleoclimatology, and physical
anthropology. This is partly because ancient biomolecules, recovered from
macrofossils or sediments, require specialized treatment: they tend to be highly
degraded and easily contaminated by modern biomolecules. Only a handful of labs
in the USA are capable of meeting the highest standards of specimen preparation,
and access to these facilities is currently limited. This project will bring a
uniform level of support to researchers from across the country who are
interested in utilizing ancient biomolecular information in their
investigations. The AMNH Ancient Biomolecules Facility is intended to make
available to visitors a uniquely designed clean room and cutting-edge
instrumentation for biomolecular extraction and quality assessment for genomic
and proteomic applications. On-site extraction and safe handling of ancient DNA
and proteins will greatly simplify researchersâ€™ investment in the time and
effort needed for optimal data acquisition, circumvent lengthy permitting
processes, and expedite the dissemination of results to the scientific
community. Serving as a national center for ancient biomolecular extractions,
the AMNH facility will also act as a clearing house for biomolecular studies,
providing training to students and other practitioners, fostering
collaborations, developing new techniques and standards, and promoting the value
of ancient biomolecules as an investigatory tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.