* 2015187
* Predictive models for determining the fate of nonculturable and difficult-to-culture viruses in disinfection processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Krista Wigginton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,999.00

Viruses such as norovirus, rotavirus, and enteroviruses are major causes of
waterborne illness. Conventional water treatment processes like coagulation,
sedimentation, and filtration are not very effective at removing viruses. As a
result, the removal and inactivation of viruses in water treatment plants rely
heavily on disinfection processes. However, the effectiveness of virus
disinfection cannot be tested in most water quality laboratories. This is due to
the fact that many infectious viruses either cannot be grown outside of the
human body or require facilities with very high levels of biosafety that are not
available to most researchers. The goal of this research project is to develop
new fundamental knowledge on the effectiveness of disinfection on all viruses
including new pathogens such as the COVID-19 virus. To achieve this goal, the
investigator proposes to carry out inactivation experiments on a group of
structurally diverse waterborne-viruses using UV light, free chlorine, and
chlorine dioxide as model disinfectants. The data collected from these
experiments will be used to develop new models and predictive tools. Successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the development of new
knowledge and tools for identifying non-infectious and easy-to-grow surrogates
for testing and validating virus disinfection efficiency at water treatment
plants. Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education
and training via the integration of the project findings into a new cross-
disciplinary course on the roles that viruses play in ecology, biotechnology,
and infectious diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waterborne viruses are a major
cause of illness worldwide. Disinfection has emerged as a critical unit
operation used in water treatment to inactivate waterborne viruses and stop
their transmission. However, most academic, municipal, and industrial water
quality laboratories do not have adequate facilities and tools to measure the
effectiveness of virus disinfection. Although non-infectious and easy-to-grow
viruses are commonly employed as surrogates to evaluate disinfection efficiency,
no consistent framework is available for selecting such surrogates. In addition,
there is limited published data on the extent and rates of virus disinfection.
The goal of this research is to address these knowledge gaps in virus
disinfection. To advance this goal, the PI will carry out an integrated
experimental and modeling program organized around three specific tasks. In Task
1, new virus inactivation experiments will be conducted to expand the available
dataset using culture methods to grow the target viruses and UV radiation, free
chlorine, and chlorine dioxide as model disinfectants. In Task 2, the data
collected in Task 1 will be utilized to develop and validate structure-activity
relationships (SARs) for predicting the extent and rate of virus inactivation.
In Task III, the PI will leverage the new data, insight, and SARs obtained from
Tasks I and II to identify more effective surrogates for testing and validating
the efficacy of virus inactivation by UV radiation and chlorine-based
disinfectants. Successful completion of this project has potential for
transformative impact through the development of new insight and tools to
predict the efficiency of virus disinfection in water treatment
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.