* 2015843
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Role of Cytosolic One-carbon Metabolism in Photorespiration
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Berkley Walker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 735,010.00

This project will explore the intersection between photorespiration and one
carbon metabolism, two plant biochemical pathways that are of critical
importance to plant growth and human nutrition. Photorespira-tion is a plant
process that recycles toxic products created as a byproduct of photosynthesis
and is an essential process needed by the plant to grow. Rates of
photorespiration are linked to growing tempera-ture and carbon dioxide
concentration, meaning that future rates of photorespiration will change with
changing climates. One carbon metabolism is similarly vital to plant growth, and
also is the source for essential vitamins like folate. The goal of this project
is to help generate models predicting how current and future climatic conditions
influence plant performance and yields, and inform breeding and engineer-ing
approaches to optimize plant productivity and the production of plant compounds
important for human nutrition and health. During this interdisciplinary project,
high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral trainees will be taught
integrative approaches to plant biology, broadening their education and learning
opportunities in collaborative scientific research. The aim is to instill
positive attitudes towards science, and encourage creative and critical thinking
by providing trainees with greater access to the sci-entific process early in
their educational training. Participation of underrepresented undergraduate and
graduate students will be accomplished by taking part in several university
programs designed to provide information on existing research opportunities to
under-represented groups at Washington State Universi-ty and Michigan State
University. The main public-facing outreach activity of this project is a Sounds
of Science performance at Washington State University, a unique collaboration
between plant scientists and musicians resulting in a TED-talk styled event
aimed to increase awareness of the importance of plant science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, photorespiration has been considered well
defined with little metabolic flexibility. However, the PI’s recent work
suggests that photorespiratory flux can alternatively be partitioned into the
metabo-lism of tetrahydrofolate-bound one-carbon (C1) units in the cytosol. This
may provide an overflow for the traditional photorespiratory pathway and has
important implications for the energetics and carbon balance of
photorespiration, photosynthesis, and foliar nitrogen assimilation. Therefore,
it is important to define the contribution of cytosolic C1 metabolism to
photorespiration, particularly in response to conditions that influence rates of
photorespiration (e.g. drought and high temperature). The goal of the project is
to de-termine the role of cytosolic C1 metabolism in photorespiration. It is
hypothesized that two cytosolic C1 enzymes, formate-tetrahydrofolate ligase and
serine hydroxymethyltransferase, participate in processing of formate and serine
generated during photorespiration. Reverse genetics, leaf gas exchange, metabo-
lite analyses, and labeling-assisted metabolic flux analysis will be used to
test the role of these two en-zymes in the coordination of carbon metabolism
between the C1 and photorespiratory pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.