* 2015672
* Influence of Natural Cloud Seeding on Lake-effect Snow System Microphysical and Entrainment Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* David Kristovich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 511,494.00

Natural cloud seeding refers to the process by which snow particles are produced
at higher levels in the atmosphere and then fall and impact clouds and
precipitation at a lower level. In this award, the impact of natural cloud
seeding on lake-effect snowfall in the US Great Lakes will be investigated. The
main societal impact of the project will be through the potential for improved
forecasting of lake-effect snowfall location and intensity through better
choices of numerical weather model parameters. The processes investigated here
may also have broader applications, such as to Arctic locations that have
increased open water. The project will help to train the next generation of
scientists by involving multiple graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is for the analysis of the potential for natural cloud seeding to
impact microphysical properties and turbulent storm dynamics in the lake-effect
layer. The research will make use of data from the 2013-2014 Ontario Winter
Lake-effect Systems (OWLeS) field project, particularly in situ data from the
University of Wyoming King Air research aircraft and remote sensing data from
the Wyoming Cloud Radar on the King Air and the ground-based Doppler on Wheels
radars. Three main scientific objectives will be investigated: 1) Determine the
importance of “external” sources of snow on the microphysical and thermodynamic
evolution of lake-effect snowstorms, 2) Determine the impacts of seeding on the
lake-effect boundary layer entrainment zone, and 3) Develop a catalog of
microphysical and turbulence profiles in lake-effect systems for comparison with
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.