* 2015911
* Transdisciplinary Training Collaboratory: Building Common Ground
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Pamela Matson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2025
* USD 888,288.00

Addressing today's environmental and sustainability challenges calls for
solutions-oriented, actionable science, also known as engaged science. This
approach is defined by two shifts from conventional ways of doing science.
First, it requires collaborative, team-based science focused on problem solving
of real-world problems. Second, the teams are comprised of a wide range of
societal partners working closely with disciplinary experts. Although an
improved understanding of guiding principles for engaged science are emerging
through research and case study analysis at local to regional scales,
sustainability scientists lack a common language and a common set of practices
and approaches that can be used in many different regions and situations. This
project aims to harness the collective wisdom of sustainability science
researchers and leadership trainers from around the world, leading to aligned
best practices and training products that can be used and adapted in regions
around the world. This solutions-oriented, actionable science training will be
used in academic and informal learning opportunities, improving the potential
for researchers to partner effectively with government agencies, non-profit
organizations, and the private sector to tackle pressing sustainability
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable a collaboration of
training and research communities that will share knowledge, compare best
practices, evaluate approaches and develop and test training materials for
effective engaged science. The project will build a more coherent understanding
of the central elements that allow solutions-oriented actionable research or
transdisciplinary research to succeed, and provide a common framework for
training in the field. The investigators plan to assemble a team of pioneering
researchers and trainers who have been recognized in their region as thought
leaders. The approach will be to mirror the process of transdisciplinary
research—that of co-design, co-produce, and co-implement in order to create
usable training products. These products will be tested in regional and global
workshops in a variety of contexts by the experienced training team. After
testing, the organizers will create a design guide accompanied by resources for
transdisciplinary trainers and disseminate them widely throughout the regions
where the researchers and trainers work as well as through global sustainability
conferences and networks. This work will ultimately result in a common language
for transdisciplinary research and will build new knowledge and training
products focused on what works in transdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.