* 2015301
* Collaborative Research: RoL: The evo-devo of male pregnancy and its effects on the brood pouch microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* William Cresko, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,070,484.00

The evolution of novel traits can change the way that organisms interact with
their environments to survive, grow and reproduce. Deep knowledge of the
underlying genes and developmental changes that underly most evolutionary
innovations is sparse, as is understanding of the ecological consequences for
both the organisms in which novel traits emerged and the organisms with which
they interact in communities. A particular gap in understanding is how the
evolution of novel traits influences the biodiversity of their associated
microbial communities. This project will help fill this gap in our knowledge by
studying a remarkable innovation â€“ male pregnancy in seahorses, pipefish and
seadragons. This project will include the creation of new genome sequences and
detailed studies of the developmental genetic underpinnings of the embryo
brooding structures that make male pregnancy possible. The consequences of pouch
evolution on the complexity and function of the community microbes in the pouch
will also be studied, as well as how this unique host-associated microbiota can
affect the fitness of embryos in the pouch. This project will provide research
training to high school students, teachers, and undergraduates from
underrepresented groups through immersive outreach and targeted support
programs. The project will also support training of the next generation of
scientists via education of Ph.D. students and postdoctoral scholars. Outreach
to general public will be accomplished through public talks and through creation
of a museum exhibit on syngnathid biology paired with web resources to support
K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Male pregnancy, accompanied by
morphologically diverse embryo brooding structures, is a defining evolutionary
innovation in syngnathid fishes. The goal of this project is to build an
integrative understanding of the developmental genetic origin of this remarkable
syngnathid novelty and its role in mediating multi-level ecological interactions
with host-associated microbiota. This project will include production of 19 new
annotated reference genomes strategically sampled across the syngnathid lineage,
morphogenetic analysis and transcriptional/epigenetic profiling of the
developing pouch in a comparative framework that leverages the repeated,
independent evolution of complex brooding structures in the family, and analysis
of brood pouch biocomplexity as a determinant of pouch-associated microbiome
assembly. When complete, this project will provide novel insights into genome
structural evolution in syngnathids, identify protein sequence and gene
regulation changes involved in brood pouch development, and address whether the
evolution of the brooding tissues created specialization in host regulation of
microbiota with consequences for brooded progeny. The work will attract new
researchers to syngnathids for studies of evolutionary innovation and
diversification. The project will provide research training to high school
students, teachers, and undergraduates from underrepresented groups, and will
support education of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, including the
opportunity to take intense short courses to learn next generation sequencing,
bioinformatics, complex statistical analyses, and genome editing. Educational
outreach to general public will be accomplished through public lectures by the
PIs, and through creation of a museum exhibit on syngnathid biology, which will
be paired with an associated web resource directed toward K-12
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.