* 2015889
* Understanding Manufacturing Process Dynamics and Machine Tool Anomaly Detection Through Process Sensing and Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ibrahim Jawahir, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 444,405.00

Effective and efficient machine tool maintenance plays a significant role in
ensuring manufacturing productivity, product quality, operational safety, and
profitability. With the advancement of process sensing, the Internet of Things,
data analytics and cloud computing, more manufacturing plants are favoring
predictive maintenance over traditional preventive maintenance. Predictive
maintenance involves monitoring and predicting machine tool condition and
performance. It avoids unnecessary maintenance and prevents catastrophic failure
of machine tools, thereby saving operational costs and improving production
reliability. However, there are barriers to fully implement predictive
maintenance such as insufficient accuracy and reliability of machine tool
anomaly or fault detection by existing techniques. This award supports
fundamental research on designing a next-generation process sensing-machine
learning architecture for capturing manufacturing process dynamics that reveals
the underlying dependency of product quality on process settings and machine
conditions. This research engages industry in assessing the performance and
scalability of this novel machine tool health-monitoring technique at actual
manufacturing plants, with the outcomes offering a competitive edge to the U.S.
manufacturing sector in the global market. The research involves disciplines
such as advanced manufacturing, sensor networks, machine learning, and
computing. Knowledge gained is applied to developing manufacturing curricula to
equip the next generation of engineers with new skills in manufacturing and data
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the fundamental
understanding of complex manufacturing process dynamics for root cause analysis
of process sensing variation and detection of machine anomaly occurrences,
through discovering the process-observation causal relationships by an
innovative machine learning technique. To improve the trustworthiness and
computational efficiency of data-driven analysis and decision making in actual
manufacturing plants, a next-generation process sensing-machine learning
architecture is designed with capabilities in: 1) high-accuracy modeling and
high-efficiency computation upon an optimal architecture without extensive
manual tuning; 2) physically interpretable discovery of system input-output
causal relationships and process dynamics through the integration of model
training with manufacturing domain knowledge; 3) allowing for modeling from
unbalanced data and incremental learning from evolving machine conditions
without repeated model training for robust and scalable anomaly detection. A
physically interpretable convolutional neural network with automated
architecture search is developed to correlate process parameters, multivariate
sensing data (e.g., force, vibration, power), and part quality specifications
(e.g., strength, surface quality) that are acquired from turning and milling
processes. The discovered relationships are then diagnosed by an incremental
sparse classifier for machine fault detection and classification. The outcomes
from this project establish a scientific foundation for the systemic realization
of machine tool anomaly detection and predictive maintenance that is not
achievable with existing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.