* 2015641
* Freeze-Cast Manufacturing of Stable Iron-Alloy Foams for Energy Conversion and Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 424,000.00

Freeze casting is a low-cost manufacturing technique for creating porous
materials or foams. This award investigates freeze casting as a means to make
iron-nickel, iron-cobalt, and iron-copper foams that help power batteries for
storing energy on the electricity grid, or improve chemical looping technologies
for capturing carbon dioxide emissions from power plants. By advancing the
materials manufacturing for these applications, this project contributes to
national energy security, climate action goals, and U.S. competitiveness in the
advanced energy materials sector. The knowledge developed in freeze casting of
porous materials also benefits other industrial sectors such as healthcare, via
porous bone-replacement implants, and automotive and aerospace, via lightweight
structures. One current limitation to using freeze-cast energy materials is that
they degrade during use. To address this problem, this research investigates
methods, such as adding an alloying element, to stabilize freeze-cast iron foams
and increase their usable lifetime. The relationships between manufacturing
parameters and materials performance lay the groundwork for optimization and
commercialization of such freeze-cast alloys. This project actively promotes
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in research and continues
building interdisciplinary and international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In energy applications, such as high-
temperature solid-oxide batteries or chemical looping combustion, iron-based
redox materials rapidly degrade due to the repeated molar volume changes
associated with oxidation/reduction reactions. The pore architecture of freeze-
cast, lamellar foams is ideally suited to address this issue, as it provides
space for each lamella to expand and contract freely, without constraints from
neighboring lamellae. Nevertheless, mechanical degradation still occurs due to
Kirkendall micropore formation from imbalanced diffusion fluxes and
fracture/spallation of the oxide phase. Alloying iron foams with nickel, cobalt,
or copper is investigated as a strategy to suppress the above degradation
processes, by creating Ni-, Co- or Cu-rich ductile cores within the lamellae,
and by making diffusional fluxes more balanced. In-situ synchrotron X-ray
diffraction and nano-tomography are used to reveal the phase and microstructural
evolution in these alloys during redox cycling. These in-situ studies are
complemented by thermogravimetry, ex-situ redox cycling, and metallography
studies. Lastly, CALPHAD, phase-field, and finite-element models are developed
to help guide alloy and composition selection, with validation provided by
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.