* 2015454
* Iterative Algorithms for Statistics: From Convergence Rates to Statistical Accuracy
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Martin Wainwright, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 11/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Science, engineering, and industry are all being revolutionized by the modern
era of data science, in which increasingly large and rich forms of data are now
available. The applications are diverse and broadly significant, including data-
driven discovery in astronomy, statistical machine learning approaches to drug
design, and decision-making in robotics and automated driving, among many
others. This grant supports research on techniques and models for learning from
such massive datasets, leading to computationally efficient algorithms that can
be scaled to the large problem instances encountered in practice. The PI plans
to integrate research and education through the involvement of graduate students
in the research, the inclusion of the research results in courses at UC Berkeley
and in publicly available web-based course materials, as well as in mini courses
at summer schools and workshops. This project will also provide mentoring and
support for graduate students and postdocs who are female or belong to URM
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many estimates in statistics are
defined via an iterative algorithm applied to a data-dependent objective
function (e.g., the EM algorithm for missing data and latent variable models;
gradient-based methods and Newton's method for M-estimation; boosting algorithms
used in non-parametric regression). This projectl gives several research thrusts
that are centered around exploiting the dynamics of these algorithms in order to
answer statistical questions, with applications to statistical parameter
estimation; selection of the number of components in a mixture model; and
optimal bias-variance trade-offs in non-parametric regression. In more detail,
the aims of this project include (i) providing a general analysis of the EM
algorithm for non-regular mixture models and related singular problems, in which
very slow (sub-geometric) convergence is typically observed; (ii) developing a
principled method for model selection based on the convergence rate of EM, and
to prove theoretical guarantees on its performance; developing a general
theoretical framework for combining the convergence rate of an algorithm with
bounds on its (in)stability so as to establish bounds on the statistical
estimation error; and (iii) providing a complete analysis of the full boosting
path for various types of boosting updates, including kernel boosting, as well
as gradient-boosted regression trees, and to analyze the "overfitting" regime,
elucidating conditions under which overfitting does or does not
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.