* 2015378
* Statistical Properties of Privacy-Preserving Algorithms: Optimality, Adaptivity, and Stability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Linjun Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The increasing popularity of large-scale data analysis raises privacy concerns.
The tremendous amount of data collected by data curators such as search engines,
social network platforms, and medical institutions contain potentially sensitive
information about individuals. With the rapid emergence of data-driven
technologies, it has been increasingly important to respect the privacy of
individuals. A central question is: how to build privacy-preserving algorithms
to protect individual privacy without sacrificing the utility in a large degree?
This project aims to develop rigorous tools and methodologies to analyze
privacy-preserving algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this project is to develop statistical theories and applications of privacy-
preserving algorithms. In particular, the technical goals include (1) the
statistical optimality of privacy-preserving algorithms in parametric models;
(2) the statistical optimality and adaptivity of privacy-preserving algorithms
in nonparametric regression, with focus on random forests algorithms, and; (3)
the stability of privacy-preserving algorithms with applications to post-
selection inference and adversarial robustness of deep neural networks. The new
theoretical understandings will not only shed light on current privacy-
preserving methodologies but also lead to new methodological developments of
stable and adversarially robust algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.