* 2015390
* Composite Resampling Inference for Dependent Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Daniel Nordman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,961.00

Current statistical methodology for dependent data analysis often relies on
specifying an adequate model, which can be difficult in practice. A potential
consequence is that conclusions drawn from an inappropriate or mistaken model
may be unreliable or misleading. The project seeks to develop efficient and
accurate statistical methods that are "model-free" or apply without restrictive
assumptions about the dependence in data. A direct benefit of this research will
be to provide alternative tools for statistical inference that are not
susceptible to model choice or model misspecification. Therefore, the research
will benefit data-based inference in scientific areas such as environmetrics,
economics, geology, and astronomy, which encounter different forms of dependent
data and where model-free methods can play an important role in data analysis.
The project will also support the professional development of students through
graduate student mentoring as well as outreach activities with undergraduate
students at local colleges and universities for promoting recruitment and
education in statistics and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
particularly aims to produce composite, or hybrid-type, resampling methods that
combine strategies for re-using dependent data. By merging philosophically
different resampling techniques (subsampling and bootstrap), the PI will
investigate convolved subsampling for nonparametric inference. This new
resampling method has wide applicability and favorable performance under mild
conditions. For important types of strongly or long-range dependent time series,
statistical inference depends heavily on an unknown process index. The PI will
study resampling under long-memory and develop a first-ever estimator of this
index via a composition of resampling ideas. Additionally, the PI will develop
new empirical likelihood methods for time series and spatial data by combining
different resampling devices (data transformations and data blocking) for
inference over a variety of dependence structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.