* 2015174
* STTR Phase I:  A Novel Device for Accurate Intrapartum Fetal Health Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Aijun Wang, STORX TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the proposed STTR Phase I project is
to build a non-invasive medical device for fetal health monitoring to assist
obstetricians in avoiding unnecessary cesarean-section surgeries (C-Sections).
Despite significant cost and clear evidence of health risks associated with
C-Sections, many infants are delivered via C-Sections. The high C-section rate
and the associated additional cost and health complications result in part from
inaccuracy of existing electronic fetal monitors, which generate many false
alarms for fetal distress. The goal of this project is to address this problem
by developing a non-invasive device so obstetricians may conveniently and
accurately assess fetal health during labor and
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed STTR Phase I project is to advance a
breakthrough technology for non-invasive, transabdominal measurement of fetal
arterial blood oxygen saturation (FSpO2). The underlying principle of operation
is to shine light in the abdominal area at two specific near-infrared
wavelengths and subsequently sense the small amount of diffusely scattered light
transcutaneously. These measured signals require processing to correct for the
maternal contribution and to infer intensity variations due to pulsation of
fetal arteries. The proposed project will advance the development of a prototype
and demonstrate feasibility of safe, robust and reliable transabdominal FSpO2
measurement in hypoxic fetal animal models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.