* 2015599
* Correlating Nonlinear Wave Response with Mesoscale Dislocation-Based Damage to Understand Fatigue Evolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kathryn Matlack, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 452,664.00

Fatigue damage causes nano- and micro-structural changes in metals that
ultimately cause structures to fail. While materials characterization techniques
can classify this damage at very small scales, measuring such changes while
damage is occurring and in large-scale samples remains a challenge. This award
supports fundamental research to address these challenges by studying how
nonlinear high-frequency waves propagate in metals undergoing fatigue damage.
This knowledge will not only improve our understanding of how damage such as
fatigue evolves, it will also provide important insight into how high-frequency
waves propagate in metals. Because many structures and materials undergo
fatigue, it will benefit society by improving the safety and efficiency of
structures, such as those used in airframes, transportation systems, and energy
infrastructure. This award will also support student education in critical
engineering skills at multiple levels, through an integrated K-12 outreach
program that incorporates a project-based undergraduate course and graduate
student mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
determine the relationship between nonlinear high-frequency wave propagation and
dislocation-based damage at the mesoscale. To do this, nonlinear wave
measurement techniques and models will be integrated with digital image
correlation, electron backscatter diffraction, and scanning electron microscopy,
to characterize cyclic loading of polycrystalline FCC material. Spatial
variations in dislocation-based damage will be captured and correlated with
nonlinear high-frequency wave measurements and used to predict fatigue damage. A
new constitutive relationship will be introduced relating the acoustic
nonlinearity parameter measured by ultrasound and accumulated strain that
captures dislocation-based damage at the mesoscale measured with digital image
correlation. Finally, nonlinear ultrasound will be used to spatially
characterize dislocation parameters throughout the fatigue life of samples, and
then used to validate or update micromechanical models for fatigue evolution in
polycrystalline metal. This fundamental knowledge will uncover how dislocation-
based damage manifests at the mesoscale, how this relates to fatigue evolution,
as well as how nonlinear high-frequency waves propagate through spatially
heterogeneous nonlinear elastic media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.