* 2015735
* 2020 Chromatin Structure and Function: Micro to Macro Chromatin Structure in Epigenetics and Disease GRS
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Robert Porter, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 12,985.00

The award will provide support for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers to attend the 2020 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Chromatin
Structure and Function (May 30-31, 2020 in Castelldelfels, Spain) to be held
just prior to the associated Gordon Research Conference (GRC; May 31-June 5,
2020). These conferences bring together young and established scientists from
multiple disciplines, from genetics and epigenetics to computational biology,
who are investigating mechanisms governing the higher order structure and
function of the genome. The GRS serves as a forum for a diverse group of early
career scientists to discuss research through seminars and poster sessions,
exchange new ideas, technologies and resources informally, and develop their
professional network. The program also includes a panel discussion on mentoring
and career development with scientists in different professions, such as
academia, industry and publishing. The GRS is organized and co-chaired by a
graduate student and a post-doctoral fellow, providing them with a significant
career development experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New technologies, including
genome visualization tools, have accelerated discoveries in chromatin biology in
recent years, while increasing the need for multi-disciplinary training and
collaborative research. The GRS and GRC serve as a vital link for investigators
around the world to share their latest, often unpublished, discoveries, discuss
pioneering ideas and launch new collaborations. Topics at the forefront of the
field will be covered, including the organization of the genome at various
scales, chromatin remodeling mechanisms and their regulation, the effects on
cellular development and fate, among others. The GRS in particular will
facilitate training and professional development of the next generation of
scientists, including underrepresented minorities, in the field of chromatin
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.