* 2015028
* SBIR Phase I:  Hydrogel tablets as cost-effective oral dosages for solubility enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Paul Godfrin, Veramorph LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the efficacy of drug products
through a novel tablet. Current formulation technologies have limited
compatibility with the estimated 60% of drugs that do not dissolve easily,
restricting the number of therapeutic options. This project will develop a more
versatile way of delivering therapeutic compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will validate the oral
drug delivery performance by hydrogel tablets of poorly soluble drug substances
requiring formulation technologies to improve oral absorption. Solubility
enhancement by current technologies is limited to a small range of drugs and
typically causes poor shelf-life and limited drug loading, critical
characteristics of effective oral dosages. A current limitation of hydrogel
tablets is that their drug release is limited to a small pH range within the
known variability of the human gastrointestinal tract. This project aims to
optimize the composition of hydrogel tablets, with objectives inlcuding: 1)
Identify cross-linkers capable of immediate drug release over the full range of
human pH values, validating compositions using standard analytical chemistry
techniques; 2) Characterize each hydrogel’s performance via dissolution studies
and accelerated stability studies. By correlating the hydrogel performance with
the chemistry and content of cross-linkers, an optimal hydrogel composition for
drug release will be determined using two well-established types of polymers as
the “backbone” of the hydrogel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.