* 2015765
* Magnetospheric Ducts and Their Role and Importance in Whistler Mode Wave Propagation and Wave-particle Interactions in the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Vikas Sonwalkar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 569,817.00

In the geospace environment, large-scale (10-100 km) field-aligned
magnetospheric ducts are important to the dynamics and energy transport of the
magnetosphere and ionosphere. These regions have irregular density enhancements
and depletions that affect the nature of wave-particle interactions. The project
studies this process and could lead to improvements of space-based technology,
including GPS and satellite communications, and predictive models of space
weather. The project supports a graduate student and early career assistant
professor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their importance in the physics of the
inner magnetosphere, relatively few measurements of magnetic ducts are available
because appropriate experimental methods have previously not been developed.
Whistler mode (WM) and Z- mode (ZM) sounding from the IMAGE satellite provides a
new generation of methods to measure field-aligned electron density and
magnetospheric ducts. Using these new methods, the research will investigate
magnetospheric ducts and develop a new understanding of the role and importance
of ducts in inner magnetospheric processes. The objectives of the project are:
(1) to obtain new measurements of duct widths, density enhancements, and
occurrence patterns and morphology as a function of geomagnetic and solar
activity; (2) to gain new understanding of physical processes that lead to the
formation, sustenance, and decay of ducts; and (3) to gain a new understanding
of the role of ducts in inner magnetospheric processes. An approach involving
data analysis and ray tracing simulations will be used to achieve the objectives
described above. The WM and ZM radio sounding and passive measurements from
RPI/IMAGE will be the principal source of data used in this research. Results
obtained from WM and ZM radio sounding will be augmented and enhanced using
complementary wave and particle data available from other ground and space-borne
instruments (e.g. ground VLF receivers; satellite wave and particle
detectors).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.