* 2015210
* SG: Phylogenomics, chromosome evolution, and diversification of the sundews, a group of carnivorous plants
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ya Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,994.00

The sundews (Drosera) are approximately 250 species of carnivorous plants
distributed worldwide, with most species found in warm temperate and tropical
regions. The plants’ ability to catch and digest insect prey has long fascinated
the public as well as botanists. In addition to these plants’ unusual method of
acquiring nutrients, sundews also appear to possess striking variation in
chromosome number and structure, but large-scale surveys are lacking owing to
the need for living organisms and advanced microscopy techniques to evaluate
these features. This project will take advantage of extensive living collections
of sundews available to the researchers, as well as targeted collecting efforts,
to survey the chromosome numbers and genome size of numerous sundew species, as
well as the environmental conditions in which the plants grow. Researchers will
also reconstruct the evolutionary history of the sundews using phylogenomic
data, allowing them to evaluate the history of chromosome evolution and habitat
specialization in this group and their role in driving diversification. This
project will provide research training for undergraduate and graduate students
and will enable the development of collaborations for an early-career
researcher. In addition, the researchers will deliver hands-on educational
modules for first-year undergraduate students and K-12 students. They will also
assemble a living collection of sundews that will be available through the
College of Biological Sciences Conservatory at the University of Minnesota for
research, teaching, and public access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-layered
dataset will be generated for reconstructing the history of chromosomal
evolution of the sundews and to test the macroevolutionary link between
chromosome number variation and lineage diversification. Species relationships
will be estimated by sampling at least 80% of the 250 species in the genus using
a combination of transcriptome and Hyb-Seq data. Chromosome number and genome
size data will be obtained for at least 40% of sundew species, and
immunostaining will be used to determine the centromere type, which is thought
to vary substantially in Drosera, in 15 species across the genus. Additionally,
species occurrence data will be compiled from publicly available specimen
databases to enable reconstruction of climatic niche and soil characteristics.
The researchers will use state-of-the-art methods in phylogenomic data analysis
to model chromosome changes, combined with sampling hundreds of genes across the
genome to determine the placement of whole genome duplication and single
chromosome gain and loss events. This project will not only enable subsequent
investigations into the mechanisms of chromosome evolution in sundews, but it
will also establish a rigorous analytical framework for comparative analyses of
chromosome evolution across the tree of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.