* 2015601
* Collaborative research: Evaluating the drivers of exhumation during accretionary orogenesis: A field-based investigation in the Salmon River Suture Zone, Idaho
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Sean Long, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 197,832.00

Mountain building events typically result from collisions between tectonic
plates. During mountain building, rocks that were once deeply buried often
become exhumed and transported to the Earthâ€™s surface. This project will
investigate a region of central Idaho that experienced an ancient collision
between an ocean island system and the North American continent, which resulted
in exhumation of rocks that were buried as deeply as 40 kilometers. This study
will test whether a portion of the lower crust detached from the overlying
tectonic plate and subsequently sank into the mantle below, causing the
overlying rocks to be uplifted towards the surface, or alternatively whether
movement along steep faults resulted in their exhumation. To evaluate these
hypotheses, rock samples will be collected and evaluated to give information on
when, and at what rates, these deep rocks were translated towards the surface.
The results of this project will improve our understanding of the tectonic
processes that are active during plate collisions and mountain building events,
which can impact the distribution and quality of geologic resources. This
project will improve STEM education by generating field-based learning and
research opportunities for undergraduates and graduate students at Washington
State and Missouri State universities. The results of this project will
introduce STEM research to undergraduates each year through geology lectures.
Grade-appropriate presentations will be developed for K-12 students to introduce
them to their local geology and allow for the discussion of STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the contributions of processes that
exhume deep-seated metamorphic rocks during collisional tectonics is fundamental
for understanding how mountain belts evolve. In the North American Cordilleran
orogen in central Idaho, the Salmon River suture zone is a ~30 kilometer-wide
region that experienced Jurassic-Early Cretaceous contractional deformation
associated with collision of a volcanic island arc terrane with the western edge
of the North American continent. Rocks in the suture zone record structural
burial to and subsequent exhumation from depths as great as 40 kilometers, and
therefore are ideal for investigating the processes that drive high-magnitude
exhumation during accretionary events. This project will test two primary
hypotheses: 1) Rocks in the Salmon River suture zone were exhumed via hinged
unroofing following lithospheric delamination, which predicts contemporaneous
exhumation-related cooling across the width of the suture zone and eastward-
increasing exhumation rates and magnitudes; or 2) Rocks in the Salmon River
suture zone were exhumed via forward-breaking thrust propagation, which predicts
a systematic westward younging of the timing of peak burial, initial exhumation,
and motion on thrust faults. To test these hypotheses, this project will
integrate structural analysis and geochronology of field relationships, the
timing and pressure-temperature conditions of peak metamorphism, and multi-part
temperature-time paths as a proxy for exhumation-related cooling. The results of
this project will have implications for our understanding of the geodynamic
processes that operate during accretionary events. In addition, project results
will address the existence, scale, and effects of lithospheric removal, and the
temporal and spatial relationships between accretion-related burial and
associated shortening and exhumation in the overlying middle and upper
crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.