* 2015042
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Transparent Conductive Oxide Manufacturing for Smart Windows
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Cory Perkins, NEXTC CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the development of energy-efficient
windows. Electrochromic windows may be used to reduce energy costs related to
climate control and lighting, eliminate glare, and improve visual comfort in
commercial buildings. Electrochromic window manufacturers cite reduction in
overall energy loads by an average of 20% and peak energy demand by up to 26%.
Growth of the electrochromic window market has lagged because of high
manufacturing costs. This project will enable low-cost manufacturing of films
employed widely in energy conversion and conservation applications to enable
widespread use of electrochromic energy-efficient
windows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will explore the translation of solution-processed transparent
conductors used in large area devices. Transparent conductive oxide (TCO) films
are typically produced by vacuum-based techniques or chemical vapor deposition.
These coatings often suffer from high expense, poor uniformity, and optical
haze. The proposed research is aimed to eliminate the common drawbacks of
conventional TCO films. The technical objectives of this Phase I research
project support development of low-cost, large area, solution deposited TCOs
meeting industrial performance requirements. This research project will
establish correlations between precursor formulation and film processing to
control film composition, morphology, and electrical properties and reliably
meet industrial specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.