* 2015286
* The AGEP Alliance Model for Advancing the Faculty Careers of Underrepresented Minority STEM Doctoral Candidates who are Instructors at Historically Black Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Jeremy Ernst, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,557,515.00

This project will develop, implement, study, and disseminate an AGEP Alliance
model to provide faculty professional development and career preparation to
African Americans and other historically underrepresented minority STEM doctoral
candidates, who are also instructors at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), for completion of their PhD degree and progression in
early career faculty positions. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, a STEM-focused research intensive university, will lead a team that
includes subawards to three HBCUs, Morgan State University, Virginia State
University, and Jackson State University, as well as another STEM-focused
research intensive university, Embry Riddle Aeronautical University. The model
brings together faculty from HBCUs and research universities to recruit, train
and mentor the doctoral candidates, already working as instructors at HBCUs, to
support them in overcoming sociocultural and professional barriers to completing
their PhDs and continue on in the professoriate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Alliance was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education
and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program
seeks to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate
and success of URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in
specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Alliances
develop, replicate or reproduce, implement, and study, via integrated
educational and social science research, Alliance Models to transform the
dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty
advancement, and transitions within and across the pathway levels, for URMs in
STEM and/or STEM education research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation
addresses a STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and
graduate students, our universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and
promote URM STEM faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for
students to learn from, work with and emulate. An NSF report from 2015
determined that only 40% of Black/African American doctoral students were
completing their STEM doctoral degrees. A 2018 poll of STEM faculty working at
HBCUs in the southeast region of the United States revealed that 32% from
selected STEM disciplines do not have terminal degrees. The integrated research
project will identify and illuminate potential sociocultural and professional
barriers to doctoral degree completion by examining institutional environments,
student development, support relationships as well as retention and persistence.
Advancing the careers of URM faculty ultimately leads to improved academic
mentorship for undergraduate and graduate students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation of project progress and goal completion
will be monitored through the leadership team self-study and with the
contributions of an external evaluator. The Alliance will also receive input
from two advisory boards. The Institutional Advisory Board will be focused on
the institutional level work of the project and developing means for integrating
the project activities and outcomes into institutional policies and procedures.
The External Advisory Board will provide input for strengthening project
activities and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.