* 2015490
* Model Evaluation in Modern Predictive Regimes: Case Influence and Model Complexity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yoonkyung Lee, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Models are an integral component of scientific inquiries, and they can be used
as effective devices in many practical areas as engineering, commerce, and
governance. There have been remarkable advances in the way statistical models
are defined from data for prediction or for accurate descriptions of the world
we observe. While complex predictive models have routinely emerged, our
understanding of these models and methods for their evaluation have been
lagging. Appropriate tools for assessing models and recognizing their
deficiencies, and proper ways to account for their complexity are in great need.
To fill these gaps, the project aims to develop methodologies and computational
tools for assessment of case influence on general models in predictive settings.
And it will extend the notion of model complexity to general prediction rules
for model comparison and calibration by using the overall model sensitivity to
data perturbation. Results from this research will bring great benefit not only
to science and engineering through the practice of refined statistical modeling,
but also to society at large through applications. In particular, the project
will have practical utility in outlier detection for many scientific
applications, fraud/threat detection and prevention for many business
applications, and detection of adversarial attacks for artificial intelligence
applications. Moreover, it will advance our understanding of modern algorithmic
models such as deep learning through the research on model complexity and foster
interdisciplinary research. The project will provide research training
opportunities for graduate students. Computational tools developed will be
distributed as open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To characterize the
sensitivity of a predictive model to data, the PIs will develop novel approaches
to case influence assessment for general modeling procedures, encompassing many
modern statistical learning techniques for classification and regression.
Extending case deletion statistics and case influence graph in linear
regression, the project will offer a variety of new case influence measures for
classification in particular. In addition, the PIs will develop efficient
computational algorithms for evaluating those case influence measures by
utilizing a homotopy technique to relate two modeling problems with the original
data and perturbed data under various perturbation schemes. Further, the project
will examine model complexity through the lens of model sensitivity to data
perturbation considered in case influence assessment and extend the notion of
model degrees of freedom to general modeling procedures including large-margin
classifiers. This extension will be based on the relation between expected
optimism and model complexity in the risk estimation framework where model
sensitivities to perturbation of individual cases can be linked to the
conditional expected optimism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.