* 2015272
* Manifold Coordinates with Physical Meaning
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Marina Meila, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Finding low dimensional meaningful descriptors for high-dimensional phenomena
has been one of the motors of scientific discovery. For instance, the "genetic
maps" introduced by Cavalli-Sforza map the variation of the human genomes into
2-dimensional geographic locations, charting prehistorical migrations. In this
example, the scientists' intuition guided the mapping of the genomes on the
spatial dimensions. This project will develop a general statistical framework to
expand and automate this process. A scientist provides a list of descriptors
with scientific meaning, that could be used to unfold the data in low
dimensions. This list is called a "dictionary". The dictionary mediates between
expert knowledge, expressed with the concepts of the scientific domain, on one
hand, and the lower level representations of the data used by learning
algorithms, on the other. This project will facilitate the tranfer of knowledge
between scientist and machine. A statistical learning algorithm will replace the
task of manually checking individual descriptors for correlation with the data
variation; the algorithm will perform this task on the whole dictionary at once.
The output is a small set of descriptors from the dictionary, which together
capture most of the variation in the data; we call them Interpretable Embedding
Coordinates (IEC). Unlike Principal Components or Principal Directions, which
are abstract, these coordinates are always meaningful and interpretable, because
they are selected from the dictionary of descriptors supplied by the
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project it is assumed that the data lie
on or near a smooth low-dimensional manifold; the dictionary consists of smooth
functions on the manifold. The new method finds coordinates in the manifold
among the interpretable, meaningful functions in the dictionary. Interpretable
Embedding Coordinates (IEC) will be formulated as a non-parametric, non-linear
sparse functional regression problem. The main idea is to tranform this problem
into a linear sparse regression in the space of function gradients. This allows
one to apply the well-developed aresenal of sparse recovery methods to IEC,
without sacrificing the original non-linearity of the problem. Statistical and
geometric guarantees for recovery will be given. The new methods will be
integrated into the big data unsupervised learning platform megaman, distributed
and maintained by Meila's group. PI Meila, with support from the UW eScience
Institute, will disseminate the ideas and methods in an on-line Active Training
Lab on Unsupervised Learning. This project is part of Meila's current research
program "Unsupervised Validation for Unsupervised Learning" to design
mathematically founded methods to interpret, verify and validate the output of
machine learning algorithms for scientific data and scientific
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.