* 2015700
* Compact Phase-Modulated Photonic Structures for On-Chip Multiband Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 11/30/2023
* USD 379,999.00

Due to the rapid developments of highly-integrated photonics and quantum
communication technologies as well as the recent advancements of high-resolution
medical imaging techniques, there is currently a compelling need for
miniaturized and scalable optical elements that enable simultaneous light
focusing and directional control over different spectral bands. Responding to
these challenges, this project advances the understanding of optical devices
that combine multiple functionalities on the nanoscale. The research team
utilizes experimental and computational approaches to help develop novel
materials and structures that enable controllable light focusing responses with
reduced losses and enhanced efficiency for use in next generation of power-
efficient nanophotonics devices, such as on-chip spectrometers, optical sensors,
and miniaturized imaging systems that operate over multiple and spectral
regions. The project supports one graduate student and encourages the
involvement of undergraduate students in the research through a vibrant outreach
program aimed at introducing fundamental concepts of optical science and
engineering in their academic curricula in partnership with practical laboratory
demonstrations and research activities through summer programs at Boston
University. An important component of this outreach plan is to attract
underrepresented minorities to a career in optical engineering through
participation in the project. Finally, the outreach involves the development of
a focused teaching module addressing the emerging field of Metaphotonics that
will be offered to students (graduate and undergraduate) and practitioners both
in industry and academia as part of the photonics outreach programs at Boston
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this proposal is to combine
favorable aspects from both meta-optics and diffractive optics technologies in
order to design, fabricate, and experimentally characterize high-performance,
ultra-compact novel diffractive devices with spatially-modulated phase profiles
based on high-index transparent materials and scalable multi-level fabrication.
In particular, the researchers will focus on two closely related novel photonic
structures: (i) single-element, ultra-compact micro- spectrometers based on
achromatic axilenses with engineered phase modulation, and (ii) multi-spectral
axilens-based focusing devices that achieve simultaneous focusing of radiation
over selected spectral bands. The goals will be accomplished by a comprehensive
integration of rigorous Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction theory, device-level
Finite Element Method (FEM) numerical design, materials fabrication, and
experimental characterization of optical devices with integrated imaging and
spectroscopic functionalities across a wide spectral range. While using silicon
(Si) and titanium dioxide (TiO2) transparent dielectrics for the visible and
near-infrared (NIR) spectral range, the research concepts, methods and design
approach can naturally be extended to any wavelength of interest and dielectric
materials platforms. The intellectual merit of the proposed research program
relies on the development of novel and more powerful avenues for cost-effective,
miniaturized, phase-engineered devices that are polarization insensitive, work
over a large range of incidence angles, and combine highly-efficient focusing
and grating responses that, in addition to optical spectroscopy, also find
applications to multi- spectral optical detection, quantum information sources,
and on-chip sensing. This project enables a substantial broader impact as it
provides the foundation for the next generation of ultra-compact spectroscopic
phase-modulated devices for optical imaging, sensing, and
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.