* 2015425
* US-Africa Collaborative Research Network in Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Peter Johnson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This NSF award provides support for a US-Africa Collaborative Research Network
(CRN) with the primary goal to improve the human infrastructure in mathematical
sciences in both the US and Sub-Saharan Africa, especially among
underrepresented groups. It builds on the successful Masamu Program, developed
by the Southern Africa Mathematical Sciences Association (SAMSA) with the
assistance of the National Science Foundation in 2010 to enhance research in
mathematical sciences and related areas through promotion of international
research collaboration. The CRN consists of 82 research mathematicians (43 Sub-
Saharan Africa, 29 US, and remaining 10 from Canada, China, and Europe) from 46
colleges and universities and research laboratories/centers/institutes, forming
3 research groups in Pure Mathematics and 4 research groups in Applied
Mathematics. Each research group is subdivided into research teams consisting of
senior research mathematicians, early career faculty, students, and postdoctoral
researchers. Each research team includes both US and African participants.
African researchers work on research areas that overlap with American research
areas, but interestingly use different techniques and address different
questions. This award therefore provides an opportunity for CRN to broaden the
spectrum of questions to be studied and of methods/approaches for answering
these questions, resulting in increased research activity and productivity for
participating US researchers. Solutions to the research questions being studied
by these teams have important applications in pure and applied mathematics,
industry, government, and in society in general. In particular, solutions to
these mathematics questions have applications in national security, network
coverage, surveillance, transportation, finance, and statistics. Solutions to
these questions also advance understanding of the spread of diseases and
biodiversity, which have important policy implications as demonstrated by the
COVID-19 crisis. The study of tumor growth, cell motility, and DNA structure
have significant medical applications, and mathematical models involving climate
data will provide accurate predictions of the impacts of climate change on
future human and animal behavior and their interactions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The CRN forms 3 research groups in Pure Mathematics (Algebra and
Geometry; Analysis and Topology; and Discrete Mathematics (Graph Theory, Coding
Theory, and Information Theory)) and 4 research groups in Applied Mathematics
(Mathematical Biology and Biomathematics; Climate Change and Impacts;
Mathematics of Finance and Statistics; and Biostatistics and Data Science). A
key component of the Masamu Program is the Masamu Advanced Study Institute
(MASI) and Workshop Series in mathematical sciences and related areas, which
provides a platform for these collaborations. SAMSA holds a 4-day international
research conference during Thanksgiving week each year, and Masamu Program runs
a 10-day MASI that overlaps with the conference period. US-Africa CRN members
thus take advantage of this gathering and participate in the SAMSA conference,
MASI, and workshops to meet face-to-face, work on research problems, plan
research activities for the subsequent year, and present their research findings
at the conference. This NSF award provides support for US faculty, students, and
postdocs to attend MASI each year. This enables the network to produce high
quality new PhDs in the US and Sub-Saharan Africa, high quality joint research
publications, and long-term US-Africa research partnerships consisting of
researchers from diverse backgrounds. This will have long-lasting impacts on
research collaboration and human infrastructure in the US and Sub-Saharan Africa
in mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.