* 2015796
* Neuromuscular simulations for predicting functional walking ability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Jessica Allen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 11/30/2022
* USD 254,532.00

Restoration of functional walking ability is a high priority for rehabilitation
in pathological populations, e.g., older adults, stroke survivors, individuals
with spinal cord injury and Parkinson’s disease. This project will address two
critical gaps currently limiting rehabilitation efforts to improve functional
walking ability. First, the underlying impairments in neuromuscular control
(i.e., how the nervous system recruits muscles to move) that cause pathological
walking ability are not well-understood. Second, these impairments can vary from
individual to individual such that “one-size-fits-all” rehabilitation approaches
produce only modest gains in walking ability. To overcome these gaps, this
research will use a combination of experimental motion capture and predictive
musculoskeletal computer simulation techniques to identify neuromuscular
impairments of walking ability. This project will provide fundamental knowledge
about neuromuscular control that is important for functional walking ability.
The knowledge gained will help guide rehabilitation interventions to improve
pathological walking. This project will also provide educational and research
opportunities for socioeconomic and educationally disadvantaged K-12 and
undergraduate students in the Appalachian region to learn how biomechanics can
improve human health, stimulating their interest and participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine the
causal relationship between neuromuscular generalization and functional walking
ability through predictive simulation techniques. If neuromuscular
generalization is identified as important for functional walking ability, which
is expected based on preliminary results, the predictive simulation framework
can be used to identify impairments in neuromuscular generalization and provide
a target for gait rehabilitation. To achieve the project’s objective, the
Research Plan is organized under two aims. The FIRST Aim is to characterize the
observed relationship between fastest achievable walking speed and neuromuscular
generalization across standing reactive balance and walking. The working
hypothesis that recruiting standing reactive balance motor modules during
walking enables an individual to walk at faster speeds will be tested in healthy
young adults, older adults with a history of falls, and stroke survivors.
Surface EMGs (electromyographs) will be measured from 12 muscles in the dominant
leg (both legs in stroke survivors) while tasks are performed on a split – belt
instrumented treadmill. Tasks include (a) standing quietly on a stationary
treadmill while being exposed to support-surface translation perturbations
through discrete movements of the treadmill belts (standing reactive balance),
(b) walking at a self-selected speed on the treadmill for 30 seconds and (c)
walking on the treadmill at the fastest speed that can be safely maintained for
30 seconds. Motor modules will be separately identified from the assembled EMG
data matrices from each task using non-negative matrix factorization. The SECOND
Aim is to demonstrate that increased neuromuscular generalization across
standing reactive balance and walking leads to higher maximum walking speed. The
working hypothesis that recruiting standing reactive balance motor modules
during walking enables an individual to walk at faster speeds will be tested
using predictive simulations driven by motor modules that maximize walking speed
using the data collected under Aim 1. A generic musculoskeletal model with 23
degrees of freedom and 46 muscles per side (OpenSim Gait 2392 model) will be
scaled to subject mass and dimensions. Experimentally observed motor modules
will be converted to simulated motor modules through solving the inverse-
dynamics based muscle redundancy problem. Walking simulations of single gait
cycles that are constrained by motor modules will be generated that track
observed motion from the self-selected and maximum walking trials using direct
collection in OpenSim. Identifying whether recruiting reactive balance motor
modules during walking enables walking at faster speeds will provide strong
evidence for neuromuscular generalization as a novel rehabilitation
target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.