* 2015008
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of AI Software to Capture and Identify Circulating Rare Cells in Lung Patients
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Yongjian Yu, Axon Dx LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2021
* USD 224,426.00

This broader impacts/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I NSF project is to
develop Artificial Intelligence (AI) software to identify circulating lung
cancer related cells efficiently and accurately. It is estimated that there will
be over 200,000 new cases of lung cancer in the US in 2020, driving the cost
above $166 billion. The current standard of care requires close monitoring of
these patients, with chest Computed Tomography (CT) scans taken every 6 weeks.
Patients also undergo pelvis CT scans concurrently if their cancer is determined
to be at later stages. The proposed technology will provide the clinician
additional data for early detection of lung cancer with a simple blood draw in a
clinical laboratory setting for immediate feedback to the patient and clinician,
thus avoiding more invasive procedures and radiation exposures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance liquid biopsy techniques
in R&amp;D clinical settings. This project’s novel imaging system’s ability to
identify the fluorescent tumor-derived cells will provide a more sensitive and
reliable methodology to detect early-stage disease and differentiate indolent
from aggressive lung cancer, with further potential to be integrated into lung
cancer screening programs. Utilizing advanced Artificial Intelligence (AI)
algorithms and world-class optical immunofluorescent detection methods, this
project’s fluorescent microscope will be an AI-driven image processing system.
This project provides an unprecedented solution for detecting low levels of rare
cells in a clinical setting through the combination of high resolution
multichannel optical imaging, proprietary fluorescent taggants and assays, and
state-of-the-art AI segmentation and classification
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.