* 2015013
* STTR Phase I:  Distance of Flight Mass Spectrometry for High Mass Ion Collection
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Steven Ray, SANTA FE QUANTUM SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project
will be a new instrument to study agents causing human disease and damage to the
environment. This technology enables better studies of viruses and large
chemicals for public health and life sciences research. This new capability will
also enable the study of interactions between proteins in the body, a critical
aspect of many diseases. In addition, this new instrument can be used for
continuous monitoring of drug and vaccine production to ensure high quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed STTR Phase I project focuses on the
development of a new type of mass spectrometry, known as distance-of-flight mass
spectrometry; and a new detector capable of detecting ultra-high molecular
weight ions. Conventional mass spectrometry detectors depend on high-velocity
collisions of the target ions on a small area of the detector, releasing an
electron from the collision surface for subsequent amplification. Unfortunately,
this strategy of ion detection fails for large ions. The proposed project will
incorporate a new type of mass spectrometer that spatially distributes ions
along an array of ion charge detectors according to their mass-to-charge ratio.
The approach has no upper mass limit to the ions that can be separated, and thus
is an optimum method to determine the mass of large ions. Further, by detecting
the ion charge directly as opposed to the impact event, the new approach is able
to detect massive ions. Having separate detectors arrayed by mass also enables
collection of the ions after analysis. When the new detector is developed and
incorporated into the mass spectrometer, the unique capabilities will be
demonstrated by analyzing micelles under development as drug delivery
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.