* 2015275
* Tunable catalytic surfaces synthesized and studied by in-situ methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Eli Stavitski, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,839.00

Research examining modification of oxide surfaces with nanostructure has
produced exciting materials for optical, mechanical, chemical, and other
applications. These nanostructured surfaces can accelerate the chemical
reactions used to produce fuel, enabling cheaper, more efficient, and more
environmentally-sound production. As such, this project stands to protect the
Nation's security through access to more affordable fuel sources. The project
will advance understanding of how aspects of the nanostructured surface
formation can facilitate the transformation of atmospheric emissions into fuels.
This project also seeks to integrate research and educational activities through
a combination of traditional and pioneering approaches. For example, the
investigator plans to introduce educational games and on-line learning tools
into undergraduate and high school courses. The effectiveness of efforts to
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM will be evaluated
through the on-line learning outcomes. Graduate students in the investigator's
"Materials Impact on the Environment" course will have the opportunity to
conduct pilot testing of self-cleaning catalytic coatings, which will be
deposited on on-campus solar panels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional methods
of controlling morphology and size distribution of nanoparticles have
significant drawbacks. For instance, capping and encapsulating agents are
usually difficult to remove, resulting in surface contamination, while physical
deposition methods are challenging to scale up. This project offers a unique
approach to forming nanostructured surfaces by establishing new structure-
property relations, where particle size, metal-oxide interfaces, and shape are
tuned by a relatively simple yet novel and scalable approach. Modulation of
reduction temperature, concentration, type of dopants, and the presence of
oxygen vacancies will enable control of particle size and morphology, which are
critical for achieving unique catalytic properties. By combining new in-situ
characterization techniques and theoretical methods based on machine learning
tunable surfaces, capable of high conversion of carbon dioxide to fuels, will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.