* 2015919
* I-Corps: Process Intensification in a Multi-Product Waste Polyolefin Refinery
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,06/30/2023
* David Shonnard, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a low-cost and energy-efficient conversion of mixed waste
plastics into an intermediate product that the petrochemical industry can
convert into new polymer resin. This new technology will revolutionize the
plastics recycling industry and will allow for closed-loop plastic material
flows. The process technology will improve recycling of polyethylene (PE) and
polypropylene (PP) plastics from materials recovery facilities (MRFs),
significant because PE and PP comprise over 50% of global plastics production
and post-consumer waste generation. The proposed process is modular and small
footprint so that it may be deployed over a wide range of scales to serve
municipalities of various population sizes. The products from this process may
be of great interest to petrochemical firms who are seeking solutions to
recycling and a circular economy for plastics. This project will explore
translation to help municipalities, counties, and states achieve higher mandated
recycle rates for PE and PP plastics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a novel waste plastics recycling process that
will enable a circular economy for olefin plastics, polyethylene and
polypropylene, and contribute to the solution of the global waste plastics
problem. The design of the proposed technology combines multiple functions into
each process unit, increasing energy efficiency and cost savings. The technology
is based on rapid conversion at elevated temperature in a reactor with precise
control over the molecular conversion mechanisms. In addition, the process may
generate a range of chemical products, such as monomers, aromatic intermediates,
and fuel-range liquid products substituting for petroleum naphtha, diesel, jet,
and gasoline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.