* 2015276
* NEURONEX: The fabric of the primate neocortex and the origin of mental representations. From transcriptomics to single neurons and neuronal networks.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Amy Arnsten, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 5,400,000.00

This award provides support for the US component of a NeuroNex Network
consisting of 15 research teams in the US, Canada, and Germany. This consortium
will address the molecular, cellular, and circuit mechanisms underlying working
memory in primates. This is fundamental to abstract thought and cognitive
ability. The central hypothesis to be tested is that there is an evolutionarily
driven expansion of visual connectivity in different regions of the brain and
along the visual processing pathway, and that this connectivity principal will
be more pronounced in macaques than marmosets. The research targets three
regions, reflecting three levels of the visual pathway. A long-lasting, far-
reaching impact involves leveraging work from this NeuroNex Network with other
BRAIN Initiative projects to enable acquisition and sharing of the new
knowledge. Future applications, even beyond the brain, of the knowledge and
tools developed here will give rise to data that address fundamental and novel
principles of complex self-organizing systems. The NeuroNex Network also
involves training the next generation, including through inter-laboratory and
fellow exchanges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NeuroNex Network integrates teams
of four Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs). The approach involves
characterizing neurons in each of three regions of the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (LPFC) and processing stage using genotyping and transcriptomics, and
then examining linkages to basic electrophysiological properties. These areas
also represent three stages of information processing along the primate cortical
pathways as well as in the evolution of cortical layers. It is hypothesized that
the functional, anatomical and molecular dependencies of neurons vary across
these regions, and that differences are prominent in macaques, and more subtle
in marmosets. The data are to be used to drive the development of computational
models. The first IRG takes an in vivo physiology approach using laminar
recordings. The second IRG addresses in vitro electrophysiology and neuronal
circuitry. The third IRG is a molecular characterization using transcriptomics
and immuno electron microscopy. The fourth IRG takes a neuroinformatics approach
that combines these data to inform computational models of cortical
architectures that mimic the single neurons and population dynamics measured in
the first IRG. This IRG will also create a centralized resource to assess data
across levels and IRGs. This project is co-funded by Emerging Frontiers in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging
Science and Engineering Research (CESER) program within the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.