* 2015403
* Secure-by-Construction Controller Synthesis for Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ashutosh Trivedi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 387,640.00

This project advocates a paradigm shift in the development of safety- and
security-critical cyber-physical systems (CPS) by proposing a secure-by-
construction controller synthesis framework that generalizes existing correct-
by-construction synthesis methods by considering privacy and safety properties
simultaneously. CPS are the technological backbone of the increasingly
interconnected and smart world where design fault or security vulnerability can
be catastrophic. Self-driving cars, wearable and implantable medical devices,
smart infrastructure and connected communities are some of the high-profile
examples that underscore privacy and safety concerns of modern CPS. In the last
decade, safety concerns have received considerable attention in the design of
CPS, while security analysis is left as an afterthought for the later stages.
This existing paradigm results in costly and lengthy development of CPS due to
the high cost of post-facto security verification and validation. The proposed
research lays the foundations for safe and secure deployments of CPS
applications including self-driving cars, wearable and implantable medical
devices, and autonomous drones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed secure-by-
construction controller synthesis methodology is through a general scheme called
symbolic controller synthesis. In this methodology, the safety and privacy
requirements for the system are described using formal specifications expressed
as linear temporal logic formulae or omega-regular languages. Then, a finite
abstraction of the continuous control system is constructed in such a way that
safety and privacy properties are preserved over the abstraction. Moreover, a
secure-by-construction controller designed on the finite abstraction can be
refined into a hybrid controller enforcing given formal specifications over the
original system. This project develops algorithmic techniques and computational
tools for constructing discrete controllers guaranteeing both safety and privacy
properties, which are then automatically refined as hybrid controllers for the
original concrete systems. To tackle the computational complexity associated
with symbolic control schemes, the project proposes a divide and conquer
strategy to scale secure-by-construction controller synthesis for CPS by
combining compositional synthesis techniques from computer science (e.g. assume-
guarantee rules) with those from control theory (e.g. small-gain theorems). The
proposed theoretical results will be made available to the practicing control
engineers as an end-to-end tool implementing a design flow for secure-by-
construction controller synthesis for large-scale CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.