* 2015669
* Creating Heterogeneous Organic Amines for Glucose Isomerization to Fructose
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nicholas Brunelli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 359,290.00

This project targets the design of heterogeneous catalysts for the conversion of
biomass to chemicals and fuels. The researchers will study catalyst structure
and performance aspects related to catalyst stability, activity, and product
selectivity. The project will support transition to a clean-energy economy by
improving the design of catalysts for manufacturing fuels and chemicals from
bio-renewable feedstocks rather than fossil sources. The project will involve an
educational outreach component that will seek to increase participation of women
and underrepresented students in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will
investigate the synthesis-structure-reactivity of aminosilanes immobilized on
heterogeneous silica supports for the isomerization of glucose to fructose. A
series of heterogeneous catalysts containing different aminosilane designs will
be tested to determine how the structure of the aminosilane can be modified to
increase catalyst stability. Identifying a stable aminosilane structure will
have broad implications for catalytic materials for all liquid-phase chemistry.
Further, the work will examine how the reaction selectivity can be increased
through modifying the reaction conditions, including the concentration of
glucose. The complex reaction mixtures will be analyzed using advanced mass
spectrometry techniques to determine how glucose concentration impacts the
species formed. Finally, spectroscopy techniques including nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) will be used
to investigate amine-silanol interactions. These amine-silanol interactions have
been implicated in reducing the activity of aminosilica materials. The
spectroscopy will provide insights on how the structure of the aminosilane
impacts amine-silanol interactions. The impact of the project can be substantial
since it has the potential to provide new methods to create heterogeneous
catalysts for aqueous phase reactions. The project involves a diverse team of
students that will be trained in advanced catalytic material synthesis,
characterization, and testing. More broadly, the project will broaden
participation from underrepresented groups in STEM programs through interfacing
with several existing programs at Ohio State University to demonstrate a
classroom module to elementary school children to inspire future generations to
pursue education in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.