* 2015553
* Travel Grants for Research Presentations by Undergraduate Students at the Joint Mathematics Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* T. Christine Stevens, American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

For a period of five years, this award will enable undergraduates to present
their mathematical research at the world's largest mathematics conference, the
annual Joint Mathematics Meetings (JMM), beginning with JMM 2021 on January 6-9,
2021 in Washington, D.C. Presenting their work at a national conference can be a
life-changing experience for undergraduate researchers, giving them the
opportunity to discuss their work with peers, graduate students, and established
mathematicians who share their excitement about mathematics. Participating in
the wide-ranging program of the JMM enhances their mathematical growth,
increases their familiarity with the mathematics profession, and helps them
develop a sense of belonging to the mathematical sciences community, thus making
them more likely to pursue a mathematically based career or graduate study in
the mathematical sciences. This sense of “belonging in math” is particularly
crucial for students from underrepresented groups. By contributing to the
development of a diverse and mathematically skilled workforce, this project will
advance the Nation’s ability to meet current and future challenges.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Held in January each year, the JMM typically attracts more than 6000
registrants, including about 800 undergraduates. Over a five-year period, these
grants will help about 940 students to present posters and papers about their
research and will enable them to participate in the many other opportunities
that the meeting offers, including a Graduate School Fair. In order to be
eligible for travel grants, undergraduates must be enrolled a US-based
institution and must be presenting their work in either a research-focused paper
session of the American Mathematical Society or in the Student Poster Session at
JMM. The latter will be organized by the Mathematical Association of America at
JMM 2021, and thereafter by the mathematics honor society Pi Mu Epsilon. The
website for JMM 2021 is
http://jointmathematicsmeetings.org/jmm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.