* 2015068
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid-scanning Ultrafast Imaging Microscope for Material Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Eric Martin, MONSTR SENSE TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop and demonstrate a novel imaging microscopy
technique for next-generation semiconductor defect inspection and material
characterization. The technique is based on ultrafast spectroscopy and is
uniquely able to measure functional material parameters over a rapidly raster-
scanned image. The semiconductor industry relies on process control to maintain
high yield and to prevent the propagation of faults through the manufacturing
process. Semiconductor inspection represents a market of nearly $5 B in size and
generates an estimated 15% of spending in the semiconductor industry. As the
materials used in semiconductor devices evolve, so too must the inspection
techniques. Many next-generation materials for various applications, such as
solar energy and displays, are not pristine single crystals, and their
inspection requires new technologies. The proposed project will advance the
development of the next-generation materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is to investigate translation of real-time
imaging via ultrafast spectroscopy. The primary challenge of this project is
that ultrafast spectroscopy scans at a single point typically take seconds to
minutes, and a useful imaging system must raster a point excitation over a wide
area containing thousands of pixels. This Phase I effort will develop a method
and metrics for this technique, using images with substantially fewer samples.
The project will explore methods to measure trapped states and defects that
degrade semiconductor functionality. Performance goals include accelerating the
speed of single-point spectroscopy by two orders of magnitude. Longer-term goals
include integration of ultrafast spectroscopy with microscopy for materials
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.