* 2015217
* WORKSHOP: Resilient Supply of Critical Minerals; Rolla, MO; May 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Angela Lueking, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,886.00

In 2018, the Department of the Interior, in response to a Presidential Executive
Order, listed 35 critical minerals whose unreliable supply poses risks to our
nation's economy and defense. Subsequently, on June 4, 2019, the U.S. Department
of Commerce released the report "A Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and
Reliable Supplies of Critical Minerals" that outlines several Calls to Action
that, if executed, will reduce the vulnerability of the United States to
critical mineral supply disruptions. This grant is in support of an
interdisciplinary national two-day workshop that will bring together
stakeholders from academia, industry, and government to comprehensively address
these calls. Themed topical sessions will discuss the resilient supply of
critical minerals from cross-disciplinary, convergent perspectives, including
mining engineering, extractive metallurgy, separations, policy, and others.
National leaders in their respective fields will give keynote presentations,
followed by TED-type talks, panel discussions, and breakout sessions. The
breakout sessions will be structured for interdisciplinary engagement, to
provide a convergent perspective that includes economic, technical, social, and
policy aspects. Research road maps will be created that reflect the cross-
disciplinary nature of approaches required to enhance supply resilience. The
workshop findings will be summarized and disseminated via a publically-available
workshop report. The workshop will be held at the Missouri University of Science
and Technology in Rolla, Missouri, on May 27-28, 2020, and will be followed by
an optional field trip on May 29, 2019 that will highlight the critical mineral
potential of the Midwestern USA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will help
nurture a budding national community with expertise in critical mineral supply
resilience, spanning academia, industry, and government. Travel grants, for
students and early-career researchers in particular, will help build a community
that spans generations and will enhance the workshop's lasting impact. The
development of a healthy and active critical mineral community is vital to the
national economy and security because the United States is currently import-
reliant for 31 of the 35 commodities on the critical minerals list. This
workshop will generate insights into how U.S. universities can meet the
projected future demands for the nation's critical minerals workforce,
particularly in rural areas which are most likely to contain undiscovered
resources. Therefore, the workshop will provide a basis for helping rural
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.