* 2015642
* Topological Materials and Electron Correlations
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Matthew Foster, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2022
* USD 7,000.00

The Condensed Matter and Materials Theory and Condensed Matter Physics Programs
jointly contribute support to this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last couple of decades, the
mathematical concept of "topology" has emerged as a new organizing principle in
the science of materials, one that can determine, for example, whether the
surface of a solid is metallic or electrically insulating. Topology refers to
global properties that stay the same when a material is perturbed locally.
Topological materials properties remain robust, for instance, against the
presence of local imperfections or dirt. The interactions between electrons in
topological materials can be weak or strong, and, because the methods used to
study these two classes differ, two communities of scientists have been working
on parallel tracks. The breadth of the field calls for interactions among the
communities. This workshop aims to bring together top experts from these two
communities to highlight the recent achievements in each area and to provide a
forum for cross-talk between the subjects. Rice University's Rice Center for
Quantum Materials will host a two-day workshop on this topic, bringing together
top experts and junior researchers from around the globe who probe
experimentally candidate materials, develop theoretically the phenomenology of
topological materials, and understand the role of strong correlations. The key
distinguishing feature of this workshop will be to bring together the weakly and
strongly correlated communities interested in topological materials. This will
address an acute need to understand and explore the intersection between
topological matter and strong
correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological matter in weakly correlated electrons
has seen major advances in recent years. Examples include the discovery of
"higher-order" topological insulators and their potential experimental
realization, Weyl semimetals in magnetically ordered materials, and explorations
of topological states of magnons. Meanwhile, rapid progress has taken place
during the last couple of years in exploring electronic topology of strongly
correlated systems. Examples include the discovery of strongly correlated Weyl
semimetals in heavy-Fermion materials and progress in the search for signatures
of topological states in Kondo insulators and iron-based superconductors. For
the most part, the two directions have been developing with very limited
crosstalk. Now is a particularly opportune time to foster active dialogue
between the two communities. The workshop aims to realize this goal by bringing
together key players interested in topological materials from the communities of
both weak and strong correlations. To enhance the opportunities for crosstalk,
it will feature a variety of materials, ranging from weakly interacting systems
involving sp-electrons, strongly correlated compounds based on d- and f-
electrons, engineered structures including graphene layers, liquid 3He and
ultracold atoms. The topics have been chosen with a view to both the level of
excitement and the pace of advances that have been made in recent years, as well
as by the potential for cross fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
permission from the speakers, the slides from the talks will be compiled and
made available for download in pdf form from the meeting website following the
conclusion of the meeting. The slides will include the summary outcomes of the
group discussions. The participants will be encouraged to use these as a
springboard for graduate education about these problems at their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.