* 2015710
* Physics-Based Probabilistic Prognostics for Battery Health Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Simon Laflamme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 384,825.00

The objective of this project is to create a physics-based probabilistic
prognostics platform for lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries. Li-ion battery
technology is playing an increasingly important role in realizing wide-scale
adoption of hybrid and electric vehicles, and renewable energy sources.
Successful development of the proposed platform will produce major advancements
in extending battery life while ensuring battery safety. Advances in energy
storage management could reduce the costs and promote the wide-scale adoption of
hybrid and electric vehicles and renewable energy sources, which in turn will
reduce the dependence of our nation on foreign sources of energy. The research
findings will be disseminated to the battery industry, main stakeholders, and
decision makers through collaboration with an industry leader in battery safety.
An inclusive education and outreach plan will help (1) train a globally
competitive workforce in battery reliability modeling by incorporating research
findings into classroom teaching, (2) provide research experiences to
undergraduate and K-12 students with an emphasis on increasing the participation
of women and underrepresented minorities, and (3) raise public awareness about
battery reliability and safety by giving talks to the local communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the proposed prognostics platform is its
ability to integrate mechanistic degradation analysis into remaining useful life
prediction using probabilistic models. More specifically, model-based smoothing
and learning are adopted, in conjunction with bias-corrected half-cell models,
to infer the degrees of degradation from noisy voltage and current measurements.
This is followed by physics-based prognostics, where model-based tracking is
used to predict future degradation trajectories and remaining useful life. The
resulting prognostics approach leverages a combination of physical knowledge and
sensor data to achieve gains in prediction accuracy and robustness. The proposed
platform will advance the field of battery health management by furthering
understanding on: (1) how to validate mechanistic half-cell models using
relatively few expensive experiments; (2) how to predict the long-term
degradation using only early-life data; (3) the role of physics in designing
prognostics approaches; and (4) the coupling effects of degradation modes on
capacity fade and failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.