* 2015325
* Robust Post-Selection Inference with Application to Subgroup Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jingshen Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 220,000.00

Researchers have been facing challenges from high-dimensional data that contain
many different characteristics for each subject. For example, biomedical
scientists analyze tens of thousands of genomes to determine the cause of
disease and find the most promising treatments; social scientists study
differential policy impacts by leveraging vast amounts of personal data gathered
from social media. This project lays out two lines of research aimed at
developing valid statistical inference in this challenging environment. The
insights and tools developed from this project would contribute to the
advancement of a wide variety of other disciplines, including economics,
education, health care, and biomedical sciences. In addition, graduate students
will be engaged in the project to study the statistical guarantees and to
develop relevant software packages for the research. Since the project develops
modern statistical methodologies with substantial applications, it will be
suitable for training graduate students with a broad range of
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two research problems and
seeks to provide insights, theory and tools for more informed decision making in
high dimensions. The first problem focuses on studying the treatment effect
heterogeneity. Quantification and characterization of heterogeneous treatment
effects play an increasingly important role in evaluating the efficacy of social
programs and medical treatments in the presence of high-dimensional covariates.
In particular, the research will develop efficient procedures for estimating
heterogeneous quantile treatment effects and subgroup average treatment effects
via covariate balancing. The second problem focuses on studying the validity and
invalidity of data splitting for conducting inference with high-dimensional
data. The project will address the issue of “random-splitting bias” in
estimating the regression coefficients when the number of dummy/imbalanced
variables is sizable. To overcome this challenge, the project will develop a
guided data splitting framework that splits the data into more balanced halves.
Because the usage of random data splitting goes beyond post-selection inference,
the framework developed and the possible solutions derived from it are broadly
applicable to many data-driven investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.