* 2015205
* Cross-Discipline Approach to Quantum Computing in High Schools: Building towards a Quantum Computing Workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Mark Hannum, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 03/31/2022
* USD 99,996.00

The National Quantum Initiative Act was signed in December 2018 to ensure the
United States remains competitive in technology and quantum information science.
Quantum information science is fundamental to technology (e.g., cell phones),
national defense, navigation (e.g., GPS), energy systems, banking security, and
more. It is critical for the future workforce to understand basic principles of
quantum mechanics and exposure to that knowledge should begin in grades K-12.
Currently, most U.S. educators lack content background and confidence in
teaching quantum information science. Furthermore, not all K-12 students take
physics and even fewer will major in physics in college. Educators who recognize
the relevance of quantum mechanics may not have adequate resources, curriculum,
or content background to effectively introduce or teach quantum information
science to students. This award supports the phased development of quantum
information science curricula through summer workshops, communities of practice,
and a conference of stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports three
activities: (1) Development and implementation of summer workshops for teachers
that focus on a cross-disciplinary approach to introducing quantum information
science to high school teachers and their students. The workshops will utilize a
matrix formalism for two-state spin systems and then use computer notebooks for
hands-on computation of linear systems, thus integrating mathematics, physics,
and computation. (2) Building a community of practice. This will include
teachers engaged in the design and deployment of both science content and
pedagogical content as they create lessons and curricular materials for their
students. Evaluations of the first two activities will be conducted to explore
the content knowledge growth of teachers and the barriers they encounter. (3)
Convening a conference of stakeholders. This conference will be a venue to
articulate current efforts, describe lessons learned, explore the current and
future workforce needs of industry partners, and chart an organized and
research-driven pathway for improvement in K-12 quantum information
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's Discovery
Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the Directorate for Education &amp; Human
Resources. DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. This project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research, the
Division of Physics and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.