* 2015291
* Statistical Estimation from Decoupled Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Jonathan Niles-Weed, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 249,999.00

Modern statistics is defined by the fact that a great deal more data is
available to practitioners than ever before. This is particularly the case in
the sciences, where advances in experimental methodology across fields such as
biology, chemistry, and physics have led to an explosion of different types of
data, collected by different measurement apparatuses at potentially different
times. Moreover, it may be difficult or impossible to connect data points from
different experiments. For example, a chemist may apply two different
measurement techniques to the same batch of molecules to obtain high-quality
data about the whole batch, but it may be challenging to track the identities of
particular molecules between measurements. The statistician who wishes to make
the best possible inferences is faced with the difficult problem of how to
integrate the data from different sources to conduct a unified analysis. Despite
the ubiquity of this problem, rigorous statistical analyses of procedures
designed to work with decoupled data are rare. The main goal of this project is
to develop new tools for performing estimation tasks with decoupled data and to
establish the fundamental limits of such techniques. This project will have
impact on scientific and statistical methodology in both research and industrial
settings.The graduate student support will be used on interdisciplinary research
and writing codes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate optimal
rates of estimation for regression problems given access to decoupled data, and
to establish potential trade-offs. Several intermediate regimes will be
considered, for example, where the experimenter has access to many independent
batches of shuffled data or to data with partial coupling information. This
project will quantify the statistical price for learning with decoupled data via
tight minimax bounds. This research is also aimed at establishing when minimax
statistical procedures can be made computationally efficient, and investigating
the possible presence of information theoretic-computational gaps in optimal
rates of estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.