* 2015680
* Hydro-ML: Symposium on Big Data Machine Learning in Hydrology and Water Resources; Pennsylvania, May 25-29, 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Chaopeng Shen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 48,689.00

Artificial intelligence has the potential to impact every facet of our society.
Machine learning, an important component of artificial intelligence, is
revolutionizing much of what we do today. Deep learning is a relatively new
subset of machine learning that has tremendous potential to improve our
capabilities for industrial applications and scientific discovery. The use of
artificial intelligence in hydrology, and deep learning in particular, can bring
tremendous benefits to society. Hydrologic academics and professionals, however,
have not historically taken advantage of artificial intelligence. While there
have been some workshops and gathering opportunities for hydrologists interested
in deep learning, there have been no dedicated workshops to build a community
that can leverage common datasets, methods, and goals. A Machine Learning in
Water Workshop (“Hydro-ML”) is proposed to demystify artificial intelligence for
a wider audience in hydrology, build dedicated expertise and collaborative
potential through training sessions and hackathons. Building a hydrological
machine learning community will enable sharing of resources, organization of
competitions stimulating an expansion of the field, and encourage collaboration
among academics and professionals to solve large challenges. Special attention
will be paid to participants' diversity both in terms of gender and race, which
has previously been identified as an issue in artificial intelligence and
hydrology. The topics covered by the symposium will be defined through
solicitations to the community at large, with the intention of stimulating
broader impacts in the hydrologic community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hydro-ML
symposium will build a collaborative community focusing on machine learning in
hydrology. It will consist of four types of sessions: research presentations,
breakout discussion forums, deep learning tutorials and hackathons, and
community-building activities. Specific sessions will discuss forward-looking,
overarching questions that will be solicited from the participants prior to the
meeting. These symposium activities will provide the foundation to build
collective efforts in novel dataset identification, preparations for machine
learning-in-hydrology competitions, and discussion of physically-informed
machine learning. The symposium will be widely advertised through diverse
channels, including hydrology newsletters and mailing lists, targeted
communications to underrepresented, non-profit, and industry groups, and
publications aimed at the general public. The organizing committee will
encourage participation from diverse and underrepresented communities, and
welcome those who are new to artificial intelligence. The outcomes from the
symposium include collective publications serving as positional statements by
the community (including journal papers and white papers), detailed plans for
hydrologic machine learning competitions, and technical deep learning tutorials
for audience with varied deep learning experience, ranging from newcomers to
intermediate users. The symposium’s events will be aimed at building a diverse
community that enables advancements in hydrology which will benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.