* 2015994
* Processes Underlying the Rise of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Veronica Perez Rodriguez, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 188,339.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to global urbanism studies aimed at
understanding what sociopolitical strategies can foster or undermine societal
stability and urban resilience. This project explores the different
sociopolitical strategies used, first to establish and then maintain social
cohesion in an early urban center. As urbanism scholars seek to find ways to
apply the knowledge gained from archaeological research, it is becoming clear
that successful urbanism not only incorporates sound environmental planning and
urban food production, but also sage sociopolitical maneuvering and stable forms
of social organization. These sociopolitical strategies and the activities that
result from them leave their mark on cities, their layouts, and their public
spaces. This project will undertake the methodological challenge of
investigating how different sociopolitical strategies can be identified
archaeologically by investigating the activities that took place in urban public
spaces, plazas, and assess how the greater public benefited or were alienated
from these spaces and the activities in them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will include a geophysical survey of a monumental area at a city that first
flourished but then was largely abandoned. The team will use the geophysical
survey results to guide shovel testing and targeted excavations to
systematically collect plaza floor samples for chemical analysis and associated
artifacts and burials for archaeological study. Through the proposed excavations
and analyses the research team will test whether the plazas served as areas for
market exchange, craft production, public food processing and feasting, communal
burial, and public ritual activities. These processes leave distinctive artifact
and chemical signatures in the archaeological record. The goal will be to
investigate the activities that took place in the plazas and test previous
findings that suggest that construction and expansion of such a public
monumental area occurred as the city’s leadership shifted towards a more
corporate form of governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.