* 2015823
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Urbanism and Long-Term Technological Change in Material Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Jeffrey Blomster, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 25,200.00

This doctoral dissertation project will utilize geoarchaeological data to
advance our knowledge of past people’s relationship with the environment and its
natural resources, particularly during periods of significant sociopolitical
transformations. In addition to generating new comparative data of ancient
ceramics to advance archaeological knowledge of long-term sociopolitical change
in prehistory, this project will offer robust datasets to better understand the
social impacts of raw material procurement and use in modern and prehistoric
communities. The project will foster collaborative relationships between
scholars and students of various academic disciplines, such as geology and
materials science, and provide advanced research and training for archaeology
students and an underrepresented female minority scholar in STEM. The
researchers will also promote interest in local cultural heritage through public
outreach and collaborations with modern communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon recent literature on early urban societies by scholars who
call for more nuanced understandings of urbanism and its effects on daily life.
Urbanization in prehistory involved many changes to people’s everyday lives that
enabled them to live in dense, socially differentiated settlements. This project
aims to better understand changes to raw material procurement and use in ancient
crafting traditions during the transition to an urban society. It is centered on
long-term technological changes in pottery production at two sites. The
researchers will perform two complementary forms of compositional analysis –
Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) and petrography (optical
mineralogy) – on ceramic collections from these sites. The compositional data
will offer insight into how significant sociopolitical change in the region
impacted people’s access to and use of raw materials for craft production. These
fine-grained analyses will ultimately offer new geochemical and mineralogical
data of pottery from both sites to examine the relationship between early
urbanism and long-term technological change in ancient crafting
traditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.