* 2015237
* DMREF: Development of DMREF Website
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 218,818.00

Non-technical description: This project will develop and maintain a public
website for the National Science Foundation's (NSFs) Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program. The DMREF program has
built a solid base of materials research that has been accelerated through the
use of the computationally-led and data-driven principles promoted by the
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). One of the goals of MGI is to render the
digital outputs of DMREF funded projects available and useful to the community.
In order to increase the impact of DMREF research, it is critical to increase
its visibility through a public website. This website will disseminate the
research of the program to the scientific community and the general public. The
website will contain a database of DMREF teams and their research topics.
Highlights from each of these teams will also be made available through the
website. Activities and conferences related to the DMREF program will be posted
to the site and archived. Training materials will be made available to
facilitate the interdisciplinary training of students and thus contribute to the
development of a modern workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
The goals of the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) program at the National Science Foundation (NSF) are consistent with the
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) which accelerates the pace of materials
research through computationally led and data driven methods. This highly
interdisciplinary program coordinates activities with MGI-related efforts funded
by other federal agencies. As such, there is a need to connect PIs and their
research in real-time. Webpages have become a common tool for conveying
information in the modern era. This project will develop and maintain a website
for the DMREF program that will contain information about the DMREF teams and
their research. In order to increase the impact of future DMREF research, it is
critical to increase its visibility through a public website. This website will
enable connection between PIs that will lead to the formation of new teams to
address contemporary materials research problems. A goal of the MGI and DMREF is
to accelerate the transition of materials through the materials development
continuum from discovery to deployment. This website will facilitate this
process by rendering DMREF research visible to potential industrial partners.
The website will also enable students from all levels of education to learn
about the DMREF program and provide resources to enable them to prepare for
future careers in academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.