* 2015201
* CBET-EPSRC: Enhancing the CSMHyK fluid dynamics calculations via the inclusion of a stochastic model of hydrate nucleation, agglomeration and growth
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Carolyn Koh, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 379,813.00

The abundance of natural gas hydrate deposits across the world could provide
abundant energy resources for the future. Natural gas hydrates are solid
structures formed by water and gas that can block oil &amp; gas pipelines, which
can lead to pipeline ruptures, causing spills and environmental disasters,
production interruptions, and even loss of life. The ability to predict gas
hydrate formation and fluid dynamics based on molecular-level models has the
potential to revolutionize the strategies used for gas hydrate control in oil
and gas pipelines, as well as other gas hydrate energy applications. The
predictive capability of gas hydrate fluid dynamics models is currently lacking
due to the inability to fundamentally model the timescales for hydrate
formation. The principle aim of the project is to develop a kinetic molecular
model to predict gas hydrate formation times based on a synergistic experimental
and molecular modeling campaign, leading to the ability to predict
quantitatively gas hydrate formation in pipelines. The project is also focused
on inclusion of under-represented minority students in STEM disciplines, via
outreach activities that target students at all stages of development, industry
engagement, and state-of-the-art web-based materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to quantify the rate-limiting mechanisms in gas hydrate
formation to provide a predictive fluid dynamics model for gas hydrate
formation. Identification of which mechanisms of hydrate formation (i.e.
nucleation, growth, agglomeration, adhesion) is rate-limiting under different
scenarios remains unknown, and yet must be overcome in order to have a
predictive fluid dynamics model. This knowledge gap will be filled by the four
main aims of the project: (1) obtain free energy barriers representative of gas
hydrate growth, agglomeration and adhesion; (2) assess the reliability of (1)
with in-situ micromechanical force and film growth measurements; (3) develop a
computationally efficient stochastic kinetic Monte Carlo model that incorporates
information from (1) and (2); (4) incorporate the outcomes from (3) into the
transient fluid dynamics model and validate this predictive stochastic model
against flow-loop experiments. This approach will provide a potential game-
changing improvement to the fluid dynamics simulation model and molecular-based
predictions of hydrate formation in pipelines. This research was funded under
the NSF Engineering – UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
opportunity NSF 20-510.” Co-PIs included Alberto Striolo and Michail Stamatakis
at the University College of London.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.