* 2015980
* Conference on Standards for Interlinear Glossed Texts in Related Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Xian Zhang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,330.00

Data formats and annotation standards vary widely for transcribed and translated
linguistic data. This means the data cannot be readily mined for hypothesis
testing and typological discovery. The University of North Texas will host a
meeting of linguistic experts working with genetically closely related languages
to explore consensus building on shared annotation standards for Interlinear
Glossed Texts (IGT). IGT is a popular output of documentation projects and
present language data with morpheme, word, and clause translation. This data
format is a powerful way to discover and illustrate grammatical description.
Three sessions at the conference will feature experts’ conversation on:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Session 1: Standards and procedures for the creation of
Interlinear Gloss Texts (IGT) &lt;br/&gt;Session 2: A generalized ontology for
annotating linguistic concepts for related languages &lt;br/&gt;Session 3:
Metadata for linguistic concepts in digital and legacy archival materials
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expert recommendations of an advisory board and conference
participants will be documented in a white paper. The white paper will focus on
lessons learned including: the power of cross corpora comparison for grammatical
analysis, reuse of archived data through improved metadata, and incorporating
information of legacy data into current investigations for improved analysis and
results. Recordings, presentations, and discussion will be archived at the
University of North Texas Digital Library. Two graduate students will gain
experience in academic professionalism. One of the graduate students will also
gain knowledge of many aspects of grammar, language documentation, language
annotation, and language archiving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.