* 2015025
* MetaQuantum: Hybrid Plasmonic-Photonic Meta-Structures for Quantum Information Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Alexandra Boltasseva, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Photons, which are quantum particles of light, are one of the most promising
platforms for the emerging quantum information science and technology (QIST)
applications including quantum communication, computing and sensing. As photons
travel long distances without inference and at the ultimate speed, the field of
quantum photonics seeks to enable quantum devices for QIST using photons. The
goal of this project is to produce quantum photonic structures and devices that
can be integrated on a chip for future applications in quantum computing and
communication links. As part of the effort, we will address several challenges,
such as the fact that quantum states are hard to preserve, particularly at room
temperatures, and that quantum systems can be limited in speed due to photons
loss, that is absorption. We aim to overcome these limitations by developing
meta-devices, which are nanoscale structures utilizing metallic thin films and
so-called plasmonic nanoparticles that can uniquely enhance emission from
quantum light sources. We will also explore the realization of hybrid devices
that incorporate both meta-structures and conventional optical components. We
will employ machine learning algorithms to aid in advance structure designs and
quantum measurements. &lt;br/&gt;Due to unique properties of photons as quantum
information carriers, namely weak interaction with matter and propagation at the
speed of light, quantum photonics has emerged as one of the most promising
enabling approaches for quantum information science and technology (QIST)
platforms. The goal of the project is to overcome fundamental limitations that
conventional quantum nanophotonic structures are facing, which include slow
operation, optical loss, and fast decoherence rates in matter at room
temperature. This effort will address the critical need to develop efficient,
low loss, ultra-fast (THz rates) and compact on-chip quantum photonic devices by
investigating both theoretically and experimentally strongly enhanced, highly
controllable light-matter interactions in the quantum regime in nanometer-scale
plasmonic (metal-based) structures and metamaterials. This project will merge
nanoplasmonics with artificial-intelligence (AI) to realize hybrid plasmonic-
photonic meta-structures for room-temperature quantum systems that can operate
at THz speeds and offer a small footprint and unprecedented functionality. The
program objectives are to create a fundamentally new framework for realization
of advanced photonic QIST components via (1) theoretical studies of quantum
emitters coupled to plasmonic meta-structures; (2) demonstration of plasmonic
speed-up of quantum processes and exploration of hybrid meta-structures,
including single-photon sources, deterministic multi-photon gates and quantum
frequency converters; and (3) development of AI-assisted design, integration and
characterization of quantum devices. This program will advance the emerging QIST
technologies and expected to generate a significant industry interest in the
fields of quantum information and quantum sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.