* 2015285
* Complexity of High-Dimensional Statistical Models: An Information-Based Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ming Yuan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With big data come bigger goals – many modern statistical applications not only
involve large datasets that may offer new insights but also require deciphering
highly intricate relationships among a large number of variables, often
characterized by very complex and high-dimensional functions. As more data are
acquired, these functions inevitably become more complex. Oftentimes the most
fundamental challenge for these applications is how to quantify the complexity
of such tasks and learn these functions from data in an efficient way, both
statistically and computationally. Despite impressive progress made in recent
years, the current approach towards this goal is limited by the discrete nature
of the classical notion of computational complexity and is not suitable for
statistical problems that are continuous. This project aims to develop an
information-based approach that better accounts for both statistical and
computational efficiencies. This new framework of complexity is expected to
offer insights into the potential trade-off between statistical and
computational efficiencies and to reveal the role of experimental design in
alleviating computational burden. The project provides training for graduate
students through involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
nonparametric techniques based solely on smoothness are known to suffer from the
so-called "curse of dimensionality." But in many scientific and engineering
applications, the underlying high-dimensional object may have additional
structures which, if appropriately accounted for, could help lift this barrier
and allow for efficient methods to handle it. This project aims to develop a
coherent framework to quantify the complexity of high dimensional models that
appropriately accounts for both statistical accuracy and computational cost and
helps better understand the role of these additional structures. The project
will use this notion of complexity to examine several common yet notoriously
difficult high-dimensional nonparametric regression problems: one based solely
on smoothness, another based on smoothness and sparsity, and finally, one based
on low-rank tensors. The exercise is designed to reveal interesting
relationships between statistical and computational aspects of these problems
and lead to the development of novel and optimal sampling and estimation
strategies. The research will develop the new framework of complexity in more
general statistical contexts as well and investigate its role in characterizing
statistically and computationally optimal inference schemes. This will be
achieved by developing new statistical methods and computational algorithms,
theoretical study of their performance and fundamental limits, and the
development of related mathematical tools and computational
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.