* 2015154
* SBIR Phase I:  Predictive and Computational Technologies for the Mortgage Industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Alex Papanicolaou, INTELLIGENT FINANCIAL MACHINES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 223,820.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from providing mortgage market participants such as lenders,
servicers, insurers, investors, rating agencies, government sponsored
enterprises, and regulators with integrated deep learning systems that offer
actionable predictions of borrower, portfolio, security, and market behavior of
unprecedentedly high accuracy and low latency at scale. The systems will enable
these organizations to identify valuable opportunities, reduce losses, and
improve staff utilization while dramatically lowering compute costs in a $2
billion annual mortgage decision and risk analytics market. Wide adoption will
boost the performance of the American housing-finance system, benefiting
homeowners and the broader population through lowering borrowing costs,
expanding access to credit, and reducing the risk of future financial crises.
The Phase I project focuses on developing transformative computational
algorithms that make comprehensive deep learning predictions available in real
time, at a fraction of the cost of existing computational technologies. It
yields new insights into how computational algorithms can significantly enhance
the benefits of AI prediction systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address the core technical
challenge associated with the development of powerful deep learning systems for
measuring risk and identifying opportunities in the mortgage industry. This
challenge is the construction of novel and transformative asymptotic-
approximation algorithms to run in real time, rather than the hours or days
prior technology requires. Examples of such applications include measuring the
risks of large pools of mortgages over long horizons and the risks of mortgage
securities backed by such pools. The dramatic running time gains offered by
these algorithms are the key to harnessing the unprecedented predictive accuracy
of deep learning models of individual borrower behavior. The key objectives of
the proposed project are to develop a large-pool asymptotic approximation
approach that offers run-time guarantees for deep learning models, and to
construct efficient numerical schemes for implementing the resulting algorithms
in a cloud environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.