* 2015849
* Collaborative Research: Near-infrared light-controlled beta-cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Emmanouhl Tzanakakis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Diabetes is a chronic disease afflicting over 30 million people in the United
States. Both type 1 (childhood onset) and type 2 (adult onset) diabetes are
associated with the deficiency or impairment in beta-cells in the pancreas.
These are the only cells in the body that secrete insulin, an essential hormone
for blood glucose regulation. Engineered insulin-producing cells can
reconstitute the impaired pancreatic beta-cell function, however, the large
number of required cells poses challenges on the implantation device size, and
supply of nutrients and oxygen, which results in rapid deterioration of
implanted cells. This project aims to enhance insulin production in engineered
beta-cells via optogenetic means, i.e., using a combination of genetics and
optics. Human beta cells will be genetically engineered to produce more insulin
when activated by near-infrared window (NIRW) light. NIRW light penetrates deep
through tissues and can reach transplanted beta-cells better than light of other
wavelengths. The enhanced function of beta-cells means that fewer cells need to
be transplanted to correct high blood glucose. Once developed, the technique
will be tested in a mouse model of diabetes. The knowledge generated will inform
the development of the next generation of technologies for efficient diabetes
treatments. Educational activities, which are intertwined with the proposed
research, will provide ample training opportunities for a new generation of high
school, undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. The knowledge and
associated technologies generated through this work will be disseminated to the
scientific community and the general public through online media, presentations,
and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to engineer
human beta-cells with enhanced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) in
response to near-infrared window (NIRW) light. The project capitalizes on two
recent advances from the collaborating laboratories. The first advance is
demonstrating that rodent beta-cells expressing a blue light-activated adenylate
cyclase (bPAC) for modulation of cAMP levels significantly (~3-fold) enhanced
GSIS with no increase in oxygen consumption rate. After bPAC--cell
transplantation, diabetic mice subjected to blue light display improved glucose
tolerance, lower hyperglycemia and higher plasma insulin. The key deficiencies
of the bPAC-prototype were limited activation due to poorly penetrating blue
light, nonspecific cAMP effects due to intracellular mislocalization of bPAC,
and the lack of human Beta-cells. The second advance is a recently engineered
adenylate cyclase activated by NIRW light (NIRW-AC) that will help overcome
these deficiencies as it penetrates more deeply through mammalian tissue than
blue light. The Research Plan is organized under three objectives. OBJECTIVE 1
is to design a NIRW-AC with low dark activity, improved photoactivation range
and optimized expression in human beta-cells. OBJECTIVE 2 is to engineer a light
inducible system for localized, target-specific photoactivation of cAMP levels.
The localization of the NIRW-AC will be tuned to mirror the localization of
native ACs in beta-cells thereby reducing the nonspecific effects of cAMP and
improving the long-term optogenetic performance of beta-cells. OBJECTIVE 3 is to
generate human beta-cells with NIRW light controlled enhancement of their GSIS.
This will encompass the biochemical and functional characterization of the
engineered human beta-cells expressing the optimized NIRW-AC. OBJECTIVE 4 is to
test the performance of the NIRW-AC-expressing cells in a murine model of
diabetes. The projectâ€™s deliverable will be a NIRW-AC with superior
photoactivation, optimized spatial positioning and expression in human beta-
cells for optogenetically enhanced GSIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.