* 2015379
* Collaborative Research: Extremes in High Dimensions: Causality, Sparsity, Classification, Clustering, Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Richard Davis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

In recent years, through news reports and first-hand experience, the general
public has become keenly aware of extreme events, in particular, of extreme
weather conditions such as extended heat waves, periods of extreme cold, an
increase in the number and intensity of tornadoes and hurricanes, or periods of
record precipitation resulting in unprecedented floods. Just in the past few
years, the insurance claims from extreme climatic events have been staggering,
which include the Missouri River flood in April 2019 ($10.8B), Hurricane Michael
in October 2018 ($25B), the California wildfires in December 2017 ($18.7B), the
US drought/heatwave in 2012 ($33.9B), and Hurricane Sandy in October 2012
($73.4B). This list does not include non-climatic extreme events such as the
financial crisis from 2008 nor the current covid-19 pandemic. Many of the
extreme events experienced today that are weather, environmental, industrial,
epidemiological, economic, or social media related are occurring at a more
frequent rate, which often result in huge losses to our society in a variety of
ways from financial to human life to our way of life. While the occurrence of
extreme events is reasonably well understood in steady state situations, it has
become clear that the preponderance of extremes events suggest that the steady-
state assumption is no longer valid. The key objective of this research is to
try to understand causal impacts of various factors from a potentially large
array of variables including changing environmental conditions, demographic
movements within the US, changing landscapes, and changing economic conditions,
on the frequency and magnitude of extreme events. From many variables, we hope
to produce methodology to extract the important features in the data that have a
direct impact on describing and predicting extremes. This research is
potentially of use to policymakers who need to anticipate and plan for extreme
events leading to sensible strategies for mitigating their impact on society.
The graduate student support will be used for interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of this research project is to
design new tools for analyzing and modeling extremes in a myriad of situations
that go well beyond the boundaries of classical extreme value theory. These
include detection of often nonlinear sets of much smaller dimension that can
provide an adequate description of extremes in high dimensions, for which we
hope to apply the powerful modern learning techniques (such as graph-based
learning methods) that allow us to determine this extremal support from the
data. In general, detecting sparsity in the exponent measure describing high-
dimensional extremes, i.e., locating (often numerous) low-dimensional regions
which carry most of the support of exponent measure will be a key focus of this
research. A second main thrust of this research centers on the issue of
causality in both small and large dimensional problems. In the most basic form,
a set of variables X is said to be tail causal to a dependent vector Y if
certain changes in X (sometimes themselves extreme but not always so) impact the
tail behavior of Y. An important setting of this type is the potential outcomes
framework for causality of extreme events, which will be a major focus in this
project's research agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.