* 2015688
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: We are thriving: Challenging negative discourse through voices of women in project teams
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Jia Liang, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 211,254.00

The goal of this research is to understand women who are thriving (i.e.,
developing and succeeding) in engineering student project teams and
undergraduate engineering programs. Project teams are extra-curricular, student-
led, engineering design teams. One important aspect of this research is that
these thriving women are encouraged to speak for themselves, describe their own
experiences, and tell their own stories. Another is the intentional focus on
women who are doing well, feeling positive about themselves as engineers and
about their professional futures. Currently, the number of women who pursue
engineering degrees remains low, around 20%, despite over 40 years of research.
Previous researchers have provided valuable frameworks to explain the low
participation and retention of women, but these projects have focused on what
may be wrong -- why women do not select engineering or why they decide to leave
engineering. While important, this type of research may inadvertently encourage
women to avoid engineering as it may propagate the message that they “do not
belong”. This research adopts a novel approach to explore a new direction toward
understanding women’s experiences in engineering and employs an asset-based
approach in its attempt to identify what women find rewarding. Therefore, a
fresh and quite possibly transformative understanding of women’s engagement in
engineering is anticipated. The primary deliverable will be a perspective and
specific actionable items that can be adopted by university engineering programs
and engineering companies that will encourage greater participation of women in
engineering, and also suggest how those programs and companies might create an
environment in which women can thrive. The broader impacts of this research
include (1) increasing gender equity in engineering; (2) engaging a diverse
range of women participants; and (3) suggesting alternative pathways toward
engineering degrees and careers in engineering. Each of these broader impacts
will contribute to a long-term goal of changing the negative discourse regarding
the persistence of the underrepresentation of women and minorities in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research asks and answers the research
question: what are the personal and institutional factors that facilitate women
who thrive in engineering student project teams? The research approach is to
conduct a series of three semi-structured interviews with women project team
leaders at Kansas State University, Cornell University, and University of Nevada
Las Vegas. These partnering universities vary by location, size, type, and
ability to attract and retain women in engineering. The interviews include their
life history or how they understand their life-experiences in relation to
engineering; learning journey or how their experiences in project teams has led
them to identify as engineers; and PhotoVoice, an approach which places students
behind a camera, such that they can document and explain those project team
experiences to others and in their own terms. The aim is to learn about the
positive experiences of these women, identified and explained by the women
themselves, thereby enabling a better understanding and appreciation of those
experiences. Additional interviews with women at other institutions, engineering
leadership, and project team faculty advisers will inform the understanding of
the roles project teams play in broadening engagement in engineering. These
interview data, together with secondary, document-based contextual data, will be
analyzed to identify positive engineering experiences and then will be used to
create a theoretical framework for encouraging thriving. The research offers the
prospect for a new, targeted and more positive focus regarding women’s
participation in engineering. The results of this research will be included on a
website created by an undergraduate student project team to maximize
dissemination, long-term accessibility, and project
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.