* 2015613
* SBP: Why Neighborhoods Matter: A Causal Mediation Analysis of Contextual Effects on Child Academic Achievement
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Geoffrey Wodtke, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,264.00

Growing up in a poor neighborhood harms child development, but it remains
unclear exactly what it is about these neighborhoods that make them so
consequential above and beyond other aspects of children’s lives. This project
examines why growing up in a poor neighborhood affects child academic
achievement. Across many different academic disciplines, it is widely
hypothesized that the effects of living in a poor neighborhood on child learning
may be due to differences in school quality, exposure to various health hazards,
and/or exposure to violent crime. Yet there is almost no empirical research that
has put these hypothesized explanations to a rigorous empirical test. This
project will fill a critical gap about why neighborhoods matter for children.
Its findings will speak to public concerns about recent growth in neighborhood
inequality as well as ongoing public debates about the most effective
interventions for mitigating the harmful effects of concentrated poverty.
Because the poor educational outcomes of children from disadvantaged
neighborhoods likely work to reduce scientific literacy, hamper the economic
competitiveness of the U.S., and engender obstacles to human flourishing in
adulthood, findings from this project focused on understanding and mitigating
the effects of neighborhood poverty on child learning will contribute to
advancing the nation’s health, prosperity, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate whether the effects of neighborhood
poverty are due to differences in school quality, health hazards, or violence by
linking and analyzing data from multiple different sources. These sources
include (a) panel data on academic achievement from large cohorts of children in
the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study and the Project on Human Development in
Chicago Neighborhoods, (b) data on the socioeconomic composition of
neighborhoods from the U.S. Census and American Community Survey, (c)
administrative data on schools from the U.S. National Center for Education
Statistics, (d) data on environmental health hazards, such as lead and air
pollution, from the Chicago Department of Public Health and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, and finally, (e) data on local violent crime
rates from Location, Inc. Using these linked data sources, the potential
outcomes framework, and novel statistical methods designed to adjust for the
non-random selection of families into different neighborhoods over time, the
project will estimate the cumulative effects of neighborhood poverty on academic
achievement and then decompose these effects into components due to differences
in the characteristics of schools attended by resident children, differences in
exposure to lead and other neurotoxins, and differences in exposure to violent
crime. Findings from the project will inform sociological theories regarding
academic attainment, poverty, and neighborhood effects on child outcomes,
particularly those tied to violence and risks to
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.