* 2015175
* STTR Phase I:  A kinetic and conformation based platform for targeting G-protein coupled receptors
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Grace Mizuno, SEVEN BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to enable the discovery of new therapeutics
targeting G protein-coupled receptors (GCPRs). GPCRs are expressed in nearly
every organ system, are accessible due to their location on the membrane and
potential to elicit almost every signaling pathway. Drugs targeting GPCRs make
up 35% of all FDA approved drugs, generating sales of more than $200 billion
annually. Despite relative success in pharmacologically targeting GPCRs they
remain vastly underexploited, largely due to the lack of technology that
addresses the characteristics and signaling patterns of GPCRs. The proposed
project will explore the potential of GPCRs to help develop new drug candidates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project leverages genetically encoded fluorescent GPCR sensor technology to
address several challenging but necessary characteristics of GPCR targeted drug
discovery: selectivity despite close sequence and structural homology, precise
signal modulation within the continuum of receptor activation/ deactivation
states and downstream signaling, in many cases the absence of a known endogenous
ligand, and the ability to monitor compound activity (pharmacodynamics) directly
in vivo in real-time. The proposed technology reflects ligand-dependent changes
in GPCR conformation in real-time and directly reports ligand-receptor
interactions, the primary determinant of signal generation in continuum. The
technology can be readily implemented in high-throughput formats and universally
adapted for a broad exploration of all GPCR targets. GPCR sensor technology
provides unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution critical for in vivo
analysis and enables precise measurements of the dynamic changes of receptor
conformation. Therefore, it is well suited for the exploration of functionally
selective compounds. Furthermore, by harnessing the sensitivity and selectivity
of GPCR sensor technology, compounds that activate allosteric receptor sites
through heterodimerization can be discovered. Ultimately, compounds discovered
using the GPCR sensor technology are expected to be more clinically efficacious
and therapeutically effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.