* 2015650
* Direct Measurement of Interfacial Energies in Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ricardo Castro, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 546,426.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ceramics are present in a multitude of technological
solutions that help address the current and future global challenges.
Applications range from electronics in mobile devices to sensors for biohazards,
but the design and fabrication of finely controlled and predictable ceramics
still face significant difficulties. This project takes a transformative
approach to provide a missing piece of understanding on how to control the
evolution of ceramic structures during processing and operations. By using
experimental approaches utilizing sophisticated techniques, including
quantification of microscale heat evolution- and high-resolution electron
microscopy, the research introduces a method to measure interfacial energies –
currently largely unknown – which hold the key for predictive manufacturing and
design. The project also has important education components that focus on the
promotion of engineering in middle and high schools with a series of educational
activities based on the science behind superheroes. These are effective vehicles
to inspire students to join science and engineering fields by discussing the
fantastic universe of superheroes from a technological perspective. The project
also provides training of undergraduate and graduate students in research and
development in this strategic field, with graduates in this field typically
finding positions in high-tech electronics companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The predictability of manufacturing and
design of ceramics strongly relies on a solid understanding of the
thermodynamics of interfaces. Direct measurements of interfacial energies is
therefore a key element for evolution of the field into being less dependent on
empirical evidences and trends. This project applies microcalorimetric
techniques to measure interface energies of ceramics, using yttrium oxide as a
model system, and combines the results with detailed microstructural and
structural analyses to deliver unprecedented data. The first research product
presents a methodology for broad application in other materials, which is
complemented by a careful study on how to control interfacial energies. Such
control optimizes compositional design in industries, enabling more energy and
cost-efficient products, and improves reliability during operation. From an
education perspective, students are mentored and conduct research with strategic
materials and processes, receiving training on highly advanced techniques to be
applied in their future careers as materials’
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.