* 2015151
* SBIR Phase I:  Metasurface optical elements for augmented/mixed-reality smart glasses
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Chee Wei Wong, XAVIER OPTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate a transformative
augmented/mixed-reality smart glass to enable new immersive digital spaces. The
high-performance implementation of the technology developed here will be used to
augment users' perception and understanding of information and images. The
remote and virtual human-to-human interactions can be enhanced through these
user-natural augment/mixed-reality smart glasses beyond the smartphone. This
next-generation mobile display more seamlessly interfaces with online content
available today and in already established networks, ranging from online retail,
gaming, sports immersion, entertainment, and social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project develops smart glasses for augmented/mixed-reality digital
spaces beyond the smartphone. Current smart glasses are typically based on
conventional holographic or diffractive optical elements which have significant
physical and performance limitations, preventing their wide-spread adoption.
This project develops metasurface waveguides to achieve the key performance
metrics of resolution, field-of-view, efficiency and optical element integration
in augmented/mixed-reality waveguides. The metasurface waveguide is finely tuned
for high performance specifications collectively, across the full color gamut,
and with ease of fabrication and manufacturing scaling. The system is light
weight, compact, and integrates with current light
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.