* 2015870
* RoL: Regulation of cell envelope homeostasis in the alpha-proteobacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sharon Long, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Organisms adapt, survive and even thrive. Some function more successfully by
interacting with another completely different kind of organism, where the two do
something together that neither can do on its own. This may benefit both
organisms, making it a mutualistic symbiosis. How do organisms manage to
cooperate instead of one causing disease in the other? Our project addresses
such questions in the case of a plant and its bacterial symbiont. With the
bacteria providing usable nitrogen, this partnership is fundamental to
environmental and agricultural sustainability. Our work will employ several
approaches to discover how the plant host accommodates and communicates with its
bacterial partner. Beyond this particular symbiosis, our work pushes back the
frontier of understanding the general rules for microbe-host interactions. How
prevalent are symbioses in the living world? How do communities of microbes
interact with hosts, and what are the costs and benefits? The experimental
approaches we develop in this project, and the discoveries we make in our
research, will advance the general field of symbiosis and will also contribute
to microbiome and disease research. The project supports the STEM community and
will increase its diversity by incorporating new high school science curricula
on nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. These classroom and laboratory modules will tie
together plant science with ecology and nutrition and provide historical and
cross-cultural context on the use of legumes in sustainable agriculture. The new
curricula will be of particular interest to students of Latinx and native
American ancestry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rhizobia-legume symbioses
proceed through a series of stages with ongoing recognition and communication
between the plant host and bacterial partner. While early stages of symbiosis
have been well studied, and signal molecules and molecular responses have been
analyzed, less is known about the stages of late infection and early
differentiation. Previous work from several research groups including ours have
identified Medicago truncatula dnf mutants (defective in nitrogen fixation) that
are defective in Sinorhizobium meliloti bacteroid maturation. One plant mutant,
dnf1, is required for processing of nodule cysteine-rich (NCR) peptides, and
other dnf mutants encode NCR peptides themselves. By transcription and mutant
analyses, we identified a set of bacterial genes, the "L2 cluster", which appear
to be downregulated just prior to bacteroid differentiation. The L2-cluster gene
set is enriched for genes predicted to function in cell envelope homeostasis. We
concurrently discovered that cell envelope stress responses are tied to
regulation of extracellular polysaccharides, which are required for host plant
infection. With a combination of genetic, molecular, and cell biology
approaches, we will dissect the mechanism for cell envelope stress response and
define its relationship to symbiosis. We will further explore how the plant host
controls the bacterial L2 cluster by exploiting plant mutation analysis together
with in vivo cell and molecular reporter analysis of bacterial infection and
differentiation. Co-funding Programs: Rules of Life; Plant Biotic Interactions;
Cellular Dynamics and Function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.