* 2015598
* CAREER: Understanding Interface-Mediated Deformation in Layered Composites through Modeling and Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Caizhi Zhou, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 416,436.00

Metallic nanolayered composites are a special class of metallic composite
materials with ultra-fine layer thicknesses which impart unique behavior. They
exhibit large increases in strength compared to larger-scale bulk constituents.
In some cases, they display increased ductility, high radiation damage
tolerance, shock resistance, and thermal stability; thus showing great potential
for applications in a variety of fields. These materials can lead to new
performance levels and energy efficiency not achievable with current materials
and thus can have a significant economic impact. However, a lack of
understanding of the underlying mechanisms that control the properties of
metallic nano layered composites severely limits our current ability to process
and tailor them. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research to advance fundamental knowledge, develop computational
tools and provide design guidelines for metallic nanolayered composites with
exceptional controllable properties. Results from this research have the
potential to enhance U.S. competitiveness within the markets of aerospace and
electronic devices. As part of this project, the research results will be made
available to other researchers and the general public through publications and
active participation in conferences and workshops. With the aim of educating the
twenty-first century workforce, this work also increases the exposure of high
school students to science and technology concepts through outreach programs,
and provides invaluable educational opportunities for student researchers to
collaborate with National Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to
develop a new experimentally-validated multiscale-modeling approach to elucidate
the mechanical properties and deformation mechanisms of metallic nanolayered
composites. The specific research objectives are: (i) to explore the influence
of dislocation-interface interactions on the strength of metallic nanolayered
composites; (ii) to investigate the effects of the interface structure and layer
thickness on the ductility and plastic instability; (iii) to identify the roles
of interface structure and material properties of constituents in the texture
evolution during the accumulative roll bonding process; (iv) to reveal the
microscopic mechanisms for cyclic deformation behavior of metallic nanolayered
composites. The research results will provide insights into the interaction
between dislocations and interfaces and their interplay with macroscopically
applied fields. The seamless integration of the multiscale-modeling approach and
experiment studies will allow one-to-one comparisons between fundamental defect
models and deformation experiments on nanostructured materials, creating a
unique opportunity for testing the applicability of state-of-the-art theories of
crystal defects in real materials systems.