* 2015789
* Towards Characterizing the Nitrogen Isotope Systematics of the Oceanic Mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Peter Barry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 574,076.00

Nitrogen is far more abundant in the Earth’s atmosphere than in the mantle.
Therefore, nitrogen can reflect interactions between Earth’s interior and
exterior. However, few studies have investigated the nature of nitrogen in
basalts that form as the mantle melts. The difficulty in measuring nitrogen in
basalts is because of analytical challenges and the difficulty in obtaining
representative samples. This is an important gap in knowledge because basalts
make up the ocean crust that underlies two-thirds of the Earth's surface. This
project will measure nitrogen isotopes from key mantle-derived samples. The
samples were obtained from the main environments of basaltic magmatism in the
world's oceans. The project thus aims to produce the best measure, to date, of
the global nitrogen cycle over Earth history. The study will establish Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution as a key USA-based laboratory. The unique
capability of the laboratory is the measure of high-precision nitrogen isotopes
on extremely low concentration samples. Findings from the study will address
many broader questions pertaining to the origin of the most abundant gas in our
atmosphere. The recycling of this gas is tied to the evolution of the Earth and
the solar system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of oceanic basalts from the
Lau Basin, Manus Basin, Alarcon Basin, Galapagos and Mid-Atlantic Ridge Popping
Rocks will allow us, for the first time, to define the scale of delta-N-15
variability in the oceanic mantle by targeting samples with high 3He/4He values
(plume-influenced mantle) as well as other glasses with 3He/4He values within
the nominal range of depleted MORB mantle (DMM). Given the well characterized
geochemistry of these samples – including radiogenic isotopes (Sr-Nd-Pb), noble
gases and major volatiles (He-Ne-Ar-CO2-H2O) –the relationship between
delta-N-15 and petrogenetic tracers will be assessed to distinguish between
mantle source features and secondary controls (e.g., degassing fractionation
and/or surficial contamination). All samples will allow scrutiny of δ15N-3He/4He
relationships and further characterization of the variability of delta-N-15 in
the oceanic mantle from the perspective of different sampling media and regional
controls. As a proof of concept, mafic crystals and xenoliths from the Canary
Islands hotspot will also be measured, however this task is significantly more
challenging due to extremely low N abundances in mafic crystals. Studies on
mafic crystals will define limits for sample N-contents required for analysis,
potentially leading to a significant increase in the sample base amenable to
delta-N-15 studies. All results will provide important constraints on modeling
the evolution of the DMM vs. plume-influenced mantle, and the advent of plate
tectonics over Earth history. Specifically, N isotope data generated in the
proposed study will be incorporated into a newly developed forward model that
couples observations from N and other volatiles species (i.e., heavy noble
gases) to understand the relative recycling efficiency of different volatile
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.