* 2015148
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a safe gene editing system via CRISPR-Cas and Cas inhibitor co-delivery
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2021
* David Rabuka, ACRIGEN BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable safe and effective human gene editing, providing therapies
targeting myriad human genetic diseases. CRISPR (clustered, regularly
interspaced, short palindromic repeats) and CRISPR-associated (Cas) genes
compose adaptive microbial `immune systems' found in diverse bacterial species,
serving as a defense mechanism against viral infection. The simplicity,
programmability, and versatility of CRISPR-Cas systems have enabled genetic
modification of many organisms and offer immense therapeutic potential for
treating human diseases. However, CRISPR-based gene editing can also cause off-
target edits, resulting in the introduction of mutations, insertions, deletions,
or DNA restructuring at unintended off-target editing. This effect can cause
significant problems. The proposed technology will develop tools to safely
translate CRISPR-based gene editing to in vivo human therapeutics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance a technology based on virus-encoded CRISPR-Cas inhibitor
off-switches, enabling control of off-target gene editing. These anti-CRISPR
proteins are a novel class of robust protein inhibitors that can be genetically
encoded for co-delivery with the CRISPR editing machinery. This proposal will
focus on understanding CRISPR editing kinetics to pinpoint the ideal ‘editing
window’ providing the highest therapeutic benefit while minimizing off-target
risk. Second, the project will design a system for simultaneous delivery of the
CRISPR editing machinery along with the anti-CRISPR inhibitor to leverage this
new ‘editing window’. Genetic regulatory elements will be used to tune the
expression of the various components of the system and provide the framework for
a therapeutic delivery system. This work will enable safe and effective gene
editing in a therapeutically relevant context, providing a toolkit for
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.