* 2015119
* A resistance and susceptibility gene cluster in barley is targeted by diverse Pyrenophora teres f. teres effectors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/26/2019,07/31/2022
* Robert Brueggeman, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 67,631.00

The plant immune system recognizes pathogens early in the infection process,
activating immune responses capable of arresting them before they colonize and
establish themselves as a threat to viability. Pathogens that survive this first
line of defense are met by a second line of defense that results in a higher
amplitude programmed cell death response, which effectively sequesters some
pathogens in foci of dead cells. However, in the case of necrotrophic pathogens,
the class of plant pathogens that acquire nutrients from dead tissue, this
defense response is hijacked and utilized by the pathogen to further disease
proliferation, translating to crop failure. The project will fill knowledge gaps
in the understanding of how plants perceive this important class of pathogens
and how immunity responses result in a positive outcome for the plant host
(disease resistance). Thus, the project will contribute to understanding of how
plant immunity responses are effective at stopping the necrotrophic pathogens
which is important as they are becoming well known for their roles in causing
disease on important crops and are significantly contributing to world food
security issues. The information generated will transect multiple pathosystems
important to crop production through characterizing and defining the mechanism
that regulates host signaling and immunity against diverse pathogens. The
molecular genetic and genomic data generated and molecular tools developed, will
broadly benefit the plant-microbe interactions scientific community as well as
answer fundamental questions that will facilitate the deployment of genetic
resistance in crops contributing to a more secure food supply. This research
will also be used in cross-disciplinary training of high school, undergraduate,
graduate, and post-graduate students in molecular genetics and molecular plant
pathology from both the host and pathogen perspective. A collaborative outreach
program developed through this grant will involve education of young Native
American scientists in order to effectively recruit them into the scientific
fields effectively broadening the participation of the most under represented
group in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis is
that early immunity responses are effective at stopping the necrotrophic
pathogens, yet later elicited immunity responses result in programmed cell death
that is effectively hijacked by the necrotophic specialists to complete their
lifecycle, contributing to disease susceptibility. The two specific objectives
to test this hypothesis focus on a comprehensive evaluation of the temporally
and spatially distinct immunity and virulence responses from the host (barley)
and pathogen (Pyrenophora teres f. teres), respectively. These aims will address
fundamental questions: 1) is a diverse receptor-like protein targeted by
multiple necrotrophic effectors to elicit necrotrophic effector triggered
susceptibility (NETS); and 2) does a highly effective dominant resistance gene
activate early defense responses, arresting the necrotrophic specialist before
it colonizes and deploys its necrotrophic effector repertoire? The first
component of the plant immune system investigated is a highly variable receptor-
like protein, Spt1, which is targeted by multiple diverse necrotrophic effectors
located throughout the genomes which evolved to incite disease. This receptor
contains unprecedented variability at a localized region that correlates with
specific susceptibilities, suggesting that the pathogen populations continually
evolved to target this unknown domain and the host has been undergoing a high
level of diversifying selection at this domain to evade pathogen virulence. The
information gathered on the receptor and necrotrophic effectors will fill
fundamental gaps in the knowledge of how necrotrophic specialists target the
host and manipulate a weak link in its immune system to cause
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.