* 2015895
* University of Washington for R/V Thomas G. Thompson and R/V Rachel Carson Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/29/2024
* USD 213,577.00

Requests are made by the University of Washington to support Oceanographic
Instrumentation on R/V Thompson, a 274â€™ general purpose, global class research
vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a newly outfitted 72-foot coastal research
vessel, both operated as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF). In 2019,
Thompson completed 296 funded days with 251 (85%) of them for NSF. For 2020, the
vessel is scheduled for 287 total days with 255 days for NSF. Carson had 116
days in 2019 but there were no NSF days involved. For 2020, there are 61 days
scheduled, 7 of which are for NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, UW
provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the
following Oceanographic Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) 3.5kHz and
12kHz Transducers $65,652 &lt;br/&gt;2) 300 kHz ADCP $50,161 &lt;br/&gt;3) 2
tension-monitoring blocks $48,059 &lt;br/&gt;4) Sea-Bird 911plus CTD $64,925
&lt;br/&gt;5) 3 uCTD probes $51,849 &lt;br/&gt;6) Towed Magnetometer, Cable, and
Winch $48,825 &lt;br/&gt;7) Sea-Bird 45 Thermosalinograph $15,567 &lt;br/&gt;
$345,038 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.