* 2015699
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 21st ACM Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications (ACM HotMobile)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Corey Baker, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 02/28/2021
* USD 19,400.00

This award supports students at US institutions to attend the Twenty-first
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems
and Applications (ACM HotMobile). The HotMobile workshop will be held in Austin,
TX, March 3-4, 2020. HotMobile is a workshop targeting mobile computing and
system integration fields. Attending this event will benefit the scientific
progress of a student's research. The workshop discusses fundamental open
questions, advocates new approaches, offers constructive critiques of the state-
of-the-art, debunks existing assumptions, reports unexpected early results,
reports on promising but unproven ideas, or proposes new evaluation methods. The
exposure to the technical content of HotMobile will inspire students to address
the tough problems in their respective fields, with a long-term benefit of
scientific advances in mobile computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Priority will be
given to students who will benefit from attending this workshop but are unlikely
to attend due to the unavailability of travel funding. In addition, applications
from female and underrepresented groups in mobile computing research will be
strongly encouraged. Up to 25 students will receive travel grants from this
award to attend HotMobile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.