* 2015430
* University of Georgia/RV Savannah Oceanographic Instumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Clifton Buck, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2023
* USD 182,625.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation for the Research Vessel
Savannah, a 92-foot coastal research vessel, owned and operated by Skidaway
Institute of Oceanography as part of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF). The
primary working area for the vessel has been the continental shelf, coastal and
estuarine environments of the Southeastern United States. The ship has also
conducted cruises that have crossed the Gulf Stream into the western Sargasso
Sea and as far as Curacao in the SE Caribbean. The R/V Savannah has been
specifically designed with a large science berthing capacity to provide learning
opportunities in ocean and estuarine environments and to demonstrate
oceanographic research methodologies to diverse and often under-served student
populations. In 2019, the R/V Savannah completed 86 days at sea. NSF funded
projects accounted for 15 days (18%) of the total sailing schedule. In 2020, the
vessel currently has 142 days scheduled, of which 89 days (63%) are for NSF.
With this proposal, Skidaway provides technical descriptions and rationale for
the acquisition of the following Oceanographic
Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trace Element Clean Water Sampling System
$166,871&lt;br/&gt;Bottle Sampling Space Infrastructure $7,449&lt;br/&gt;Year 2
Sampler Blank Analysis $8,305&lt;br/&gt; $182,625&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.