* 2015647
* Eastern Pacific carbon chemistry after the ice age: gaining insight to a persistent carbon cycle mystery
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Patrick Rafter, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 326,148.00

The current rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) due to human activities
such as fossil fuel burning is warming the planet. One way to better predict
future climate is to study past natural changes in atmospheric CO2. Such changes
occurred through the ice ages of the past 1 million years. The ocean is thought
to have played a key role in ice age atmospheric CO2 changes because ocean
uptake of CO2 contributes to global cooling and CO2 release by the ocean
contributes to warming. One of the most useful tools for reconstructing past
ocean CO2 cycles is the radioactive isotope of carbon, 14C. Radiocarbon is
measured in marine microfossils which record the 14C of seawater. This study
will develop microfossil 14C records from ocean sediment cores and use them to
unravel the causes of a low-radiocarbon anomaly that occurred in the eastern
North Pacific Ocean at the time of the Last Glacial Maximum (roughly 20,000
years ago). Understanding this anomaly will improve our knowledge of ocean-
atmosphere CO2 exchange in the past, and thus will help us predict the impact of
rising atmospheric CO2 on future climate. The project will support research
participation by undergraduate students at UC Irvine. The project also includes
support for a series of workshops designed to introduce prospective First
Generation college students to the Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will use a set of new sediment 14C/ records along the Eastern
North Pacific margin to address a long-standing paleoceanographic question—what
is the origin of the anomalously low 14C in the Eastern North Pacific during the
deglaciation? This feature has alternately been explained as evidence for: (i)
an anomalously low seawater 14C/C advected to the eastern North Pacific sites,
(ii) the local or regional addition of low-14C carbon from seafloor volcanism,
or (iii) post-depositional alteration of the proxy record. The proposed analyses
will yield four new benthic foraminifera 14C/C records from Eastern North
Pacific core sites upstream of the sites with anomalously low deglacial 14C.
These records will be synchronized using benthic foraminifera d18O records and
will be used to create a new map of Eastern North Pacific deglacial seawater
14C. This map will be used to distinguish between advected and local sources for
the low-14C signal. The study will support the training of undergraduate
students at UC Irvine (a Minority Serving Institution). The project will also
support organization of a 3-day workshop for prospective First Generation
college students from local high schools with high under-represented minority
populations, with the goal of increasing the participation of under-represented
minorities in the Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.