* 2015639
* Towards a Unified Framework of Quantum Dynamics of Nonlinear Optical and Transport Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Benjamin M. Fregoso, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2024
* USD 304,133.00

Nontechnical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances and broadens our
basic scientific understanding of materials under intense illumination. Of
interest are phenomena and materials where the laws of physics are radically
distinct from day-to-day experience due to the smallness of particles inside
materials, i.e., quantum physics and quantum materials. Advancing our knowledge
of irradiated quantum materials will facilitate their use in future quantum
technologies, e.g., more efficient solar energy harvesting, faster computers and
optoelectronic applications. This research develops new concepts and methods in
both optics and quantum condensed matter physics, benefiting both fields of
knowledge. Education and outreach efforts include developing a new computational
physics course, hosting a workshop for senior undergraduate students (including
those from nearby minority-serving institutions), developing a one-day STEM
curriculum unit for low-income high school students enrolled in Upward Bound,
hosting middle school teachers via the US State Department’s International
Leaders in Education Program, and mentoring undergraduates and graduate students
in research. These efforts aim to expand and diversify the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need
for clean energy sources has led to great interest in solar energy harvesting.
Unconventional photovoltaic mechanisms such as the so-called bulk photovoltaic
effect are promising candidates for both solar energy harvesting and novel
optoelectronic applications. Key aspects of the bulk photovoltaic effect,
however, are not well understood. This project aims to develop a theoretical
framework to classify and unify nonlinear transport in crystalline solids
including the bulk photovoltaic effect. Materials of interest include two-
dimensional ferroelectrics and topological materials. The framework will
ascertain the role of dissipation and carrier interactions not yet addressed in
existing analytical or numerical theories but which are important to understand
experiments and uncover novel nonlinear phenomena. The project uses analytical
field theoretic methods and numerical density functional
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a related topic, light is also emerging as a
versatile tool for engineering the properties of materials as exemplified by the
recent realization of the Floquet-Bloch state and the light-induced anomalous
Hall effect. These states are very short-lived because irradiated materials
quickly heat up. Understanding pathways to thermalization is of fundamental
importance in realizing applications of novel nonequilibrium states. The PI will
construct models of many-body thermalization which include electron
interactions, excitons and phonons and in so doing assess the opportunities and
challenges of laser-driven nonequilibrium states in realistic scenarios.
Theoretical models will be experimentally validated via close collaboration with
partners conducting experimental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.