* 2015666
* Collaborative Research: A Workshop for Evaluating the Value and Scope of a Biological Repository of Antarctic Specimens
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Elizabeth Crockett, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,657.00

This workshop will bring together Antarctic marine freshwater and terrestrial
biologists, students, and experts in specimen curation to assess the value of,
need for, and scope of a biological repository of Antarctic specimens, including
tissue samples. Currently, some US collected Antarctic specimen collections are
housed in various museums, repositories, and labs. These collections are not
easily discoverable on the internet, and how well they represent the
biodiversity of Antarctica is largely unknown. The workshop coordinators will
advertise the conference broadly and recruit underrepresented groups to
participate. Participants will assess current repositories and determine how to
make Antarctica biological samples more accessible in a unified location (or
through better coordination). This effort will benefit the broader community of
biologists working with Antarctic organisms by providing opportunities to
conduct Antarctic science by investigators and their students that might
otherwise not be possible due to the logistical and budget challenges for
deployments. Following workshop activities, a final report will be published on
the outcomes of the efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.