* 2015906
* Winds and the Weather: Evaluating Three Dimensional (3D) Stratospheric / Tropospheric Jet Relationships and Their Roles in Extreme Cool-Season Weather Events
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Gloria Manney, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 509,518.00

The stratosphere is a layer of the atmosphere where the increase of temperature
with height discourages vertical motions, thereby barring entry to the clouds,
storms, and frontal weather systems that form in the troposphere below.
Nevertheless very long waves can propagate from the troposphere into the
stratosphere and influence its circulation, most dramatically by disrupting its
circumpolar vortex and causing a sudden stratospheric warming (SSW) event.
Conversely, the stratospheric circulation can have a substantial effect on
tropospheric weather, albeit through indirect pathways which are not entirely
understood. In particular several studies have shown that cold air outbreaks
(CAOs) are more likely when the stratospheric circumpolar vortex is weak, or
disrupted by an SSW, and the condition of the stratospheric vortex can also
influence the tropospheric jet streams in ways that can in turn affect surface
weather. Interactions between the stratosphere and troposphere are thus of
practical as well as scientific importance and are a focus of substantial
research effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award uses novel
methods to characterize the three-dimensional structure of stratosphere-
troposphere interactions. The work complements previous studies which have
emphasized spatially aggregated quantities like the mean strength of the
stratospheric vortex averaged over the polar cap and the mean speed of
tropospheric jets averaged around circles of latitude. A hemispheric average can
suffice to identify an SSW but it may conceal differences in the structure of
the event which matter for its interactions with the troposphere. For instance
the stratospheric vortex can be weaker in a hemispherically-averaged sense
because the vortex center has moved away from the pole, or because the vortex
has in fact split into two distinct vortices. A split vortex and a displaced
vortex are likely to influence the troposphere in different ways. Their
influence on jet streams may also depend on longitudinal variations in jet speed
that would be obscured by averaging around a latitude
circle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work consists primarily of analysis of
stratosphere-troposphere interactions identified in two datasets developed by
the Principal Investigators. One is called JETPAC, for JEt and Tropopause
Products for Analysis and Characterization, which identifies the locations of
jet stream maxima on a three-dimensional grid including the troposphere and
lower stratosphere and also identifies the tropopause (or multiple tropopauses)
in each grid column. The second is developed using an algorithm called CAVE-ART,
for Characterization and Analysis of Vortex Evolution using Algorithms for
Region Tracking. CAVE-ART uses methods from computer vision to identify the
three-dimensional structure of the stratospheric polar vortex. CAVE-ART is able
to track separate pieces of the vortex in the event of a splitting SSW
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impact due its relevance to
significant weather events such as CAOs. The datasets generated for the project
are made available to the research community in order to maximize their value
for scientific discovery. Web-based outreach materials are developed and used to
conduct outreach to the public, and the work supports two students at New Mexico
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.