* 2015128
* SBIR Phase I:  Composite Coatings for Improving Energy Efficiency of Building Envelope Systems
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Aashay Arora, ENKOAT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2021
* USD 249,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of energy efficient building
coatings that have the potential to significantly reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. The market for energy efficient coatings is experiencing accelerated
growth due to government and rapid rise in demand for Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design certified structures. With these recent developments,
building developers are actively seeking solutions which are technologically
robust and cost-effective for meeting energy mandates. These novel architectural
coatings not only provide the aesthetics and textured finish as traditional
architectural coatings, but also provide the added benefit of decreasing heating
and cooling related costs for the building owner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
developing an optimized blend of phase change materials for incorporation in
architectural building envelope coatings such as paint, plaster and stucco, to
provide them with insulative properties. The optimized blend will consist of
phase change materials (PCMs) with different phase transition temperatures in
specific volume proportions to maximize energy savings in a specific climate
zone in terms of heating and cooling costs. Preliminary lab work has shown
promise that PCMs can be utilized in coatings to reduce temperature swings and
shift the peak load to off-peak hours, which can lead to significant cost
savings. This project will develop protocols to maximize incorporation of PCMs
in these coatings without compromising their aesthetics. Energy modeling and
experimental work including micro- and macro- scale material characterization
will be carried out to verify the laboratory and small field-scale performance
of these coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.