* 2015311
* RAPID: Groundwater resilience to hydrologic extremes and climate variability: The case of Hurricane Dorian
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Zoi Dokou, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,104.00

The impact of Hurricane Dorian (September 2019) was catastrophic, especially in
Grand Bahama, where the hurricane generated a storm surge that drove extensive
flooding and saltwater contamination of the groundwater resources of the island.
Groundwater, in the form of freshwater lenses (FWLs), is the sole source of
drinking water on the island. It is unclear how quickly FWLs recover from
saltwater contamination, and how that recovery is driven by the intensity,
duration, and frequency of precipitation during the wet season and the
characteristics of groundwater aquifers. The overarching goal of this study is
to understand how the rate of recovery of FWLs that have been impacted by storm-
induced salinization is connected to climatological characteristics (intensity,
duration and frequency of precipitation) and how future FWL recovery will be
affected by elevated sea level and extended periods of drought induced by
climate change, as well as the human response to these events, such as excessive
pumping activity. The study will provide opportunities for training and
international research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as engagement with stakeholders in the region impacted by saltwater
intrusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that the rate of recovery of
freshwater lenses (FWLs) impacted by storm-induced saltwater intrusion is
primarily driven by climatic variability and climate change. This study will
enable the collection of time-sensitive, perishable groundwater data pertaining
to storm-induced saltwater intrusion on the island of Grand Bahama following
Hurricane Dorian. These datasets will later be used to build a robust three-
dimensional, density dependent model to simulate the saltwater intrusion process
in the FWL system and accurately predict the seawater intrusion extent, its
temporal dynamics and the flushing process, as well as the combined effect of
climate stressors such as sea level rise and change in recharge. The ultimate
goal is to develop a framework that combines seasonal forecasts of precipitation
with state-of-the art numerical models to assess the impact of climatic
variability and climate change on the rate of recovery of the FWLs. This project
will provide training opportunities and international research experiences to
students at Sacramento State, which is a Hispanic Serving Institution and an
Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander Serving Institution, and at
Florida Institute of Technology. The citizen science data collection initiative
will provide opportunities to local high school students and students from
University of the Bahamas to interact and participate in the generation of
scientific knowledge. Local water management authorities will benefit from the
generation of new data. Subsequent development of models based on these data
will be available to the local authorities and will assist them in decision
making and planning procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.