* 2015806
* RUI: Investigations on yFACT-genome interactions and other chromatin processes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrea Duina, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,030.00

The central goal of this project is to provide a better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms that ensure that the genetic material within living cells
is used properly and efficiently. Proper utilization of genetic material is
crucial for all aspects of life, ranging from the ability of single-celled
organisms to sense and respond to their surroundings to processes that promote
the development of a newborn human being from a fertilized egg. Thus, this
research will contribute to our understanding of fundamental questions of
widespread biological importance. The project will include participation of a
large number of undergraduate students as key scientific contributors. Twelve
students will be carrying out experiments in the PI’s laboratory: these students
will be mentored by the PI in various aspects of the scientific process,
including experimental design and execution, presentation of research at
scientific meetings, and critical evaluation of scientific literature. These
students will also have the opportunity to develop skills required for effective
communication of scientific concepts to the general public. Approximately 100
additional students will carry out part of this project in the context of
laboratory courses: these students will learn cutting edge experimental
approaches and will be engaged in discussions related to the uses and ethical
considerations of current gene editing technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within eukaryotic cells, most of the DNA resides within
the cell nucleus and is highly compacted through association with a number of
proteins to form a structure known as chromatin, the basic unit of which is
referred to as the nucleosome. Whereas nucleosomes are of critical importance to
cells, they also represent physical obstacles to cellular factors whose
functions require access to DNA. During gene transcription, a complex known as
FACT is recruited to genes to assist with the disassembly of nucleosomes to
facilitate RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) transcription, as well as to promote
nucleosome re-assembly in the wake of Pol II passage. Previous work from the
PI’s laboratory using the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model system identified a
region on the side of the nucleosome, referred to as the ISGI region, required
for proper dissociation of FACT from several genes following transcription. In
this project, the PI’s team will use genome-wide approaches to study the role of
the ISGI region in controlling FACT-chromatin interactions across the entire
yeast genome and in promoting other chromosomal processes. Experiments will also
be carried out to identify and characterize additional nucleosomal regions and
proteins that influence FACT’s ability to interact with genes. Finally, a
CRISPR-based approach will be used to simultaneously identify proteins that
assist Pol II in removing non-nucleosomal obstacles in its path and to identify
factors that promote Cas9-gRNA localization to target genomic sites. Since the
factors and processes studied in this project are highly conserved across
evolution, findings stemming from this research will shed new light on processes
relevant to all eukaryotes, including humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.