* 2015813
* NSF/GEO-NERC: Fungi in a Warmer World
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Jennifer O'Keefe, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2024
* USD 646,855.00

Fungi range from virulent pathogens to key nutrient recyclers in ecosystems.
Understanding their role and global distribution has become vital to our
response to changing environmental conditions. This has proven difficult because
the necessary large-scale, long-term, global fungal community datasets do not
exist. This project will identify and analyze small fungal remains (fungal
microfossils) preserved in sediments from before, during, and after the Middle
Miocene Climatic Optimum (MMCO), a gradual warming event that began 17 million
years ago, to produce the needed data. Results will be used to build better
models of past environmental changes and to predict how fungi will respond to
changing climate conditions today. This international research project links
small, rural universities with flagship research institutions through student
research and tiered-mentoring opportunities, as well as outreach to primary
school children with an engagement package that can be disseminated broadly, and
the greater scientific community through workshops on this topic at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the first global data set
of fungal biodiversity and ecosystem services during an interval of geologic
time characterized by a gradual warming event. Analyses of this dataset will be
used to test the following hypotheses: 1) Overall fungal diversity was higher
during the MMCO; 2) MMCO fungal assemblages globally will show a greater species
richness and abundance of forest-associated ascomycetes; and 3) Fungal diversity
during the MMCO was greatest in areas of warm-unseasonal climates. Hypothesis
testing utilizes three complementary research avenues: 1) identification of
fossil fungi and fungal community assemblages from 11 localities in North
America, South America, South Africa, the Arabian Sea, Australia, Southeast
Asia, and Europe; 2) synthesis of global fungal records from the MMCO; and 3)
reconstruction of global climate for the MMCO using statistically robust
techniques and utilizing both the new data generated and existing data. In
combination, these three research activities will provide the necessary data to
understand fungal biodiversity and ecology in the context of a warmer
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Sedimentary
Geology and Paleobiology Program, (NSG/GEO), the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and NERC. This is a project that is
jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s Directorate of Geosciences
(NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (UKRI/NERC) of the
United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement
allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the
Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with its own investigators and
component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.