* 2015485
* Advancing High-Dimensional Bayesian Asymptotics and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Yves Atchade, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

The big data revolution has turned statistics and machine learning into highly
active and fast-pace research areas that have seen great progress over the last
few decades. However uncertainly quantification with big data and complex models
remains a challenge in the field. In theory, Bayesian statistics solves --
elegantly and straightforwardly -- the uncertainty quantification problem. There
is therefore a need for ideas and methods for constructing useful and
computationally scalable Bayesian procedures. This research project contributes
towards that goal. The developed methodology can improve decision making in
areas such as autonomous driving, medical diagnostics, bail decision, credit
worthiness, criminal sentencing, to list a few. This research will also include
training for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
contributes to the development of theoretically sound, and computationally
scalable Bayesian methodologies for the recovery of high-dimensional parameters.
Toward that goal, the PI will develop a novel and widely applicable quasi-
Bayesian (semi-parametric) framework for learning high-dimensional parameters.
The project will also contribute to the development of Bayesian asymptotic
theory with the analysis of high-dimensional, non-identifiable models. Several
high-profile models (e.g. neural network models) widely used in the applications
are non-identifiable. By applying the new framework to canonical correlation
analysis, this project will also contribute to the development of flexible
Bayesian solutions for high-dimensional sparse canonical correlation analysis,
with wide applicability in bio-medical research. This research project will also
contribute to the computational aspects of high-dimensional Bayesian statistics
with the development of several novel MCMC and VA algorithms. Finally, this
research project will also contribute more broadly to statistics and machine
learning with the development of Bayesian generative adversarial networks
(GAN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.