* 2016360
* IIBR Instrumentation: Development of a Stimulated Raman Scattering Activated Cell Sorter to Enable Phenotype-Based Separation of Microbial Cells From Environmental Samples
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Erik Grumstrup, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 860,072.00

An award is made to Montana State University to develop a stimulated Raman
scattering activated cell sorter to reveal the biology of yet uncharacterized
cells in environmental microbiomes. The instrument will be built and utilized by
a team of three graduate students working at the intersection of physical
chemistry, mechanical engineering, and microbiology. In addition, six
undergraduate students will be trained throughout the project. The highly
interdisciplinary nature of the project will guarantee a unique training
experience for all students. Given the intense interest associated with the
microbiome and its effects on ecosystem functioning and human health, a better
understanding of the microbial world is needed. This project will train primary
and secondary educators to help communicate standards and new findings in this
rapidly evolving field. Project activities will target students at Bozeman’s
Sacagawea Middle School, the annual “Montana State University Family Science
Day” as well as the “Science-Technology Summit”, a 3-day annual workshop
targeted at K-12 teachers from across the state of
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resistance to cultivation under laboratory
conditions of most microorganisms has hindered our understanding of the
functioning of microbes in their natural habitats. A powerful way to study
microbes is to characterize their biology under natural conditions at single-
cell resolution and link their in situ phenotype - their function in their
natural habitat - and genotype - their genetic make-up. While promising, the
available instrumentation capable of achieving such phenotype-based cell
characterization is notoriously low throughout, destructive to the cell, or
both. This project will overcome these bottlenecks by combining stimulated Raman
spectroscopy-based cell characterization, microfluidics-based cell sorting, and
downstream genetic characterization of sorted cells. The high cell sorting rates
achievable by such a system will enable phenotype-based cell sorting of entire
microbial communities, something that is currently not achievable using existing
technologies. The project will impact researchers across many fields, including
microbial ecologists working on natural or human-made system, biogeochemists,
and scientists interested in studying single-cell physiology or the physiology
of rare cell types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.