* 2016661
* Law and Science Dissertation Grant Program
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Jon Gould, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,467,437.00

The Law and Science Dissertation Grant (LSDG) program promotes the progress of
science by identifying and supporting doctoral dissertation research projects
that have the potential to advance science in the multidisciplinary law and
science field, including the disciplines of anthropology, criminology/criminal
justice, data science, environmental science, economics, empirical legal
studies, forensic science, human rights, information technology, political
science, psychology, and sociology, among others. Each year the LSDG program
will provide research support for up to fifteen dissertation projects. In doing
so, the LSDG program nurtures the next generation of law and science scholars by
funding dissertation research with the highest intellectual merit and broader
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSDG program includes policies and procedures
to ensure it funds only the most meritorious dissertation research projects in
law and science. An Advisory Council, composed of representatives nominated by
the various professional organizations that comprise the law and science
research community, will assist in the review process and provide guidance on
general policies and procedures. The LSDG program has a commitment to diversity
that ensures award recipients represent various perspectives, including
substantive representation of fields, demographic representation, and
institutional representation. Awards up to $20,000 each will support basic
scientific research (applied research will not be funded) that is theoretically
derived and empirically oriented. Data will be collected from awardees, who will
provide regular progress and annual reports, and all applicants will be surveyed
to assess early career trajectories. These data will contribute to research on
predictors of success in STEM training. The LSDG program will strengthen
connections among the professional societies that comprise the law and science
community and further efforts to increase the intellectual impact of law and
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.