* 2016850
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Steven Hartz, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 707,800.00

The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) operates R/V Sikuliaq, a 261-foot,
global class ice-capable oceanographic research vessel owned by the NSF as part
of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF) fleet. Sikuliaq provides a general-purpose
platform for multidisciplinary research missions from polar to temperate
latitudes. The ship was delivered in 2014 and has completed five years of funded
operations. UAF requests funds to purchase and install Oceanographic
Instrumentation that would be custom engineered to enhance the vessel's
capability in support of NSF-sponsored research to be undertaken on Sikuliaq in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2019, Sikuliaq completed 274 days, 183 (68%)
of which were for NSF. In 2020, the vessel is scheduled to sail 248 days with
163 days of the schedule for NSF. With this proposal, UAF provides technical
descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following Oceanographic
Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Ship-Side Software-Defined Data Center
$317,800 &lt;br/&gt;2) Ship-Side Core Network Refresh $50,000 &lt;br/&gt;3)
Ship-Side Access Layer Refresh $250,000 &lt;br/&gt;4) Ship-Side Backup Storage
$31,000 &lt;br/&gt;5) Shore-Side Software-Defined Data Center $100,000
&lt;br/&gt;6) Ship-Side Wireless Refresh $82,500 &lt;br/&gt;7) Ship-Side Routing
Refresh $7,500 &lt;br/&gt; $838,800 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.