* 2016058
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Threat Intelligence for Targets of Coordinated Harassment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Andrea Forte, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 388,194.00

Coordinated online harassment by collections of individuals and groups is a
scourge of the modern Internet. It has upended and cost lives, silenced voices,
and is making our public discourse more cruel and less representative. The
phenomenon creates challenges for those who seek an equitable, secure and
trustworthy internet to reduce the threat of coordinated attacks and handle
attacks swiftly and effectively. Using the research team's past experiences with
a clinical model that has been useful in helping victims of intimate partner
violence, and new understandings of how to handle coordinated harassment to
reduce harms and provide active assistance to targets of harassment, this
project pilots an advice clinic. To ensure that the work has practical, real
world impact, the project is also developing materials and working with
platforms, threat intelligence companies, and non-profit organizations that help
targets of online harassment .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a
comprehensive set of technical and human-centered methods to advance our
understanding of coordinated harassment threats and mitigation techniques. The
coordination of harassment allows harassers to scale their attacks, but also
provides defenders with an opportunity to monitor attackers. This project will
study how threat intelligence---an emerging area of cybersecurity that has
enabled the blocking, detecting, and remediation of cyberattacks---can be used
to monitor channels where coordinated harassment and doxing campaigns happen,
understand escalation processes, identify pain points, and prioritize courses of
action for platforms, law enforcement, and targeted individuals. The
multidisciplinary team and mixed methods approach will enable the project to not
only build sophisticated tools, but also build scientific knowledge in multiple
fields and to understand whether and how the proposed tools can contribute
solutions to a complex societal problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.