* 2016191
* Developing in operando structure-property-function guidelines for small molecule organic electron acceptors and its implication on device performance and charge carrier mobility
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Luisa Whittaker-Brooks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 403,070.00

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) technology has the potential for significant economic
impact due to unique features such as flexibility, low weight, and short energy
payback time (i.e. the time needed to produce the energy that was required for
its production). To achieve greater commercial application, OPVs need to
overcome technology challenges in efficiency, stability, durability, and safe
and sustainable production. This project will investigate the processes
responsible for the limited lifetime and efficiency of OPVs under operating
conditions. These studies will be carried out using a suite of in-house and
synchrotron diffraction and spectroscopy tools coupled with device fabrication.
The project team will engage the Salt Lake City community in energy and organic
electronic topics through an innovative education and outreach effort involving
high school teachers. Also, the project team will provide professional mentoring
and short research activities in STEM to economically disadvantaged young female
students in the Valley through the Young &amp; WISE (Women in Science and
Engineering) outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rational design and
investigation of the physical and chemical properties of well-controlled non-
fullerene electron acceptors are critical for enabling high efficiency,
flexible, and solution processable organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Although, power
conversion efficiencies are approaching 15% for OPVs comprising a p-type donor
polymer and an n-type small molecule acceptor in a conventional bulk-
heterojunction architecture, there are still major fundamental knowledge gaps
(i.e., morphology changes, appropriate donor-acceptor coupling, energy level
mismatches) that impede their accelerated development and commercialization.
Furthermore, there is little to no fundamental knowledge on how morphology,
donor-acceptor interfaces, energy level alignments, and device characteristics
evolve under operando conditions and bias stress effects. In this fundamental
research project, the research team will 1) design a model system based on
thionated contorted quaternary perylene diimide propellers as efficient electron
acceptors; 2) develop diffraction and spectroscopy characterization approaches
to elucidate energy level alignment, molecular orientation, and morphology of
electron acceptors when interfaced with other molecules under operating
conditions; and 3) investigate exciton interactions and spin processes that
could enhance power conversion efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.