* 2016107
* EAGER: Plant membrane on-a-chip for the genome wide studies of plant transport processes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Olena Vatamaniuk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2023
* USD 359,998.00

Plant cells are surrounded by the plasma membrane that forms cellular boundaries
and helps to maintain chemically distinct environments within and outside the
cell. Membrane-based compartmentation allows different processes to occur
simultaneously in different parts of the cell and in accordance with plant
needs. These cellular processes ensure plant growth, development and response to
environmental stresses and largely depend on ions and organic molecules
redistribution across membranes. Most nutrients and metabolites cannot freely
cross the membrane, so specific proteins, known as channels, pumps, and
cotransporters, are embedded in plant membranes for this purpose. As scientists
strive to understand how plants adapt to extreme weather conditions, pathogen
pressures, and pollution, uncovering how these transport systems operate is
important for devising sustainable approaches for improving crop yield and
promoting flourishing ecosystems. In this project, a device is proposed that can
take samples of plant cell membranes with embedded transport systems to test
their response and properties to various conditions of interest. The device
consists of a transparent, conductive plastic surface that measures the material
that crosses the plant cell membrane in a highly controlled manner, allowing
scientists to probe, and later connect, the responses of transport systems with
the plant from which it was derived and the conditions under which that plant
was grown. This project will also foster high school student excitement about
career choices in agriculture and life science industries that involve
biotechnology and applications in plants, food, and farming through Cornell’s
WOMEN event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring the flux of solutes and ions across
plant cell membranes through ion channels and transporters embedded within them,
is a significant challenge today, but is fundamental for assigning function to
unknown transporter genes, tackling transporter substrate specificities and mode
of regulation, linking metabolic pathways to cellular compartments, plant growth
and development, and bridging the genotype to phenotype gap. Today's
technologies are inadequate for a number of reasons, including low throughput
and lack of sensitivity, especially for transporters, which have fluxes several
orders of magnitude lower than ion channels. Here, a new technology is proposed
that combines planar plant membranes, microfluidic environmental control, and a
transparent, electrically conducting polymer, comprising a “plant membrane
bioelectronic device.” This device is capable of dual-mode (optical or
electrical) measurement of transporter function. This new kind of sensor device
can be highly multiplexed for collection of large data sets on plant transporter
systems in a way that has not been possible before. Such large data sets feed
into big data science approaches for enabling discoveries and breakthroughs in
our understanding of how plants adapt to genetic perturbations, extreme weather
conditions, pathogen pressures, and other critical aspects important for
improving crop yield and promoting flourishing ecosystems. This project will
also foster the next generation of high school students becoming excited about
career choices in agriculture and life science industries that involve
biotechnology and applications in plants, food, and farming through ongoing
outreach activities that engage K-12 girls and their parents through Cornell’s
WOMEN event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.