* 2016392
* 3D Dynamic Evolution of Pore Water-Air Interaction Within Saturated Sheared Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Khalid Alshibli, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 376,784.00

Many foundation systems are supported by water-saturated sand deposits. At the
micro-scale, the voids between sand grains (pore space) are filled with water.
The sand resists applied foundation loads through friction and interlocking
between particles which is known as the shear strength of sand. The presence of
air within the pore space in addition to water introduces new forces and
fundamentally changes the shear strength of sand. The PI’s preliminary
experiments show that standard procedures to saturate laboratory sand specimens
may suffer from a major shortcoming despite decades of use and wide acceptance
by the geotechnical community. It is difficult to eliminate all air bubbles from
sand pore space and the widely used assumption of a 100 percent saturated state
for a sand specimen with no change in degree of saturation is not correct. If
the degree of saturation of a sand specimen changes from fully saturated to
partially saturated during loading, then current testing procedures yield
inaccurate measurements of shear strength which has a major impact on
interpreting experimental measurements. This award will use dynamic four-
dimensional (three space dimensions and time) imaging to investigate the role of
air on the failure behavior of sand. The findings of this research advances
knowledge in measuring and interpreting shear strength of sand, which have broad
impacts on geotechnical engineering research, design, and practice. This
research will provide an enriching research experience for undergraduate civil
engineering students with emphasis on minority/female students and engage high
school students in research in order to spark their interest in the field of
civil engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to monitor
the evolution of sand-water-air interaction using fast dynamic synchrotron
microcomputed tomography imaging at 6-micron resolution under shear loading
conditions. This research will (i) investigate the influence of particle
morphology and gradation on the degree of saturation of sheared sand; (ii)
monitor local water-air interaction within pore space of sheared sand under
drained condition; and (iii) evaluate the effects of specimen density on the
change of degree of saturation of sheared sand. The following fundamental
questions will be answered: (1) what is the minimum value of pore water pressure
to maintain the same degree of saturation in sheared sand; (2) does the sand
specimen remain 100 percent saturated when it is sheared; (3) if air bubbles
develop; how they will evolve and what are the factors that affect their onset
and growth. 3D probing of dynamic particle-water-air interaction is expected to
offer unique measurements to support the development of a new particle-scale
theory that better describes the behavior of saturated sheared granular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.