* 2016453
* Novel Two Phase Vertically Aligned Nanocomposites Beyond Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Haiyan Wang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 824,213.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Metamaterials, hybrid materials made of nanoscale
inclusions, can exhibit exotic optical responses, and enable promising
applications such as super lenses, optical sensors, and subwavelength imaging.
To date, most metamaterials are created using costly and tedious lithography and
fabrication techniques, and involve lossy metallic materials with high
dissipative losses and heating. Leveraging the expertise in the PIâ€™s group in
processing self-assembled, nanoscale oxide-oxide and oxide-metal hybrid thin
films in a vertically aligned nanocomposite (VAN) form, the project develops a
new class of novel hybrid materials with all ceramic phases, i.e., oxide-nitride
VANs, to address the urgent needs of optical metamaterials with low dissipative
losses and operating over a broad wavelength range. The education and outreach
activities are integrated with the research, including 1) engaging
undergraduates in research; 2) multidisciplinary research training for students
at both Purdue and national labs; and 3) disseminating research findings to
broad audiences by (a) involving underrepresented groups in materials science
and engineering, (b) attracting high school students into materials science
through laboratory demonstrations, lectures at science festivals and materials
art galleries, (c) developing web-based tools for research group websites and
inclusion in NanoHUB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project
focuses on the design, synthesis, and characterization of metal-free hybrid
metamaterials in the VAN thin film form. The goal of the project is to achieve
all-ceramic hybrid metamaterials with tunable physical properties, especially
optical, magnetic and magneto-optical coupling properties. The specific tasks
include: (1) exploring in-plane spontaneous ordering of oxide-nitride hybrid
VANs; (2) enabling nanopillar geometry control towards designable hybrid
materials with high degree of property tunability; and (3) targeting
unprecedented 3D hybrid material designs via multilayer stacking of the VANs.
Besides the fundamental design criteria and morphology control approaches
developed for the all ceramic hybrid metamaterials, the research offers several
technological impacts: (1) metal-free hybrid metamaterial designs are critical
for a wide range of optical applications requiring low dissipation losses, high
thermal stability, chemical inertness, and multifunctionality; (2) novel hybrid
metamaterials may find applications as classical optical interconnects,
waveguides, integrated photonics, and all-on-chip optical circuits; and (3)
magnetic hybrid metamaterials may be used in high density magnetic data storage,
magnetic sensors, and spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.