* 2016961
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Plurality and Managed Integration Strategies in Urban Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Sharika Thiranagama, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,840.00

As urban areas typically tend to be home to heterogenous populations, research
on cities has led urban studies scholars to strongly theorize that the
intersecting and conflicting categories through which urban sociality emerges
are also central to the formation of public life. As witnessed in many cities
across the United States, these encounters and interactions both across and
within social categories of difference are not without their deeply political
stakes. The ways in which people encounter each other are in part determined by
how this diversity is managed by the state, especially with regards to how urban
space is planned. This project, which trains a graduate student in scientific
methods of data collection and analysis, aims to understand how everyday
relationships between communities are shaped by urban integration strategies.
The project would enhance understanding of science and the scientific method by
broadly disseminating its findings to organizations, scientists, and government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will take place in a historically
multiethnic context, where municipal and state authorities have developed a
systematic urban planning strategy of integration to manage socioeconomic,
cultural, and demographic differences. By interrogating how everyday social
relations among demographically and socioeconomically diverse individuals are
experienced, how people inhabit and negotiate their own and others’ categories
of cultural difference, and how sociodemographic integration shapes ideas about
subjectivity, this project utilizes anthropology’s skills in deep, ground level
ethnographic engagement to gain a more detailed, practical, and lived
understanding of sociocultural encounters and relations. Over twelve months of
ethnographic fieldwork combining participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, participant mapping exercises, and archival research, this inquiry
will evaluate ongoing social relations formed through particular approaches to
urban plurality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.