* 2016215
* Mantle redox and partial melting: Pyroxene/basalt and pyroxene/spinel partitioning of Fe3+
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Marc Hirschmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 466,963.00

Formation of magma in Earth’s mantle and eruption at the surface as basalt is
one of the chief mechanisms by which chemical mass transfer occurs between the
interior and exterior of the planet. A key feature of this mass transfer is
exchange of oxidized and reduced chemical species (“redox exchange”), which
influences the composition and properties of rocks, fluids, and gases at Earth’s
surface, as well as the chemical and physical properties of the mantle itself.
For example, the rise of an atmosphere rich in oxygen is linked to the fluxes of
oxidized and reduced chemical species between Earth’s mantle and surface
reservoirs. The principal element responsible for redox exchange during these
processes is iron, which can take on both oxidized (Fe3+) and reduced (Fe2+)
forms. The chief mineral controlling redox exchange during magma formation in
the mantle is pyroxene. However, the relative stability of Fe3+ and Fe2+ in
pyroxene during partial melting of the mantle is poorly understood. This project
aims to determine exchange of Fe3+ and Fe2+ between pyroxene, magma, and spinel,
another important iron reservoir in the mantle, through a program of high
temperature high pressure experiments and by developing new methods for
microbeam analysis of pyroxene using X-ray spectroscopy. The broader impacts of
this work include graduate student training and research experiences for
undergraduates, and development and distribution of standards and methods for
pyroxene Fe3+ microanalysis to other research groups. Also, research results
will be incorporated into interdisciplinary education of earth and planetary
scientists through summer school venues for training of advanced graduate
students, post-docs, and early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determination of Fe3+ in pyroxene has been
hampered by the absence of an accurately calibrated microanalytical method. In
this project, we will further develop synchrotron-based x-ray absorption
spectroscopy of pyroxene by characterizing a suite of standards, analyzed by
Mössbauer spectroscopy, and by applying a method that accounts for
crystallographic anisotropy by orienting crystals using electron backscatter
detection. We will conduct high temperature high pressure experiments in which
pyroxenes are in equilibrium with basaltic melt or with spinel. Analysis of
these experiments will provide constraints on the partitioning of Fe3+ in the
upper mantle and during partial melting. These will be applied to several key
problems in petrology and high temperature geochemistry. They will constrain the
amount of Fe3+ in mantle source regions of the mantle, and therefore lead to
revised estimates of the depths at which carbon occurs in reduced phases and Fe-
Ni alloy precipitates. They will also determine the relationship between Fe3+
concentrations in basalts from different tectonic domains, the conditions of
basalt formation, and the oxidation state of their source, thereby helping to
resolve long-term redox cycling and mass balance in the mantle-surface
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.