* 2016294
* EAGER: Physics of Living Systems Teacher (PoLST) Network: Increasing Student Conceptual Understanding of High School Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2024
* USD 290,712.00

The PI will carry out exploratory research to lay the foundation for the
establishment of a national high school physics network, with the goal of
developing a Physics of Living Systems high school physics curriculum to
increase high school physics student conceptual understanding. A set of surveys
to assess the state of high-school physics teaching was administered during the
Harvard Virtual Workshop in July of 2020. A subset of participants from this
workshop will be selected and invited to join the first cohort of the Physics of
Living Systems Teacher (PoLST) network. The network will operate in close
collaboration with the already-established NSF-sponsored graduate student PoLS
network. The goal is to establish a sustainable community of practice to improve
conceptual understanding of physics at the high school level for all students,
particularly those who are traditionally underrepresented in physics. This is
transformative research because the PI challenges the assumption that physics
educational researchers are the experts who can simply impose what works at the
university level to high school contexts. It is high-risk because we are
entrusting that high school teachers have important knowledge about their
professions and that they will be willing to share this knowledge with physics
education researchers. Rather than taking a deficit-based approach to high
school physics education, the PI will to start a productive and focused
conversation that leads to authentic partnerships with teachers and researchers.
To accomplish this, the PI will take a design-based research
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is tremendous need to increase the number
of qualified high school students who will be ready to succeed in college
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses. Mastery of physics is
critical at this time because physics is central for students interested in
pursuing any number of STEM professions. Understanding both how to leverage
collaborative networks between high school physics teachers and physics graduate
students to develop a curriculum that can increase student conceptual physics
understanding, and consequently reduce the number of undergraduate students who
leave STEM, has the potential to improve the long-term outlook of the nation's
preparation of STEM professionals. The goal is to do so in a foundational, long-
term, and systematic manner where all relevant stake-holder groups are
represented. Increasing conceptual physics understanding at the high school
level, by leveraging a high school physics teacher and physics graduate student
network, will impact how prepared students are to succeed in STEM when they
enroll in university science courses. Students with access to quality physics
education at the high school level will be better equipped to select and succeed
in STEM majors, thus opening a career trajectory in medicine, research,
governmental agencies, environmental sciences, to name a few. These types of
careers are positioned to address some of our planet's most critical threats.
The project will also impact diversity and inclusion efforts by diminishing gaps
in physics preparedness when students get to the university
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.