* 2016656
* CCRI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Open-Source, State-of-the-Art Symbolic Model-Checking Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Moshe Vardi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 256,641.00

Safety-critical and security-critical systems are entering our lives at an
increasingly rapid pace. These are the systems that help fly our planes, drive
our cars, deliver our packages, ensure our electricity, or even automate our
homes. Especially when humans cannot perform a task in person, e.g., due to a
dangerous working environment, we depend on such systems. Before any safety-
critical system launches into the human environment, we need to be sure it is
really safe. Model checking is a popular and appealing way to rigorously check
for safety: given a system, or an accurate model of the system, and a safety
requirement, model checking is a "push button" technique to produce either a
proof that the system always operates safely, or a counterexample detailing a
system execution that violates the safety requirement. Many aspects of model
checking are active research areas, including more efficient ways of reasoning
about the system's behavior space, and faster search algorithms for the proofs
and counterexamples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As model checking becomes more
integrated into the standard design and verification process for safety-critical
systems, the platforms for model checking research have become more limited.
Previous options have become closed-source or industry tools; current research
platforms don't have support for expressive specification languages needed for
verifying real systems. This project will fill the current gap in model checking
research platforms: building a freely-available, open-source, scalable model
checking infrastructure that accepts expressive models and efficiently
interfaces with the currently-maintained state-of-the-art back-end algorithms to
provide an extensible research and verification tool. This project will create a
community resource with a well-documented intermediate representation to enable
extensibility, and a web portal, facilitating new modeling languages and back-
end algorithmic advances. To add new modeling languages or algorithms,
researchers need only to develop a translator to/from the new intermediate
language, and will then be able to integrate each advance with the full state-
of-the-art in model checking. This community infrastructure will be ideal for
catapulting formal verification efforts in many cutting-edge application areas,
including security, networking, and operating system verification. This project
will particularly target outreach to the embedded systems (CPS) community as the
proposed new framework will make hardware verification problems from this
community more accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.