* 2016919
* Collaborative Research: Examining Behavioral and Neurophysiological Precursors of Effortful Control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Martha Ann Bell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 346,917.00

This project is about self-regulation, critical to wide ranging developmental
outcomes across the lifespan. We know little about the origins and initial
development of these skills during the first two years of life. It is during
infancy, however, that behavioral and neurophysiological underpinnings of
emotion reactivity, the precursor of regulation, are manifested. Moreover, sex
differences in these foundational mechanisms have not been examined, despite
considerable evidence of more advanced early regulation for girls. This research
provides an intensive behavioral and brain activity examination of emotion
reactivity, making connections with emerging self-regulation. Our study is the
first to examine: (1) development of brain activity linked with fear/approach
and related information processing biases across infancy, relying on emotion-
eliciting tasks; (2) sex differences in brain activity changes across infancy,
correspondence between behavioral and brain activity change patterns, and the
extent to which these predict self-regulation around the 2nd birthday.
Identified connections between reactivity and regulation will inform existing
developmental theories and results will be disseminated to parents and early
childhood educators, maximizing support for emerging child self-
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting in infancy, regulation is supported by
attentional capacity and becomes essential to functioning across most areas of
life. Despite this importance, the origins of self-regulation are still poorly
understood, especially with respect to the emotional underpinnings. Emotional
reactivity “comes online” first, creating a foundation for subsequent
development of regulatory capacity. Thus, growth in the principal domains of
reactivity (fear and approach) in infancy, and links between these developmental
changes and emerging self-regulation, require further study. We will answer
lingering questions regarding how fearfulness and approach orientation on the
behavioral and brain activity level are interrelated, and the extent to which
these characteristics set the stage for self-regulation. We will leverage
electroencephalography (EEG) recordings and multiple evaluations across the
first two years of life to discern how changes in fear and approach contribute
to the development of attention-based self-regulation, and how these processes
may differ for boys and girls. As a result, parents and educators can be
instructed regarding developmental periods during which effective negotiation of
extreme changes in child approach or avoidance are particularly important from
the standpoint of promoting regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.