* 2016336
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Mantle fluid contribution to springs along the Denali Fault System: Constraints on the crustal scale nature of the main strand and splays
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Sean Regan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 57,554.00

The Denali Fault in Alaska is a &gt;2000-km-long, active, predominately
horizontal motion (strike-slip) fault zone associated with the boundary between
the North American and the Pacific tectonic plates. Fault zones are breaks in
the Earthâ€™s crust that can act as conduits for transport of water from great
depths (&gt;20 miles). Major questions exist about how deeply this fault
penetrates into the crust, how the multiple strands of the fault are connected
at depth, and how the changes in the style of faulting along its trace impact
the circulation of deep groundwater. To inform these unknowns, this study will
examine the isotope geochemistry of springs that discharge along the Denali
fault zone. Results will improve the understanding of the Denali Fault,
particularly with respect to the depth and interconnectedness of fault strands,
with important implications for earthquake hazards and the distribution of
geothermal and mineral resources. This study fosters a new interdisciplinary
collaboration between investigators in Alaska and Utah, and advances education
and training for undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year project will examine the helium
isotope signature of springs discharging along the Denali Fault system and along
splay thrust faults. The fault system transitions east-to-west from a transform
fault to a continental strike-slip fault, and provides a system to test
hypotheses on the nature of continental strike-slip faults and splay thrust
faults as potential conduits for mantle-derived fluids. Helium isotope
(3He/4He), carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen stable isotope, and water chemistry data
from springs will constrain the contribution of mantle-derived fluids to test
competing geophysics models on variations in the crustal scale of the Denali
Fault system, the depth splay faults connect with the master strand of the
Denali Fault, and possible influences of the underlying subducting slab geometry
on fluid isotopic composition. For this exploratory study, ten springs were
selected along the trace of the Denali Fault system in Alaska, including six
CO2-rich springs that deposit travertine to maximize capturing signals from deep
flow paths. In addition to advancing understanding of the structural and
geochemical record of fluid-fault interaction, this study provides a framework
for future helium isotopic analysis of additional springs along the Denali Fault
system, other regional structures, and the tectonic-magmatic regime responsible
for geothermal resources across Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.