* 2016129
* Student Travel Support Program for 2020 American Control Conference; Denver, Colorado; July 1-3, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

This grant will provide the opportunity for 26 students to attend the American
Control Conference where they will attend lectures, present their research, and
network with other students, faculty, and professionals in the field. The
American Control Conference is internationally recognized as a premier
scientific and engineering conference dedicated to the advancement of control
theory and practice. The conference brings together an international community
of researchers and practitioners to discuss the latest findings in automatic
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 ACC technical program will comprise
several types of presentations in regular and invited sessions, tutorial
sessions, and special sessions along with workshops and exhibits. Controls and
the applications considered in this conference (e.g., energy, transportation,
manufacturing) span all areas relevant to the National Science Foundation. The
project will have a tremendous broader impact in that all the students provided
with a travel grant will be diverse (i.e., women, minorities, persons with
disabilities, veterans, and first-generation students) and/or from non R1
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.