* 2016469
* PFI-RP: Water System Analytics for Adaptation to Environmental Vulnerabilities
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Martin Shouler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,797.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the creation of a technical tool and
commercial enterprise that promotes and enables adaptation to climate variations
in the water sector. The specific goal for this research is to develop a web-
based analysis platform that codifies the analytical methods underpinning
advances in decision making under uncertainty to enable broad application of
climate vulnerability assessment and adaptation planning. The feasibility
research will establish a sustainable industry-university exchange through the
development of a joint venture commercial enterprise with industry partners
focused on continuous improvement and promotion of the platform. The effort may
improve the preparedness of society to weather variations in the water supply
industry both in the US and globally. In addition, this effort will educate a
female PhD student through academic and entrepreneurship training and
mentorship. The team will recruit a postdoctoral scientist and provide them with
mentorship and training according to an Independent Development Plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance knowledge in the
production of climate information that supports vulnerability analysis and
adaptation to environmental changes with specific application to decisions in
the water supply industry. It will further advance understanding of adaptation
planning in the water sector, including insights regarding the opportunities,
constraints and impediments to taking action to address vulnerabilities. The
goals of the research are to transition processes and technical tools developed
from NSF-funded research to commercial use. A general analysis platform will be
developed to create a uniform workflow software package for conducting
vulnerability assessments based on decision scaling through collaboration with
industry partners. Customer discovery will be conducted to define the value
proposition and refine the business strategy. The platform will be piloted in
two cities, Miami and Cape Town, both of which are facing threats to their water
supply systems. The key technical hurdle is the creation of the platform as a
web-based application while maintaining the key functional components of
decision scaling. Technical support from industrial partners mitigate the risks
associated with this technical hurdle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.