* 2016545
* PFI-TT: Accelerated Detection of Successful Crop Production
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Blake Meyers, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 347,514.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the acceleration of modern crop
production by removing a key roadblock. Currently, the time and monetary
investment required to generate a new crop line produces accessibility
inequities to the latest improved strains. Through this project, a technology
will be developed to reduce the time and cost to the commercial production
pipeline. This technology will help understand the earliest steps of the crop
production pipeline on the molecular level, so that projects and lines that are
destined to fail can be quickly identified and removed from the production line.
This early quality control will reduce the time and investment associated with
the crop production pipeline, reducing the commercial investment in the process
and improving accessibility to potential new crops. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to detect off-type or “aberrant” RNAs in new crop lines in
the early event sorting phase, after the process of transgenesis. These aberrant
RNAs are unwanted, as they fail the cell’s RNA quality control mechanism and
inhibit future transcription from these regions. The overall scientific goals of
this project are to develop a technology that detects all the RNA generated by a
plant transgene or any locus of interest, and then use this predictive
information to inform breeders which lines should progress in the crop
production pipeline. The research objectives are to refine the technology to
identify all species of RNA generated by a transgene, and then test this predive
potential on real-world crop lines provided by an industry
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.