* 2016564
* PFI-TT: High-Throughput Plant Genetics Platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Elliot Hui, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in improving the breeding of
agricultural crops. Measuring the inheritance of genetic variations is a
critical component of modern plant breeding. Companies individually perform
hundreds of thousands of genetic measurements each day during peak season as
they work to breed the most productive, most resilient, and most appetizing
crops. The proposed technology is expected to facilitate the performance of very
large numbers of parallel, low cost of plant genetics measurements. This
strategy will allow highly information-rich breeding strategies to be broadly
employed in a way that has not previously been possible due to the higher cost
and slower processing of current approaches. The proposed system is anticipated
to have applications in both agriculture and
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will leverage a technology
recently invented at the NSF IUCRC Center for Advanced Design and Manufacturing
of Integrated Microfluidics (CADMIM, NSF Award IIP-1841509) that enables the
formulation of large arrays of genetic measurements through the use of detailed
networks of miniaturized plumbing. This PFI team has previously demonstrated
that the proposed system is capable of performing the distribution and mixing
operations required to prepare the targeted genetic measurement reactions.
However, the reactions themselves have yet to be demonstrated. This PFI project
will transition the technology to a new material platform that will be faster to
manufacture and more conducive to performing the required biochemical reactions.
The error rate of the genetic measurements will also be characterized, and the
manufacturing processes will be tuned to improve accuracy. Finally, the number
of genetic measurements per device will be scaled up, with a target of
performing about 6000 measurements simultaneously on each device. The expected
technical endpoint of this project will be a fully functional prototype ready
for testing by different companies in the plant agriculture
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.