* 2016161
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020  IEEE International Symposium On Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM 2020)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Christophe Bobda, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

The 2020 IEEE International Symposium On Field-Programmable Custom Computing
Machine (FCCM) will be held in Fayetteville AR from May 03 to May 06, 2020. FCCM
is a forum for presenting and discussing new research related to computing that
exploits the unique features and capabilities of field-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) and other reconfigurable hardware, development on architectures, tools,
programming models and applications. The conference is organized over multiple
technical sessions, workshops, panels and a demo night where companies, research
groups and students present the latest development in the field. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Travel grants will make possible the participation of 15 graduate and
undergraduate students who will substantially benefit from attending this
conference but have limited travel funds. Besides attending technical sessions
and learning about latest developments in the field of FPGA, students will
benefit from interaction with leading researchers, companies and institutions in
the field. This can lead to Internships and full employment opportunities
between students and participating companies. Priority will be given to first
time attendees, especially those seeking research topics and in the early stages
of developing their research agendas. A portion of the award will be devoted to
under-represented groups for which substantial recruitment efforts will be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.