* 2016188
* RUI: State-dependent modulation of visuomotor reflexes across Drosophila species
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Mark Frye, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 638,084.00

From the moment we wake up in the morning until the moment we fall asleep we are
constantly barraged with sensory stimuli. The buzzing of the alarm, the dinging
of email alerts, yet somehow, we identify the salient sensory stimuli and ignore
the rest in order to generate an appropriate behavioral response each moment.
Which stimuli we identify to be salient could depend on additional factors such
as our external and internal environments. The overall goal of this project is
to explore how the brain integrates our internal and external environment to
modify the perception of visual cues to promote survival in different habitats.
Specifically, this proposal will examine the contributions of anatomical and
neural circuit changes in guiding visually evoked behaviors in Drosophila
species living in distinct ecological habitats. The proposed work will support
the training of undergraduates at Wellesley College, an all-women’s institution.
Students will be actively involved in all aspects of experimental design, data
collection, analysis, and manuscript preparation. Wellesley’s student body is
geographically, culturally, and economically diverse and all efforts will be
made to involve members of underrepresented groups. Experiments outlined in this
proposal will be carried out by undergraduate research students both in the lab
as well as integrated into an upper-level elective course. Findings from this
work will be shared at scientific meetings as well as with high school students
and elementary and secondary school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can an
organism survive in ever-changing environmental conditions? They must be able to
generate adaptive behavior by applying flexibility as they: (1) discriminate
salient sensory signals from background, (2) assign value – attractive or
aversive – to such stimuli and (3) integrate these stimuli with the current
environmental context and internal physiological state. While inroads have been
made in understanding the processes of discrimination and assigning value, much
remains unknown about where and how short-term (hours timescale) changes in
internal state are integrated to drive contextually appropriate behavior. Work
across organisms has investigated how internal state modulates perception of
odor, pheromone, temperature, and water, however, little work has examined how
internal state differentially modulates the perception of visual stimuli of
organisms from environments with distinct visual ecologies (forest and desert)
that may have imposed very different evolutionary pressures. The goal of this
proposal is to examine the contributions of anatomical and neural circuit
changes in guiding visually evoked behaviors in Drosophila species living in
distinct ecological habitats. These experiments will elucidate the impact of
ecological habitats on the generation of state-dependent behavior and
neuromodulatory circuits in order to understand how behavioral responses and the
neural circuits involved may have been altered by differential evolutionary
pressures. The project will utilize a multifaceted approach: (1) genetic
manipulation to allow control over specific neural pathways, (2) visual and
olfactory ‘virtual-reality’ flight simulators to measure sensory motor
integration that drives adaptive behavior, and (3) in-vivo two photon calcium
imaging as an indicator of neural activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.