* 2016090
* Deriving biological principles from replication initiation control in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Suckjoon Jun, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 721,787.00

The project aims to elucidate how bacterial cells decide when to start DNA
replication, and also disseminate key single-cell technologies used in the
research. While DNA replication is one of the most precise processes underlying
cellular reproduction, how cells maintain the precision under different growth
conditions has remained unsolved for over 50 years despite extensive studies. To
this end, the project brings together tools and ways of thinking from multiple
disciplines, including single-cell technologies that allow continuous tracking
of a large number of individual cells. These technologies were originally
invented in the PI’s laboratory, and have been streamlined over the years so
that even undergraduate students can perform original research alongside
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. In the proposed activities,
undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups will disseminate
the single- cell technologies to the broad scientific community using modern
knowledge dissemination platforms, so that a typical biological lab can
implement the same approaches practically at no cost. Some of the key
experiments, once completed, will be integrated into the design of a biological
physics laboratory course that the PI will develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program will focus on DnaA, a widely conserved master regulator of
replication initiation in bacteria. Based on how cell size at initiation
responds to various growth conditions, a quantitative model is proposed to
explain how production of DnaA and their biochemical properties robustly control
the initiation process in a physiology-independent manner. The predictions of
the model will be tested by using genetic mutants of DnaA and associated
proteins, as well as precision measurements of various single-cell parameters
using state-of-the-art microfluidics and imaging methods. The final output of
this research will provide a mechanistic insight into the precision control of
DNA replication initiation generalizable to a wide range of physiological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.