* 2016178
* CSR: Small: A Just-in-Time, Cross-Layer Instrumentation Framework for Diagnosing Performance Problems in Distributed Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Raja Sambasivan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 397,906.00

Distributed applications running in data centers are critical to society (e.g.,
for shopping, banking). Engineers must diagnose and fix problems observed in
data centers quickly; however, doing so is extremely challenging. A significant
hurdle is that engineers must spend significant time and effort exploring what
instrumentation (e.g., log messages about specific application behaviors) is
needed to provide visibility into a new problem. To assist in this front, this
project will develop an instrumentation framework that, in response to a new
problem, will automatically search the space of possible instrumentation choices
and enable the instrumentation needed to provide insight into
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental challenges
associated with creating an automatic instrumentation framework: (a) What
algorithms and heuristics are suited for automatically and efficiently exploring
the instrumentation search space? (b) What architectural support is needed
within the framework to enable automatic exploration? (c) How can the search
space be explored without significantly impacting application performance? The
proposal will explore the utility of algorithms based on operator knowledge,
statistics, and machine learning to explore the search space. It will build on
end-to-end tracing, as this will enable the framework to work for problems that
affect different sets of requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will inform
the architecture of next-generation instrumentation frameworks, which are needed
to keep pace with the ever-increasing complexity of distributed applications.
The critical issues identified in popular open-source distributed applications
while evaluating the framework will improve their robustness. Researchers will
be able to leverage the software artifacts released by this project to create
novel distributed-application-management tools that leverage the framework's
unique capabilities. They will be able to deploy the framework in research
clouds to obtain valuable workload traces from them. The project will generate
course modules on diagnosis practices for distributed
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The artifacts produced by this project,
including framework source code, workload traces, instrumented applications, and
research results, will be freely disseminated online at: https://massopen.cloud
and https://www.rajasambasivan.com. All software artifacts will be stored in
Github as well. All artifacts will be available for a minimum of seven years
from the start of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.