* 2016330
* PFI-TT: High Performance, Highly Efficient Valves for Controlling Gas Flows
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Thomas Chase, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to bring a new high performance gas
valve technology to market. The term gases refers to fluids that have neither
shape nor volume, such as air. It is not limited to, but includes, natural gas.
Gas valves, also known as pneumatic valves, are used in a huge variety of
industrial and medical products. Two applications of particular interest to this
project are gas flow controllers for semiconductor fabrication and medical
ventilators. The new valves offer extremely fast response and precise flow
control, which is beneficial to both applications. For example, improving valve
performance in semiconductor fabrication equipment will help increase circuit
density in microfabrication processes, thereby facilitating the continuing
evolution of microelectronic systems. The valves are also extremely energy
efficient, which makes them particularly attractive for use in portable medical
devices, such as ventilators used in emergency response vehicles. New
microfabrication techniques will be explored for producing low leakage valves
that may have application in additional products. The valves developed here have
the potential to benefit the gas valve industry as the technology matures.
Emerging applications include soft robotics and fusion reactor control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project capitalizes on a discovery of
a novel valve technology. The valves function by varying the size of a channel
through which the gas flows. Channel size is decreased by moving a plate toward
an orifice and vice versa. A highly efficient electric actuator, called a
"piezostack", is used to move the plate. However, piezostacks can produce only
very small motions, typically tens of micrometers. As a result, past valves
using piezostacks have low flow capacity. The valves overcome the flow capacity
limitation by replacing a single orifice with an array of micro-orifices. The
objective of the research is to advance the new valve technology from a
laboratory demonstration to a marketable product and to formulate a
commercialization plan for the new valves. The research will yield a valve
prototype that can demonstrate the advantages of the new technology to
manufacturers of gas valves. Computational fluid mechanics will be used to study
flow through the valve to develop improved methods for designing them. New
micro-manufacturing methods will be explored to reduce leakage. The technical
goals are to maximize flow through the valve, minimize leakage in the fully
closed position, and minimize manufacturing cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.