* 2016095
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the Reach of Industrial Career Training for Graduate Students
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Louis Rossi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 26,601.00

The 16th annual Graduate Student Mathematical Modeling Camp (GSMMC) will be held
June 9–12, 2021 at the University of Delaware, followed the week after by the
36th annual Mathematical Problems in Industry (MPI) workshop, June 14–18, 2021
at the University of Vermont. GSMMC is a mentored, problem-solving workshop, at
which small teams of Ph.D. students from across the U.S. are guided through
successful mathematical modeling of real-world problems presented by faculty or
experienced postdoctoral mentors. Under careful mentoring, student participants
build their modeling, teamwork and presentation skills during the week: via the
teamwork on modeling and simulating the problems; through the final team
presentations made at the end of the week; and in writing the final reports that
are produced. Training activities also include numerical simulations and the
preparation of a final report outlining their discoveries. These skills are put
to use and consolidated the following week at MPI, where industrial participants
present immediate modeling challenges facing their industries, on which academic
participants (faculty, postdocs, and the Ph.D. students from GSMMC) work.
Significant progress on the industrial problems is usually made, and Ph.D.
student participants take the lead in presenting the findings to the industrial
participants from industry in final presentations at the week's end. In addition
to building their skillsets and resumes, student participants are exposed to
valuable networking interactions with a range of industrial
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GSMMC-MPI program is designed to
integrate interdisciplinary research and education for graduate students. The
GSMMC is focused on graduate student education and training: its chief
intellectual merit lies in the development and analysis, by students, of the
mathematical models for the problems presented. Problems are highly
interdisciplinary, presenting students with a novel intellectual challenge. With
the preparatory training provided by the GSMMC, students are ready for the more
open-ended, research-level environment of MPI. The questions posed at MPI
challenge participants to design new ways of modeling and analyzing industrial
mathematics problems in emerging areas of technology. Mathematical modeling,
analytical techniques, numerical simulations, and data analysis must all be used
effectively. The collaborative approach to problem solving, which brings
together mathematicians ranging from graduate students to experienced faculty,
is central to the structure of MPI and provides significant additional training
to graduate students, while promoting effective scientific communication. Full
details for the Camp may be found at
https://www.mathsci.udel.edu/events/conferences/gsmmc-2021, and for MPI at
https://mpi2021.w3.uvm.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.