* 2016563
* PFI-RP: Scalable Plant-Based Production of Affordable Protein Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Karen McDonald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 591,597.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is a new plant-based biomanufacturing
platform for the production of treatments for rare diseases that will help
patients, reduce U.S. healthcare costs, and open up new commercial market
opportunities. It is estimated that there are about 7,000 known rare or “orphan”
diseases, most with a genetic basis, that collectively affect between 25-30
million people in the United States (about 8% of the population) and only 350
FDA-approved orphan drugs. Even when orphan drugs are available they are often
extremely expensive, costing between $100,000 and $400,000 per patient annually.
As the U.S. tries to reduce healthcare costs, new plant-based biomanufacturing
platforms that enable low cost, scalable production of “orphan” biologics (i.e.,
protein-based therapeutics) are urgently needed. As a proof-of-concept, the team
has selected alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT), a human blood protein that has proven to
be extremely challenging to make efficiently in traditional mammalian and
bacterial hosts, as a target product. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will establish a new biomanufacturing paradigm that overcomes prior challenges
associated with achieving high level production (&gt;500 mg/kg plant fresh
weight) of functional, fully intact human blood proteins in plant production
systems. This project will focus on process development for recombinant AAT
production using transient agroinfiltration of a host plant, Nicotiana
benthamiana, a relative of tobacco, in a contained facility. Since the novel
expression vectors, host engineering vectors, and bioprocessing strategies that
will be evaluated in this project are generic (e.g. the AAT gene can be swapped
out for genes for other therapeutic proteins), it is a platform technology that
can be applied to many biologic products. The specific aims of the PFI-RP
project are to improve production of functional and intact native AAT,
oxidation-resistant AAT variants, and AAT-Fc fusion proteins; establish AAT
production consistency and product quality; and adapt and modify in silico
process technoeconomic models as the process is optimized to evaluate
manufacturing costs, capital investments, and environment, health and safety
impacts for scaled-up production facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.