* 2016239
* 2020 Industrial Ecology GRC; Newry Maine, June 13-19, 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Anu Ramaswami, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 45,000.00

2026239 (Ramaswami). Industrial ecology (IE) is an emerging field that aims to
more efficiently manage natural resources and reduce environmental impacts. It
examines local, regional, and global material and energy flows in products,
processes, industrial sectors, and economies. IE applies a systems approach to
achieve the broad goal of sustainability, that is to advance the well-being of
people and the planet. This 2020 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) seeks to break
new ground by exploring data science advances as they impact core methods of
industrial ecology and sustainability systems science. The GRC-IE will be held
in Newry, Maine, June 14 - 19, 2020. A companion meeting for graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers, the Gordon Research Seminar on Industrial Ecology
(GRS-IE), will be held in conjunction with the GRC-IE (June 13 – 14, 2020).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GRC will break new interdisciplinary ground in
environmental science and engineering by bringing together disciplines that have
not traditionally engaged with environmental science &amp; industrial ecology.
For example, speakers will span: Engineers (including those working on energy
and transportation systems), Remote sensing specialists, and Social Scientists
addressing Co-Production. There will be intentional integration of core methods,
data science, and sustainability systems science. The plenary speakers are
leaders in the field and the discussions will advance basic science, methods in
the field and across disciplines, and applications. Data science advancements
will include data science methodological innovations as well as the science of
co-producing data, with knowledge and insights shared among researchers and
communities of practice, essential for linking research with policy and action
for a sustainable society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.