* 2016501
* Electromechanical Interactions of Gold Nanomaterials with Human Cardiac Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Paul Westerhoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 556,938.00

Nanomaterials have been widely used for a diverse range of applications from
environmental to biological engineering and therapeutics. Among different types
of nanomaterials, gold nanomaterials are promising candidates because of their
minimal toxicity, ease of fabrication, and electrical conductivity. Gold
nanomaterials are used in applications such as regenerative medicine,
specifically for engineering of electroconductive tissues (e.g. cardiac, nerve
or skeletal) that could be used for treatment of trauma, injuries or diseases.
However, there are still knowledge gaps regarding mechanistic understanding
about interactions between gold nanomaterials with electroactive human heart
cells. This research team brings interdisciplinary expertise in biological,
environmental and nanotechnology engineering. It aims to synthesize diverse
geometries of gold nanomaterials and use 3-dimensionsal hydrogel biomaterials
that mimic a porous tissue microenvironment to independently study the
biophysical and electrical interactions of nanomaterials with human heart cells
at cellular and molecular levels. The project has been carefully designed to
broadly impact society through educating the next generation of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, while bringing synergy among scientists
across interdisciplinary fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
the development of a mechanistic and fundamental framework for the interactions
of gold nanomaterials with human cardiac cells (i.e. heart cells) that modulate
their biological response. The research design is based on a two-fold strategy,
through independent assessment of the biophysical and electrical interactions of
gold nanomaterials with cardiac cells. First, a library of gold nanomaterials
with a wide range of geometries and defined surface chemistries, will be
synthesized and then embedded in hydrogel-based scaffolding biomaterials to
mimic a porous native-like tissue microenvironment found in the heart.
Subsequently, cellular uptake of gold nanomaterials, surface colonization,
spreading as well as changes in cytoskeletal structure of the cardiac cells and
specific protein markers will be assessed within the nano-enabled hydrogels.
Next, gold nanoparticles will be synthesized with different surface
functionalities, while maintaining a fixed particle geometry, to specifically
isolate the effect of varying conductivity of nanomaterials on the
electrophysiological response of cardiac cells. Through these research
objectives, the team will test the overarching hypothesis that the mode of
interaction of gold nanomaterials with cardiac cells is through two primary
independent pathways by which gold nanomaterials influence the cellular-level
function and molecular-level response of the cells. These two pathways are
biophysical and electrophysiological sensing. The outcome of this study will
generate fundamental knowledge for in depth understanding of interactions of
conductive nanomaterials with human cells and will further enable better design
of nanomaterials for biological and environmental systems. Additionally, the
interdisciplinary nature of this study will train the next generation of high
school, undergraduate and graduate students, will broadly present the
methodology and the outcome of this research to the scientific community and
will bring together scientist and collaborators across interdisciplinary fields,
ranging from bioengineering to nanotechnology, surface engineering, and cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.