* 2016959
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive explicit and implicit feedback in second language pronunciation training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2024
* USD 332,630.00

Over one million international students study at US universities, and the
majority study in STEM fields. All need to communicate in English, which
requires intelligible pronunciation. The conventional wisdom is that simple
immersion in the English-speaking environment will, over time, improve
pronunciation. Research, however, rejects this view: without instruction that is
explicitly focused on pronunciation (e.g., the vowels /ɛ/-/æ/ as in bad-bed),
learners are only likely to improve within the first year in the new
environment, and instruction is needed after that. Unfortunately, face-to-face
pronunciation instruction is infrequent, thus making computer-assisted
pronunciation training (CAPT) the best option for pronunciation training. CAPT
programs are common, but share a critical weakness of not providing effective
feedback to the learner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will examine the
usefulness of two complementary forms of pronunciation feedback in CAPT:
explicit feedback (focused on delivering precise instruction to the learner
about the location and nature of pronunciation errors), and implicit feedback
(relying on the learner’s ability to perceive their mispronunciations). In
particular, the investigators will develop mispronunciation-detection algorithms
that can highlight errors in the learner’s speech, and they will create accent-
conversion algorithms that can generate personalized speech samples for the
learner: their own voice producing native-speech. These two forms of
pronunciation feedback will ultimately be integrated into a CAPT system that
automatically adapts to the learner’s current pronunciation performance to
maximize the benefits for the learner as they develop their
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;This research is technologically innovative in developing
machine-learning algorithms to simultaneously solve challenges in accent
conversion and mispronunciation detection. In regard to learning, the research
seeks to identify when implicit and explicit feedback are effective within
different stages of pronunciation learning so as to maximize learning. Finally,
the research integrates speech technology and pronunciation training to leverage
their individual strengths. Our goal is that the proposed system can be
successfully used by autonomous learners without involvement of instructors,
thus making personalized pronunciation training feasible at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.