* 2016993
* Investigating the Role of Interest in Middle Grade Science with a Multimodal Affect-Sensitive Learning Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Rowe, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 414,761.00

Student interest and affect play critical roles in shaping how individuals
learn. Interest impacts student engagement with scientific ideas and practices,
student learning outcomes, and the ability to set goals and self-regulate.
Student interest is also a well-known precursor to STEM career development. Over
the past several years, research on affect-sensitive learning environments has
enabled data-rich investigations into the affective dynamics of student
learning. However, designing adaptive learning environments that respond
effectively to student affect is a key gap in the research. Recent developments
in multimodal affect recognition and adaptive learning technologies have set the
stage for the creation of affect-responsive interventions to support student
learning, engagement, and critically, the development of science interest. This
project centers on the design, development, and investigation of a multimodal
affect-sensitive learning environment to enhance middle school studentsâ€™ science
learning, engagement, and interest in science. The project will investigate the
relationship between student affect and interest in science, enabling the
development of methods to support learning and interest development through
multimodal, affect-sensitive interventions within an inquiry-based science
learning environment. It is anticipated that the project will advance the
national goal of providing effective, engaging science learning experiences for
all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the overarching goal of developing
methods and adaptive learning technologies that enable improved STEM education,
the project has two major objectives: The first objective is to design, develop,
and refine an affect-sensitive learning environment based on multimodal neural
architectures to generate and sustain student interest in inquiry-based science
learning. A suite of physical hardware sensors to capture rich multi-channel
data (facial expression, eye gaze, posture, gesture, interaction trace logs)
combined with quantitative observations of student affect and behavioral
engagement (i.e., an established protocol for observations) will be utilized to
train multimodal recurrent neural network-based models of student affect
recognition. These models will drive adaptive interventions to guide students
toward engaged problem solving by triggering and maintaining student interest in
science inquiry. The affect-sensitive interventions will be integrated with
Crystal Island, an inquiry-based learning environment for middle school science
education. The second objective is to investigate the impact of the multimodal
affect-sensitive learning environment on student learning, engagement, and
interest in science. A culminating study with middle school students will
examine the impact of these designs, comparing the multimodal affect-sensitive
learning environment to a baseline environment without affect-sensitive
interventions. This comparison will test the effectiveness of the learning
environment in fostering enhanced learning and interest outcomes across a
diverse range of learners, examining measures of knowledge, engagement, and
interest, including interest in science and interest in STEM careers. The
resulting findings will yield significant contributions to both theory and
practice in student interest development and produce an empirical account of the
effectiveness of multimodal neural architectures for modeling and responding to
student affect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.