* 2016420
* PFI-TT: Fabrication of color-shifting coatings containing reflective microstructures
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Lauren Zarzar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,946.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to design, fabricate, and evaluate
the properties of coatings that change color when viewed at different angles or
under different lighting conditions for technological and aesthetic use. Color-
shifting coatings have commercial applications as diverse as security, anti-
counterfeiting, decorative paints, cosmetics, packaging, and advertising.
Current color-shifting coatings technologies rely on very small nanoscale
structures, which are challenging and expensive to produce. Current technologies
also provide little control over the specific colors reflected and the angles to
which those colors are reflected. More customizable color-shifting coatings that
use larger microscale structures may enhance the distinctiveness of security
features, provide new avenues for self-expression, and reduce cost. Success of
this project may enable the design of the microstructures to create customized,
desired color palettes that can be fabricated by scalable methods. The proposed
technology will also be incorporated into an entrepreneurial innovation course
at Penn State as a team-based case study to provide undergraduates with hands-on
experiences developing a commercialization plan for a new technological
invention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to exploit, for the
purposes of coatings design, the color generation that occurs when light
reflects multiple times within microstructures. Existing color-shifting
materials, such as diffraction gratings or thin films, create optical
interference through the use of periodic nanostructures. By using
microstructures that are orders of magnitude larger and easier to fabricate in
various geometries, there is an opportunity for greater customization of the
reflected colors. Objectives of this project include the fabrication of
microstructure arrays over large areas, generation of nickel metal molds that
can be used for polymer imprinting of microstructures, evaluation of
thermoplastic polymer embossing and scalable methods for microstructure film
production, and evaluation of the prototype film optical properties as
benchmarked against current competitor coatings. Partnerships to aid
manufacturing scalability will be pursued. Customer discovery will be conducted
to aid in evaluation of commercial potential and target market
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.