* 2016739
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 140,054.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) requests funds for Shipboard
Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) that is needed to carry out NSF-supported
scientific research. Working within the collaborative framework of the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), the proposed
equipment will be maintained by the SIO ship operations department for use by
NSF-supported scientists from institutions nationwide who require these seagoing
facilities. Equipment is requested for the three vessels operated by SIO: RV
Sally Ride, a 238-foot, Navy-owned vessel built in 2014, RV Sproul, a 125-foot
state-owned vessel and RV Roger Revelle, a 273-foot, Navy-owned vessel. Sally
Ride completed 282 funded days in 2019, only 13 of which were for NSF. In 2020,
the ship is scheduled for 254 days with 102 of them in support of NSF-funded
science. Sproul completed 90 days in 2019, 6 of which were for NSF. In 2020, the
vessel is scheduled for 81 total days with 2 of them for NSF. Revelle is
currently in mid-life refit but completed 85 days in 2019, 72 of which were for
NSF. In 2020, she is scheduled to sail 177 days with 98 of those for NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, SIO provides technical descriptions
and rationale for the acquisition of the following SSSE:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Wide-throat block R/V Robert Gordon Sproul $26,014&lt;br/&gt;2) Trawl winch
level wind R/V Robert Gordon Sproul $127,013&lt;br/&gt;3) Flagging block sheave
tread R/V Roger Revelle $13,041&lt;br/&gt;4) Flagging block sheave tread R/V
Sally Ride $13,041&lt;br/&gt;5) Replacement portable crane for R/V Roger Revelle
$222,760&lt;br/&gt; $401,869&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.