* 2016192
* Electrode/Electrolyte Interfaces in High-Voltage Aqueous Alkali-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Zhenxing Feng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 484,324.00

Energy storage at an affordable cost has emerged as one of the challenging
issues for the energy sector. It is critical for a wide range of applications
ranging from electric vehicles to grid storage of renewable energies. Batteries
that use an aqueous (water-based) electrolyte have the potential to be more
durable and less prone to thermal runaways than current lithium batteries that
use an organic solvent. Many of these energy storage applications require high
energy density with safe, thermal control of the system. The aqueous electrolyte
can solve this problem and also be beneficial for energy storage due to its low
cost and high power. However, current aqueous battery technology has an
insufficiently low energy density and a narrower voltage output compared to
lithium-ion batteries using organic electrolyte. The aim of this research
project is to expand the voltage operating window of aqueous batteries. This
research will use model thin film systems and combine a suite of advanced in-
situ synchrotron X-ray scattering and spectroscopy methods to study the
electrode/electrolyte interfaces, which is posited to be the key to enable high
voltage in these systems. In addition to advancement in science, the project
also promotes the participation of undergraduate students in research through
Oregon State University’s Johnson Scholarship and conducts STEM outreach through
the OSU Summer Experience in Science &amp; Engineering for Youth Program
involving pre-college students in middle school and high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aqueous alkali-ion batteries (AAIBs) are promising
candidates for large-scale electrochemical energy storage in terms of cost,
safety, and power capability. Compared to lithium-ion batteries using organic
electrolyte, the main drawback of AAIBs is the limited 1.23 voltage window,
beyond which the water splitting reaction happens and consequently hydrogen
and/or oxygen gases are produced. Although some successful cases have
demonstrated that using water-in-salt electrolyte can obtain high-voltage (more
than 3 V) for some aqueous lithium-ion chemistries, such knowledge has not been
transformed to other alkali ion chemistries such as sodium or potassium-ion. The
goal of this project is to use well-defined thin film systems of aqueous
lithium-ion batteries and in-situ synchrotron X-ray techniques to study the
formation, structure and composition of solid-electrolyte interphases at the
anode and cathode. Such knowledge can be used to design aqueous batteries with
high-voltage and long cycling life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.