* 2016256
* Designing Ultra-hard Coatings of Q-carbon and Diamond Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 126,101.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ultrahard protective coatings are critical in
applications ranging from microelectronics packaging to cutting tools needed for
oil and gas extraction and high-speed machining. Performance improvement
directly scales with the hardness enhancement of protective coatings. This
proposal focuses on design and synthesis of ultrahard materials, striving to be
harder than diamond — the hardest material known so far. By using a novel
approach based upon rapid laser melting and quenching, it is possible to create
diamond or new Q- phases of carbon which are significantly harder. Since this
process can be performed at ambient temperatures and pressures, there is a
significant reduction in energy usage and manufacturing of Q-carbon and diamond-
related materials. This research is being integrated with the curriculum
development and related educational activities, such as M.S. Nano program. The
proposal addresses training of graduate and undergraduate students in
collaboration with ORNL, Kopin Corporation and NC A&amp;T to attract minority
students into the graduate studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Diamond and Q-phase related materials are synthesized by nanosecond laser
melting of carbon films and rapid quenching from the undercooled state. The
degree of undercooling determines this direct conversion into diamond or
Q-carbon or a mixture of the two. Modeling is carried out to understand laser-
solid interactions and correlations between hardness and number density of
atoms. In this project, different Q-carbon and diamond mixtures are synthesized
by controlling laser, film and sapphire substrate variables. These phases are
characterized by using high-resolution electron microscopy, electron-energy-loss
spectroscopy and Raman techniques, and direct correlations with enhanced
hardness and toughness established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.