* 2016266
* Light-Induced Chromosomal InteracKon: A New Tool to Study Chromosome Dynamics and Its Biological Roles
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Lu Bai, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

This project will develop a novel method to use light to control and manipulate
the 3D conformation of chromosomes. Containing the genetic materials of an
organism, chromosomes play essential roles in many cellular processes. To
perform these functions, chromosomes often need to interact physically. Although
many interactions between chromosomes have been found, how fast such
interactions can be established is not clear. The project will provide a method
to probe such dynamics and understand how these dynamics are regulated. This
project will engage undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary
research bridging genetics, imaging, and computational biology. The principle
investigator is developing an interdisciplinary biophysics course, and some of
the results from this project will be incorporated into two new teaching modules
in that course. This project will also allow the principle investigator to
continue promoting women and minority students from multiple disciplines to
pursue science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engineer baker’s yeast
cells in order to recruit light-induced dimerization proteins to targeted
chromosome loci and then use light to induce physical interactions between the
two loci. The lab will collect quantitative measurements of the time it takes
the two chromosomal loci to encounter one another and to dissociate when
dimerization is reversed. Next, they will examine how the phases of the cell
cycle, cell size, and DNA damage affect the encounter time. The project will
also probe how such induced interactions affect genome-wide chromosome
conformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.