* 2016450
* PFI-TT: Development of a low-cost OLED via surface chemistry
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Russell Holmes, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is greater availability of the superior
(but currently more expensive) organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). OLEDs
display advantages including high brightness, large viewing angles, thin
profile, lightweight and flexible construction, and custom form factors. The
cost savings achieved via the project potentially allows these OLEDs to enter
lower cost markets currently occupied by liquid crystal displays (LCD, e.g.
calculators, monitors), providing higher quality displays at comparable cost.
Lower cost flexible OLEDs accelerate their adoption in next generation devices
such as smart fabrics, rollable/foldable electronics, and bioelectronics.
Reduced cost in OLEDs also directly benefits consumers of electronic devices
which already contain these screens (e.g., OLED TVs, smartphones, and
tablets).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to address an issue
that occurs during the last step of the OLED stack manufacturing process. This
step deposits hot or high energy metal electrodes onto the sensitive organic
layers leading to material damage and/or formation of metal filaments shorting
the device. As an alternative, a thin chemical coating, only a nanometer thick,
can be applied to the surface of the top organic layer. Chemical substituents
are designed to specifically bind to the incoming metal, arresting its
penetration into the sensitive organic layers and eliminating damage. By
controlling this interface, less organic material is needed to compensate for
the damage-induced inefficiencies. These reduced cost OLED prototypes are
fabricated and assessed via standard device metrics (e.g., device driving
voltage, external quantum efficiency, and lifetime) to show device performance
is maintained. Coating conditions are optimized within industrially-compatible
tools (atomic layer deposition) with a processing time and thermal budget in
line with manufacturing requirements. The anticipated outputs of this research
are a technology which can be immediately implemented by existing display
manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.