* 2016643
* CCRI: ENS: Modernizing and Streamlining DeterLab Testbed Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project modernizes the publicly available DeterLab cybersecurity testbed
by: (1) updating the community research infrastructure (switches and nodes) to
support large scale, virtualized experiments, (2) streamlining the
experimentation process to broaden participation of new user communities. One
third of the institutions using DeterLab today are community colleges and
smaller universities, which lack dedicated research infrastructure. This new
generation of Community Research Infrastructure will offer powerful assistance
to level the playing field for the underserved research and student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be carried out through a
groundbreaking program to: (1) modernize the community research infrastructure
of the public DeterLab testbed for cybersecurity experimentation, and to (2)
streamline the experimentation process to broaden participation of new user
communities. Research infrastructure modernization will be achieved with three
architectural changes: (1) replacing current, 15-year old network switches with
modern whitebox switches, which support programmable software-defined networking
(SDN) and Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) with Virtual Extensible LAN
(VXLAN) dataplane encapsulation, (2) replacing all dated (over 10 years) old PC
nodes with 144 high-density nodes, which support virtualization of many nodes on
one physical node, (3) replacing current, outdated, testbed software, based on
Emulab, with modular and modern Merge software. These changes will modernize the
testbed, making it more robust, reliable, and self-sustainable, supporting many
more users through resource virtualization. These changes will additionally
enable users to perform large-scale experiments with reconfigurable topologies
and across multiple testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will further
streamline the experimentation process on the modernized DeterLab testbed by:
(1) fully integrating several solutions for testbed experimentation
(virtualization, traffic generators, orchestration software, malware
experimentation environment, etc.), developed over the years, with the
mainstream testbed software, documenting them and making them available to all
users, (2) providing a set of experiment templates in several cybersecurity
domains that users can start from and evolve to fit their needs; these templates
will include the newly-integrated experimentation solutions, (3) offering live
and recorded Webinars on monthly basis, and offering tutorials and demos at
cybersecurity conferences and workshops, as well as diversity conferences and
workshops, to attract new users to the modernized DeterLab testbed. Streamlining
the experimentation process will make it easier for current users to design and
perform experiments, and will attract and ease the on-boarding for new users.
Community engagement and outreach activities will ensure that existing and new
users provide input to the modernization project. Additional information on
DeterLab can be found at https://deter-project.org/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.