* 2016293
* 2020 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics, Baltimore, Maryland
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Thao (Vicky) Nguyen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2024
* USD 41,853.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The objective of this workshop is to enhance the
career development of future leaders in ceramics science and engineering, as
well as to facilitate a broader discussion on emerging research areas in
ceramics. The workshop will be hosted on the campus of Johns Hopkins University
on June 4-5, 2020. The workshop focuses on the research and career plans of four
recent CAREER awardees in the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials
Research, with feedback and guidance provided by experts designed to be valuable
to all early-career faculty participants. The program involves intensive
technical discussion of the participantsâ€™ research areas, targeted scientific
and career feedback, and a set of discussions via expert panels designed to
provide insight into a variety of important academia-related topics. The
workshop features senior researchers, early-career faculty, senior post-docs,
and graduate students, with the goal of bringing together a diverse group of
people in the ceramics community. The technical and career-related discussions
provide the support and guidance necessary for younger researchers to become
successful as leaders in research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The 2020 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics will be held on
June 4-5, 2020 on the campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland.
The technical portion of the workshop focuses on the four topics to be presented
by the CAREER awardees: 1) designing and understanding layered oxide ceramic
heterostructures that exhibit unique ion storage and transport properties, 2) in
situ investigation of oxygen evolution and reduction reactions at the surface of
ceramics for solid-oxide fuel cells, 3) revealing the real-time growth process
of oxide materials during atomic layer deposition, and 4) understanding how
unique magnetic properties arise at interfaces between thin oxide ceramic
materials. These topical areas provide a foundation for discussion among early
career faculty and technical experts for the purpose of critically evaluating
research plans, career development, and education
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.