* 2016549
* PFI-TT: Manipulating Mycorrhizal Fungi: Plant Symbionts in Organic Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* James Bever, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will support the development of a woman-
owned small business and the training of underrepresented students learning
farming technologies. This project will identify plant symbionts that improve
crop productivity, nutrition, and secondary metabolite production in organic
agriculture and will directly influence contemporary farming practices. In
preliminary trials, the team isolated mycorrhizal fungi; These plant root
symbionts have been shown to improve crop yield by as much as 30%. This project
will result in products for organic or conventional farmers to increase crop
yield, either in biomass, nutritional value, or the concentration of marketable
phytomedicinal compounds in their crop species. The technology may improve the
profit margins of organic and conventional farmers in the US and beyond. Beyond
the commercial potential, this team will also contribute to scientific
understanding of how plant symbionts such as mycorrhizal fungi influence plant
secondary metabolite production and plant nutrient composition. These
mycorrhizal fungal isolates could help ease soil stress and nutrient loss that
occur in long-term organic agricultural soils across the world, improving the
global agricultural environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will assess the effect of mycorrhizal fungi on organic crop production.
Maintaining productive soils in organic agriculture is challenging, as few
options are available for farmers to improve the soil conditions of their field.
This difficulty can lead to lower crop productivity and even failed crop
establishment. Mycorrhizal fungi are soil organisms that symbiotically associate
with plants to deliver difficult-to-acquire soil nutrients to plant hosts. In
preliminary trials, the team has identified several highly beneficial
mycorrhizal fungi that can be cultured in a laboratory setting to be applied in
organic agriculture. This research will use field and greenhouse assays to
assess more than 40 crop varieties to identify crops that demonstrate the
strongest growth and nutritional improvement after inoculation with unique
mycorrhizal isolates compared to commercially available mycorrhizal products.
Mycorrhizal mediated abiotic stress resistance will be assessed by testing how
mycorrhizal applications compare to traditional organic fertilizer application
in situ with a local organic farm. This project will also help farmers
understand how specific mycorrhizae can alter the concentration of plant
secondary metabolites that are marketed for their medicinal, nutritional, or
other dietary value for plants with large economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.