* 2016569
* BEE: Testing eco-evolutionary effects of genetic drift and gene flow in stressful environments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Betsie Rothermel, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 943,595.00

Habitat loss is splitting the worldâ€™s plants and animals into smaller and more
isolated fragments. At the same time, many organisms also have to withstand
rapid and stressful changes to their environment. Combined, these factors can
increase extinction risk. One possible escape from extinction is through
adaptation. Yet, small populations with low genetic diversity may be unable to
adapt in time to keep pace with environmental change. An approach sometimes used
to increase genetic diversity is to move individuals from one site to another.
In theory, this method could prevent extinction by increasing the potential and
speed of adaptation. But, it is unknown how this occurs, or how often it works.
This project will determine whether small populations that received new genes
can adapt faster to a stressful environment and avoid extinction compared to
those that have not. This project will focus on studying eastern mosquitofish in
outdoor tanks. These fish tanks will have different amounts and types of genetic
diversity, and some will be heated to make their environment stressful. The
researchers will measure changes in genes and in the number of fish in each tank
over several years. At the end of the experiment they will determine whether
fish from heated tanks can resist heat better than fish from unheated tanks.
Genes involved in adaptation to heat will be identified, and the researchers
will assess whether tanks that received new fish were less likely to go extinct.
This project will reveal the genetic factors that contribute to adaptation
versus extinction. Importantly, outcomes from this work will inform management
decisions and improve biodiversity conservation. Broader Impacts include K-12
outreach through teacher training and summer camp activities for students. A
postdoctoral researcher and several graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained as part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid adaptation has the
potential to rescue populations facing novel, stressful environments. Yet, this
will only happen if populations can survive under stressful conditions and also
have sufficient genetic variation to respond to selection. Most of the
evolutionary rescue literature focuses on the roles of local standing variation
or de novo mutation, largely ignoring the beneficial or constraining roles of
gene flow and genetic drift. Recent evidence suggests that gene flow may be an
important source of variation that can result in increased population growth,
especially when recipient populations are small and inbred. However, direct
evidence that gene flow can prevent extinction is lacking from natural
populations, and long-term benefits of gene flow such as increased adaptive
potential have almost never been shown. The proposed research will investigate
how differences in recent evolutionary history (i.e., genetic drift and gene
flow) affect adaptive response and persistence in the face of novel stress. The
project will generate experimental populations of eastern mosquitofish with
different recent evolutionary histories. The researchers will use acute stress
experiments to test the effects of evolutionary history on initial and evolved
thermal tolerance. A multigenerational mesocosm experiment will be used to test
how evolutionary history affects individual fitness, population dynamics, and
extinction probability in populations exposed to chronic novel stress (near-
lethal heat) compared to a benign environment. Finally, the researchers will
generate whole genome sequence data from wild populations and from a time series
collected from the mesocosm populations to identify genomic mechanisms
underlying adaptation and demography. This project will provide a unique
mechanistic view of the eco-evolutionary roles of genetic drift and gene flow
and may fundamentally change generally accepted expectations about the role of
gene flow in contemporary populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.