* 2016272
* I-Corps:  Fiber Scaffold Platform For 3D Cell Culture
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Vladimir Reukov, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
translation of scalable three-dimensional cell culture (3DCC) technology. In
2019 the global and U.S. market sizes for 3DCC technologies were $400M and
$150M, respectively, expected to grow at 15% CAGR through 2024. Recent advances
in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, cancer and stem cell research
are made possible through the advent of 3DCC techniques, replacing the
traditional two-dimensional cell cultures. 3DCC techniques are expected to
better mimic natural tissue conditions. The proposed 3D scaffolding technology
offers highly customizable scaffolds with specific cell type environments,
offering high yield and scalable production of biopharmaceuticals. This will
impact the drug discovery market by improving the reliability of preclinical
screening and reduced animal model usage. Further, this 3DCC platform innovation
will accelerate the research and commercial activities in tissue engineering,
cancer and stem cell markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
explores translation of improved three-dimensional cell culture (3DCC) methods.
Large-scale production and isolation of cellular metabolites of pharmaceutical
value, as well as rapidly growing tissue engineering applications, call for a
rapid and high-yield 3DCC technique that supports the right cell phenotype with
healthy cell population through a better nutrient and metabolite exchange over
an extended period. Despite significant success of laboratory-scale 3DCC
techniques to grow microtissues, they largely misrepresent the natural
extracellular (ECM) characteristics, and lack of established high-throughput and
rapid screening protocols for drug discovery are hurdles to adopt 3DCC widely in
biopharmaceutical industry and research. Therefore, a better scalable 3DCC
technique closely mimicking the natural ECM is urgently needed. The proposed 3D
scaffolding technology enables biocompatible polymeric fibers as building blocks
to recreate the cell-specific scaffold in a bottoms-up approach, mimicking the
natural ECMs closely with higher cell yields. Further, these scaffolds can be
optimized and scalable to specific applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.