* 2016802
* I-Corps:  System, Apparatus, and Method for Providing Behavior-Based Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence Augmentation to Enhance Performance
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Benjamin Harvey, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce the
cost of machine learning (ML) development by up to 50%, while simultaneously
increasing intelligence production to address national priorities. The
advancements of Big Data and storage technology have led to increasing levels of
data production but without enough qualified analysts to transform data into
actionable insights. The federal government invests nearly $5 billion in
research related to artificial intelligence (AI) and ML in fiscal 2020, and
public sector forecasts suggest that AI decision support/augmentation will
deliver $2.9 trillion in value. This project will introduce revolutionary
methods enabling analysts to auto-visualize patterns to support public sector
and private market applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
provides a framework for artificial intelligence (AI) augmentation that is tool-
agnostic and can be used across any application, including national security.
The innovation aims to integrate artificial intelligence (AI) augmentation and
user behavior patterns through existing applications, collectively enhancing the
performance of analysts and citizen data scientists. To address these
challenges, the goal is to provide recommendations that are overlaid and
integrated directly into the web application to help analysts increase
intelligence production and dissemination across various public sector
entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.