* 2016625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Language in Human Capital and Entrepreneurial Development
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Nicholas Harkness, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,200.00

Policymakers and economists frequently link investment in a nation’s young
people with its economic growth. Young people, they argue, are the nation’s
human capital and future workforce. This perspective has affected the ways
international institutions and governments manage the integration and
transitioning of new capital and labor markets. Policies and programs often
focus on the education and training of youth, placing special importance on the
development of cognitive, socio-behavioral, and linguistic skills. This project
is an ethnographic study that investigates how young people react to this
pressure to develop their human capital and entrepreneurial ability. In addition
to training a graduate student in data collection and analysis, this project
aims to advance scientific understanding by providing descriptive knowledge of
the motivations, experiences, and cultural values of everyday actors operating
under changing political economic terrains. This knowledge is essential for
policymakers and social scientists to understand the management of economic and
institutional resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a twelve-month
ethnographic study of emerging language entrepreneurs, the investigators will
examine the ways that people in transitioning contexts experience and manage
integration into the global economy through development of their human capital.
The research focuses on the young employees of media startups, in a market where
observers have determined that small and medium-sized enterprises like these are
essential to private sector development, as they are widely seen as drivers of
innovation and growth. The investigators will collect multi-perspective data
through participant observation, interviews, linguistic analysis, and
collaborative media collection to explore how and why language has become a site
of both economic and personal transformation for young entrepreneurs. This
research brings together the often-separate fields of linguistic and economic
anthropology in order to investigate how people relate economic change to
language use in everyday practice. This is especially crucial in a time when
many social theorists and economic actors alike consider information and
communication processes the driving market force. Findings will not only advance
an understanding of how states and citizens react to changes in political
economy, but will provide new insight into the consequences of policy decisions
that take human capital development as their focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.