* 2016422
* CNS Core: Small:  Rethinking Runtime Power Management for Mobile System-on-a-Chip
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Lin Zhong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 520,719.00

Runtime power management (PM) is concerned with putting idle components of a
computer system into power-saving modes while the system is still serving its
user. Power management is increasingly important to the battery lifetime and
thermal management of mobile systems whose computational heart, a system-on-a-
chip (SoC), often integrates tens and hundreds of components and billions of
transistors. Existing systems reply on device drivers for runtime PM. A device
driver is a software program that controls a particular type of hardware device
attached to a computer. This approach to PM not only leads to unoptimized, or
often complete absence of runtime PM in widely used mobile systems, but also
incurs high overhead by engaging the high-power central processing unit (CPU).
The goal of this project is to relieve device drivers and the CPU of runtime PM
by completely rethinking runtime PM of mobile SoCs. First, it will investigate a
novel architecture in which a single operating system entity reasons whether a
SoC component is idle without involving its device driver. Second, the project
will contribute to operating system support such that the runtime PM logic can
be entirely realized on an ultra-low-power computing core available in modern
mobile systems. The project will prototype and evaluate its technical
innovations with Android/Linux-based testbeds and Field-Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA)-based SoC prototyping hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
leverage collaborations with industry leaders to ensure a timely transfer of
technologies into industry and a broad impact on the commercial development of
mobile systems and their SoCs. The project will provide new modules for teaching
mobile and embedded systems and a platform to engage high-school and minority
students. As mobile systems are providing access to information technologies to
underserved populations and being adopted for professional uses, by improving
their battery lifetime and therefore usability, the project will have a positive
socio-economic impact globally. Research results will be published in academic
conferences and journals. Resulting hardware design, software, and data will be
made open-source and freely available at a repository accessible from
http://download.recg.org. This repository will be maintained at least five years
after the project is completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.