* 2016908
* Sociotechnical Interventions for Nurturing Successful Team Learning Experiences
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Brian Bailey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

As the need for collaboration in the workplace increases, teaching teamwork is
important for preparing students to be successful in their chosen careers.
Instructors who want to incorporate teamwork into their courses face challenges:
how to group students into effective teams given the learning goals and, once
formed, how to support teammates in connecting to create a successful learning
experience. Today, instructors struggle to address these challenges, often
delegate team formation to the students themselves, and conduct few, if any,
activities aimed at team development. This project will produce 1) technological
innovations that will enable instructors to algorithmically group students into
teams with effective compositions given the learning goals and 2) intervention
activities to nurture the foundations of teamwork such as team identity and
psychological safety in those teams. The activities and technological
innovations will be motivated by relevant theories, refined through design
sessions with stakeholders, and empirically tested in university courses. The
project outcomes have the potential to help the many instructors assigning team
projects decide (1) how to best group students into teams given the context-
specific goals of a course, (2) how to achieve those best groups with an
intelligent team formation tool, and (3) how to help teams create the
psychological safety that fosters success. Students are expected to benefit by
being assigned to teams where they can best utilize their individual strengths,
by experiencing a fairer team formation process, and by learning how to engage
with teammates most effectively. Graduate students aiding the research
activities in this project will gain knowledge and skills in human-computer
interaction, learning science, and computer science, and will learn about the
interdisciplinary design and research process necessary to create successful
cyberlearning tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates, in large
course settings, a conjunction of new algorithmic team formation and social
techniques, to support team development. The project integrates social and
learning science and technology design to advance knowledge of (1) how team
composition relates to collaborative process, team performance, and team
satisfaction for specific learning goals; (2) learnersourcing techniques to
generate team compositions that students prefer and to involve them in
configuring these compositions in a team formation tool; (3) interventions to
help a team develop foundations for successful learning experiences and
guidelines for which interventions teams should perform, given the team’s
composition and goals; and (4) how different categories of learners perceive the
value and fairness of algorithmic team formation and how they make that
determination. These four research goals will be addressed through a design-
based research methodology—where an iterative approach is applied to the design,
deployment, and evaluation of both the technology and the interventions—drawing
from theories of learning, team composition, and team building. The research
efforts will advance our knowledge of how best to support collaborative learning
activities and progress toward a future where instructors can combine social
processes and intelligent tools to deliver effective team-based learning
experiences for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.