* 2016619
* CCRI: Planning: Collaborative Research: Infrastructure for Enabling Systematic Development and Research of Scientific Workflow Management Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Rafael Ferreira da Silva, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 70,000.00

Scientific workflows are used almost universally across research and engineering
disciplines and have underpinned some of the most significant discoveries of the
past several decades (e.g., first detection of gravitational waves from
colliding black holes, the discovery of the Higgs boson, and the detection of an
exotic nuclear decay). Workflow management systems (WMSs) are software systems
that provide abstraction and automation for facilitating access to and
management of distributed and heterogeneous compute and storage resources. They
enable a broad range of researchers to easily define sophisticated computational
processes and to then execute them efficiently on parallel and distributed
computing platforms. Unfortunately, in spite of widespread adoption of
workflows, the technology landscape is segmented and presents significant
barriers to entry due to the existence of dozens of seemingly comparable, yet
incompatible, systems. The research landscape is also disjoint, making it
difficult to compare and contrast approaches, verify and reproduce results, and
build upon existing work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage with
representatives from the workflows community â€“ including researchers,
developers, science and engineering users, and cyberinfrastructure experts.
Through targeted community surveys and focused workshops, the project will
gather a diverse set of perspectives, create a community-owned WMS inventory and
common knowledge taxonomy, define an experimental methodology for measuring WMS
capabilities, and develop a blueprint for a community research infrastructure.
This proposed infrastructure has the potential to truly democratize workflows
research, enabling researchers, postdocs, and students, irrespective of their
institutions, to access cutting-edge infrastructure for comparison, evaluation,
and verification of workflows research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.