* 2016244
* QLCI-CI: NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Enhanced Sensing and Distribution Using Correlated Quantum States
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Mark Kasevich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 24,000,000.00

Building on correlated quantum states, quantum sensing defines the next frontier
of measurement science, holds tremendous potential for major discoveries in
fundamental physics, and lays the foundation for emerging technologies. Q-SEnSE
(Quantum Systems through Entangled Science and Engineering) is an NSF Quantum
Leap Challenge Institute led by the University of Colorado at Boulder that
embraces extensive collaborations with leading academic institutions, national
laboratories, and US industry partners to define and pursue grand challenges in
the increasingly crucial field of quantum information science. Q-SEnSE will
focus on leading qubit technologies to build scalable and programmable quantum
sensing systems with genuine quantum advantages. At the same time, the Institute
will explore multiple platforms to translate novel technology into transportable
systems engineered for practical application, while also building a national
quantum infrastructure to facilitate technology maturation and research-industry
cross-fertilization. Designed for core integration of research with education
and workforce development, the Institute will create and establish quantum
science and engineering workforce development programs for faculty at community
colleges, industry professionals, and academic trainees at multiple levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support progress in quantum information science for
information processing, simulation, and sensing, Q-SEnSE will pursue a broad
scope of research topics under three grand challenges that together will advance
fundamental science, technology integration, and practical application of
quantum technologies. The first grand challenge addresses sensing with quantum
advantage, with a focus on basic science and enabling technology that builds on
atoms, ions, molecules, and superconducting circuits. By applying many-body
quantum states to protect quantum coherence and improve measurement precision
and accuracy, the goal is to realize true and ubiquitous quantum advantage in
sensing applications. The second challenge is to develop field-deployable
sensors and systems by engineering integrated and interconnected quantum
systems. Such systems must realize advanced measurement and transduction
capabilities robust enough to be deployed in spatially distributed fields. The
third grand challenge is to build a national quantum infrastructure for sensing.
To maximize cross-project synergy and encourage standardization and technology
adoption by industry, a common platform will be built on the specific atomic
species of strontium, which will be used for quantum sensing, simulation, and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.