* 2016666
* CCRI: Planning: Enabling Quantum Computer Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Arijit Raychowdhury, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 04/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Quantum computing promises to revolutionize the entire paradigm of computing
with significant societal impact. Along with advances is research and
development, it also requires the next-generation of quantum-trained workforce
who will be able to take advantage of the technological changes. This project is
a planning grant to determine the requirements for development of an academic
hosted and online accessible trapped ion-based quantum computer testbed. A
testbed of this nature will give computer scientists access to a functioning
quantum computer to test new ideas in the area quantum algorithms. This planning
grant would have four goals: 1) determine the desire of the broader quantum
computer scientist community in having access to open quantum computer; 2)
define the requirements for the minimum number of qubits to have an effective
resource for researcher; 3) determine the at what level in the computing stack
would researcher like access to the computer; 4) determine the appropriate
balance between a computing resource the broad quantum community and the
academic nature of the device as a tool to educational and workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The approach in this planning grant is to
enable the next generation of quantum computing platforms for computer
engineering and computer science researchers to perform algorithm research.
Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI) has demonstrated leadership in developing
ion trap quantum system hardware over the last fifteen years. The project will
leverage the expertise in this joint effort between GTRI and Georgia Institute
of Technology and enable a ten-qubit quantum computing testbed with open source
software infrastructure and capability of remote access. It is expected to
directly impact the following research vectors: (1) Microarchitecture research
to explore topics related to but not limited to physical model driven error
correction, resiliency, noisy intermediate state quantum computing models etc.
(2) Algorithm research to understand the fundamental advantages and limitations
of quantum algorithms from space-time complexity on a practical system with its
full software stack. (3) Applications research which will span over engineering
as well as science disciplines â€“ with a focus on CISE related
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.