* 2016688
* CCRI: Planning: Collaborative Proposal: Tools and Research Priority Analyses for Development of Open-Source AI-Enabled Control and Testing Framework for 6G Cellular Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

5G (5th Generation) wireless is known for a revolution in flexibility in
wireless networks. Beyond 5G and 6G will likely be known for using intelligence
to capitalize on flexibility. Wireless research activities have made use of
artificial intelligence (AI) in various areas, but practical implementations of
AI-based algorithms in wireless networks are relatively rare. This planning
project analyzes the suitability of research priorities, toolboxes, and
interfaces for the development of an experimental AI-enabled 6G and testing
framework to spur US and global research. The goal of this planning effort is to
analyze and lay out the design and architectural foundations of a software
infrastructure that would spur experimental research, development and education
on 6G wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning project develops two
unique surveys: (1) Community: to understand the high-priority research needs
that the community platform should support, considering inputs from researchers,
practitioners and educators in academia, industry, and government; (2) Tools: to
assess existing AI algorithms, toolboxes, and how to interface them with the
cellular architecture and protocol stack; and thus, propose a robust design to
enable the subsequent development of a practical open-source AI enabled control
and testing framework for 6G cellular research that can run on community
testbeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning award will provide an initial
assessment of the need and potentials of a 6G research platform for use in
education at Mississippi State University, Virginia Tech, and elsewhere with the
goal of enhancing educational material with hands-on learning opportunities and
reproducible experimental case studies. The team will reach out to industry
through several means, including institutions' industry affiliation
members/sponsors, the PAWR (Platform for Advanced Wireless Research) industry
consortium, and the Wireless Innovation Forum. The team plans to reach out to
standardization bodies and regulators to make them aware of the outcomes of this
study, the envisaged research platform and potential use cases that can help
support important standardization and regulatory decisions related to 6G radio
access networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.