* 2016451
* 2020 Ciliate Molecular Biology Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Sean Taverna, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support attendance and training of early career U.S. researchers
at the 20th conference on Ciliate Molecular Biology, which will be held at the
Lisbon School of Health Technology campus in Lisbon, Portugal, on July 14-18 of
2020. Ciliates are unique organisms, the study of which has yielded multiple
transformational discoveries that have significantly advanced the molecular
biology field. This biannual meeting is the major convocation of experimental
biologists working with ciliates and plays a critical role in sustaining the
vitality of this important research community. The 2020 meeting will consist of
ten platform sessions and two poster sessions for scientific exchange. The
Broader Impacts of this conference are several, including opportunities for
professional development of early career researchers and efforts to facilitate
the integration of ciliate research and teaching. Platform sessions and a
workshop will facilitate the sharing and implementation of ciliate-based
teaching modules for both undergraduate and high school students. Additional
Broader Impacts include training young scientists at oral platform
presentations, as well as broadening participation of groups underrepresented in
science, especially women. Possibilities for collaborations will be promoted by
fostering scientific exchange in both formal and informal
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on ciliates has led to key discoveries
and established new biological paradigms such as self-splicing RNAs, telomeres
and telomerase, the role of histone modifications in gene expression, and the
dynein motor protein. More recent studies have provided novel insights into the
role of RNA interference-related pathways and non-coding RNAs in the epigenetic
regulation of the programmed chromosome rearrangements, and the function of
post-translational tubulin modification. Ciliated protozoa possess an unusual
biology that encompasses the presence of two functionally distinct nuclei in
each cell, a complex cytoskeleton, abundant chromosomes and cilia. The
innovative research approaches afforded by ciliates provide investigators with
unique opportunities to gain mechanistic understanding of major biological
processes that are expected to inform the wider molecular biology community. The
objectives of this conference are to exchange scientific findings, support and
mentor early career scientists, encourage interdisciplinary research, integrate
research and education, promote technical innovations, and develop resources for
the ciliate research community. Platform sessions will disseminate the latest
discoveries of molecular function encompassing studies of diverse cellular
processes. A session on genome evolution will demonstrate the value of intensive
computational approaches to gain insights into the selective forces that have
shaped these organisms. Another new session will focus on development of new
tools and resources for ciliate research. These broad goals will highlight
important future directions for ciliate research and STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.