* 2016018
* Automated Debriefing in Simulation-based Training of Paramedics: Comparing Self-guided to Agent Facilitated Debriefing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Sandra Katz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2023
* USD 763,609.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for paramedics and other
emergency medical service providers, such as emergency medical technicians
(EMTs). These first responders can keep a person who is struggling to breathe
alive until they arrive at a hospital and receive sustained care, including
support from a respiratory ventilator if necessary. This project focuses on
paramedics, who have the highest level of training in pre-hospital care. In
addition to utilizing airway devices that support breathing, paramedics can
revive a heart attack victim, deliver a baby who cannot wait for his/her mother
to get to the hospital, administer medications, and perform other life-
sustaining procedures. Unfortunately, there is a critical shortage of paramedics
in many parts of the US, which is partly due to student failure from paramedic
training programs, or inability to pass state and national certification exams.
This project will develop a handheld tablet device that will allow small groups
of paramedic students to get extra practice in performing pre-hospital care
procedures on patient manikins. These supplemental practice sessions will be
entirely student-run. Students will download scripted emergency scenarios from
their course web site. One student will play the role of lead paramedic, another
student will play the role of an EMT who assists the paramedic, while a third
student will use the tablet to check off actions (e.g., Checked blood pressure)
and to report the results of these actions (e.g., Blood pressure is 80/50). All
actions will be recorded in a log that will produce an automated debriefing;
that is, feedback on student performance during the scenario. Increased
opportunities for students to practice skills during training could raise pass
rates from paramedic programs and on certification exams. Better-prepared
paramedics will also increase patient safety. Project findings might generalize
to training of other healthcare providers such as doctors, nurses, and physician
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the debriefing that
typically follows a simulation-based training (SBT) exercise, when students
reflect on their performance with feedback from a trained facilitator. Although
meta-reviews of SBT indicate that debriefing may be its most critical component,
there is a dearth of research to guide debriefing practice. This project will
help to fill this void. The research team will implement and compare the
effectiveness of three approaches to automated debriefing. One version will
replicate the current state-of-the-art in automated debriefing, whereby students
scroll through an event log with embedded textual feedback on their actions
during the scenario. This approach to debriefing does not follow a standardized
protocol (script) for debriefing. The second version follows a debriefing
protocol whose acronym is DEBRIEF (for Define the debriefing rules; Explain the
learning objectives; specify the performance Benchmarks; Review what was
supposed to happen; Identify what actually happened; Examine why; and Formalize
the take home points). This version of automated debriefing simulates student
self-guided debriefing. The system will prompt the student to go through the
DEBRIEF protocol steps but will not provide feedback. The third version will
simulate human facilitated debriefing. Two automated agents, a facilitator and a
peer, will support the student who played the role of lead paramedic during a
practice scenario in carrying out a productive debriefing, according to DEBRIEF.
The main technological innovation will be development of methods to manage the
interaction between these simulated agents (facilitator and peer) and the human
paramedic student. The project consists of three main phases. First, to inform
implementation of the agent facilitated debriefing system, the research team
will observe and video record actual SBT scenarios and debriefings that take
place during paramedic training at the University of Pittsburgh, Center for
Emergency Medicine. Second, the researchers will iteratively develop, field
test, and refine each version of the debriefing system. Third, the researchers
will conduct a randomized controlled trial to compare the potential of these
approaches to automated debriefing to improve psychomotor skills (e.g.,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation) and decision-making skills. Study findings might
generalize to simulation-based training of other healthcare professionals and to
any field in which debriefing plays a major role in
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.