* 2016678
* Collaborative Research: Consistencies and contingencies of functional responses to environmental changes in tropical forests
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Maria Umana, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 10/31/2024
* USD 598,058.00

Tropical forests harbor hundreds of tree species and play a critical role in
carbon sequestration and storage. Yet, these systems are also highly sensitive
to changes in environmental conditions. Characterizing the diversity of tree
species responses to environmental variables will help understand how forests
are likely to respond to future conditions. Tree responses are mainly determined
by their physiology, which in turn depends on a combination of traits that work
together to achieve particular functions. This project examines the integrated
effect of multiple traits in trees to understand whole-plant level functionality
under a variety of environmental conditions. With this knowledge, it is possible
to build realistic models to assess potential changes in forest composition and
structure in response to environmental changes. Through the collection of
detailed field data on plant functioning, combined with advanced modeling
approaches, this study provides a mechanistic understanding of species responses
to changing environmental conditions. The project also supports
interdisciplinary research training for graduate students and post-docs in
cutting edge modeling and field-based techniques, as well as promoting
engagement with the public through the publication of field
guides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses an integrated and quantitative
characterization of tree functionality over hundreds of tree species in
neotropical forests. Functional trait data on leaves, stems, and roots are
coupled with tree growth information for species distributed across broad
environmental gradients to address a series of hypotheses focused on linking
tree performance to species responses to current and future environmental
variability. The results from this project will: (1) contribute to a generalized
mechanistic understanding of how traits modulate species responses to
environment; (2) provide information for a highly endangered, but largely
unknown and valuable ecosystem in the tropics; and (3) provide predictions of
species distributions under future climatic scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.