* 2016136
* QLCI-CI: NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Hybrid Quantum Architectures and Networks
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Mark Saffman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 23,536,605.00

Quantum information science and engineering research has the potential to
transform society by developing quantum computers that can complete certain
critical tasks faster than classical computers and that provide new applications
inaccessible to conventional technologies. For example, a large-scale quantum
computer could simulate the properties of energy-harvesting molecules and
optimize logistics such as nurse scheduling more quickly and at scales currently
unapproachable by supercomputers. However, state-of-the-art quantum devices are
too small and lack the features needed to fully realize this promise. Currently,
researchers and companies world-wide are pursuing approaches for scaling-up
quantum processors using a single-core quantum technology. While there has been
progress, the pathway to a useful quantum computer or information network that
can outperform classical technologies and provide new use-cases is
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hybrid Quantum Architectures and Networks
center will tackle this challenge by pursuing an alternative paradigm:
distributed quantum processing and networks composed of a hybrid architecture.
Nodes consisting of a modest number of quantum bits will be connected by quantum
links. This modular approach leverages the strengths of different quantum
systems and has the potential to unlock quantum information processing at large
scales. New distributed applications enabled by this approach may include
unconditionally secure information searching and multi-party computation. The
center will support robust education, research coordination, community
engagement, and industrial partnership programs that will address the quantum
workforce challenge at all levels and promote the quantum technologies
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center will carry out fundamental science
research and engineering to develop a multi-node, full-stack system, ranging
from quantum processor design and control to a high-level software application
interface. A convergent approach will be pursued by bringing together
researchers with expertise from chemistry, computer science, electrical and
computer engineering, mathematics, materials science and engineering, molecular
engineering, and physics. Three tightly integrated focus research areas will be
pursued. The first will center on developing multi-node heterogeneous networks
based on proven technologies (atomic ions, neutral atom arrays, and
superconducting circuits) with the capacity for distributed processing. This
effort will advance hybrid interconnect technologies and deploy multi-node
testbeds at each participating institution. The second thrust will develop a
distributed computing software stack, multi-node information protocols, and new
use-cases that are optimized for these hybrid networks. These protocols, such as
private quantum searching and quantum fingerprinting, will leverage the
scalability and unconditional network security advantages of a heterogeneous
distributed architecture for new applications. The third focus area will
encompass creating next-generation protected qubits with enhanced performance
and integrating these devices into the center testbeds. All thrusts will employ
a co-design approach with collaboration, iteration, and colocation of
researchers from different disciplines. The center's technology, research, and
software advancements will provide the foundation for a multi-node heterogeneous
distributed processor and network with functionalities that surpass a single-
platform architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.