* 2016143
* Collaborative Research: Systemic Signaling Networks in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Won-Gyu Choi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 380,720.00

Stresses such as herbivore or pathogen attack can severely limit plant growth
and development, for example, by reducing crop production and impacting food
security around the World. Plants possess natural sensory systems that allow
them to detect these stresses and then mount defenses against them. Defining how
these response systems operate is therefore important in both understanding how
plants survive and thrive in the natural world and how to effectively capitalize
on these innate responses to improve the resilience of agriculture. Recent
research has made key advances in characterizing these signaling systems within
the plant, revealing that plants deploy an internal biochemical communication
system that broadcasts stress information from its site of perception to the
rest of the plant body. This information then triggers the production of
defenses such as the accumulation of toxic chemicals, priming even the non-
attacked parts of the plant for defense. This communication system operates
quickly, spreading information throughout the plant over the course of minutes.
Despite such a central role in coordinating each plant’s rapid stress responses,
the cellular components that trigger this system and then transmit the stress
signal throughout the plant remain poorly defined. This project will focus on
characterizing the role of two major cellular messengers, the calcium ion and
reactive oxygen species, in propagating these rapid stress signals. The
investigation will also explore how amino acids released by the plant may act as
initial triggers for this response. This work will train graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows to help prepare them for their future careers in research
and science. The project will also provide public education on plant stress
responses and provide training to students in effective science
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have revealed a rapid
systemic signaling system in plants mediated through Ca2+- and reactive oxygen
species-dependent events. This research program seeks to extend our
understanding of these processes to the levels of the channels and tissue
architectures that support this signaling network. The Arabidopsis thaliana
Glutamate-Like Receptor (GLR) channels and reactive oxygen species-producing
NADPH oxidases have been linked to this rapid systemic propagation of Ca2+-based
signals. Therefore, this study will focus on defining the role(s) of these
proteins in systemic transmission of local wound, pathogen elicitor (flg22) and
salt stresses. The specific aims are to: (1) compare the patterns of Ca2+ and
ROS signaling that occur during the initiation and propagation of long-distance
signals in response to these stimuli and define the spatial and temporal
characteristics of the channels and ROS-related enzymes supporting these
activities; and (2) explore how glutamate and other amino acid signals are
involved in triggering these long-distance signals. These goals will be
accomplished using a combination of bioreporter imaging and mutant and molecular
analyses. This study will reveal new insight into the molecular machinery
underlying rapid plant systemic signaling. The project will help define the
spatial and temporal changes in calcium and reactive oxygen species that relay
information about stresses throughout the plant. The research will also help
define whether information about each stress is likely encoded in specific
signaling dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.