* 2016478
* PFI-RP: Carbon Dioxide (CO2)-free Hydrogen and High Value Carbon from the Conversion of Natural Gas
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jianli Hu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 599,127.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation can
lead to industrial investments, economic development and skilled workforce
development in Appalachia. The exploration and use of shale gas will enable the
environmentally-beneficial, distributed production of hydrogen and solid carbon
products. The technology will allow first-generation college students studying
engineering to be trained and retained locally to grow the manufacturing
industry. Success will mean that West Virginia State University has the high
technology workforce needed to support 21st Century natural gas conversion to
value-added products. The technology will enable distributed production, helping
to manufacture finished products locally rather than selling the raw feedstock,
shale gas. At the national level, several industrial sectors will benefit from
the technology, including hydrogen vehicles, carbon composites, electronics, and
carbon fibers. From an environmental standpoint, the broader impact of this NSF
PFI project may help mitigate the effects of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions at
mining wellheads in the region where transportation of shale gas is challenged.
The project will promote undergraduate and graduate research and train of future
leaders in innovation and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is based on the discovery and fundamental research for conversion of
natural gas into hydrogen and solid carbon products without carbon dioxide
emissions. The intellectual merit of this PFI project lies in the microwave
irradiation of a catalyst used to directly convert natural gas to hydrogen and
crystalline carbon structures such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or carbon
nanofibers. Existing technologies converting natural gas to hydrogen gas
releases CO2. This project aims to solve environmental challenges by
demonstrating the feasibility of synergistically integrating microwave reaction
chemistry and catalytic methane decomposition reactions. The value proposition
for CO2-free hydrogen production lies in decarbonizing multiple large industries
such as ammonia production, fuel cell vehicles, and power generation. The goal
of the project is to scale up the technology from a laboratory 180W microwave
reactor to a large scale 2kW microwave reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.