* 2016999
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Vulnerability and Resilience in Contexts of Recurring Violence Against Women
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Lynn Stephen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,093.00

This project investigates violence against women among marginalized women
through an examination of the impacts of a series of recent policy reforms. It
asks what legal and other support mechanisms are most likely accessed, utilized,
and engaged with when violence against women proves to be systemic and resistant
to reform. This mixed-methods study provides an opportunity to assess the
everyday ways in which marginalized women experience violence and negotiate its
after-effects, which is essential to evaluating the possibilities and
limitations of top-down policy models. In addition to supporting the training of
graduate and undergraduate student in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, findings from this research will be widely
disseminated, with practical implications for stakeholders, policymakers, and
social scientists, as well as concrete policy recommendations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine why, despite the implementation
of sweeping policy reforms, increasingly high rates of violence against women
continue to exist in marginalized communities and will explore what variables
contribute to systemic threats of violence. This analytically rich case will
permit the researcher to work with a range of local governmental and non-
governmental stakeholders, including social service and legal professionals,
state level bureaucrats, as well as marginalized survivors and community
stakeholders to determine the relationship between policy, community anti-
violence initiatives, and legal outcomes among marginalized women. Data will be
collected using ethnographic methods, long-term participant observation, semi-
structured and life-history interviews, social media analysis, and urban social
mapping. The results of the research will contribute new insight into the
specific sociocultural, economic, and geopolitical conditions that both
undergird and restrict advances towards effective, equitable reforms. In
addition, this research will enhance theories of violence, vulnerability, and
gendered citizenship, furthering social scientific understandings of how
marginalized communities' manifest resilience and organize in contexts of
recurring violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.