* 2016379
* CCRI: ENS: Collaborative Research: ns-3 Network Simulation for Next-Generation Wireless
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sumit Roy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 962,657.00

Simulation of emerging next-generation wireless networks continues to be an
invaluable component of the design, evaluation and innovation cycle as a
complement to other modes such as testbeds of performance testing. This project
will focus on upgrading ns-3, the most widely used open source network
simulator, to meet the challenges of efficient yet accurate simulation based
performance evaluation of 5G and beyond networks. It will do this via model
building for the evolutions in Wi-Fi (notably Wi-Fi 6) and cellular (notably 5G
NR) technologies and incorporating new simulation techniques targeting dense and
heterogeneous network use cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network simulation faces
fundamental challenges due to inherent increases in complexity, notably at the
physical layer due to increasing bandwidth, MIMO (multiple-input, multiple-
output) and multi-user operation as well as cross-layer (physical and multiple
access) operation, necessary to deal with network scale and heterogeneity. The
primary objective is to develop simulation methods that achieve the desired
balance between maintaining simulation run-time efficiency while preserving
accuracy of measured network parameters (loss, throughput, latency) - in the
face of increasing complexity. The research plan will explore a variety of
techniques including efficient link-to-system mappings, pruning of network state
representations that do not impact simulation accuracy, and parallelization
approaches based on optimistic simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
project plans to improve ns-3 usability and further adoption through increased
community outreach and creation of new educational material to lower barriers to
entry for a new generation of ns-3 users. The recreated ns-3 Consortium hosted
by the University of Washington will foster creation of training material for
both novice and advanced users, to be archived and distributed online as well as
in-person at leading networking/simulation conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New content (educational materials and tutorials, research
reports and publications) will be disseminated primarily via the ns-3 website
https://www.nsnam.org/ and the two institutional lab home pages (the University
of Washington - https://depts.washington.edu/funlab and Georgia Tech -
http://blough.ece.gatech.edu/research/) along with other popular channels such
as YouTube/Viemo for video. Additionally, code under development will be
preserved in archives such as Gitlab and announced via the ns-3 Users and
Developers mailing lists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.