* 2016068
* Coupled Ecological-Geomorphological Response of Coastal Wetlands to Environmental Change
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Brad Murray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 662,720.00

Coastal wetlands are connected with an entire chain of geomorphic systems, from
the sediment- and runoff- generating areas in the continental interior, to
piedmont and floodplain areas, to the marine systems near the coast. As a
result, coastal wetland dynamics are strongly coupled with a wide variety of
Earth's surface systems and respond to a wide range of environmental changes
taking place in apparently remote and unconnected areas. In fact, coastal
wetlands are sensitive to changes in a large number of forcings, including
fluvial sediment delivery rates, rates of sea level rise, subsidence rates, wave
climate, and, via organic sediment production by plants, to changes in nutrient
concentrations, temperature, and atmospheric CO2 concentration. Furthermore,
only recently have the carbon storage and the rate of carbon burial per unit
area been quantified in coastal wetlands, to find that they are the highest of
any biome and thus major players in the global carbon cycle. Despite their
sensitivity to environmental change and their importance in the global Earth
system, a predictive understanding of wetland dynamics coupled with vegetation,
the tidal channel network, the tidal flats, and the permanently submerged areas
is still missing. This project will impact research, education, and society.
Given the ecosystem services of threatened wetlands, and the large human
population near the coast that will be affected by changes in wetland area, the
results of the proposed work are of clear societal importance. The results will
provide simultaneous estimates of changes in coastal geomorphology, ecosystem
patterns, and carbon burial rates. Students at multiple levels (undergraduate,
professional master, PhD) will be impacted by the project's education/outreach
plans, which include new and enhanced coursework, and field experiences. The
impact of the project will be enhanced through: 1) a substantial partnership
with the Museum of Life and Science (Durham, NC), to increase the awareness of
environmental change, targeting K-12 and the general adult audiences including
those at the coast with hands-on activities, curricular material, and a
documentary; and 2) a partnership with the Venice Lagoon ferry service
Alilaguna, to disseminate project background and findings to anyone interested
in the Venice Lagoon and its future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the project lies in developing, testing, and making available new remote
sensing methods to observe coastal geomorphological and ecological patterns,
from the single wetland scale to the sub-regional scale, in an improved
understanding of the relative importance of different modes of environmental
change for wetland survival, clarifying whether (or under what circumstances)
coastal system response to changing forcing is likely to be gradual versus
sudden. The project will generate and compare scenarios of coastal responses to
expected environmental changes for two systems—one representative of wetland
areas in the US eastern seaboard (North Inlet, SC), and one typical
Mediterranean lagoon (Venice, Italy)—with implications for coastal zones
globally, with particular attention to changes in rates of carbon burial and the
carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.