* 2016536
* PFI-TT: Novel Mechanical Testing Technology with Intermediate Speed Actuation to Improve Manufacturing and Safety
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Hongjoo Rhee, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,829.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will increase the economic
competitiveness of US manufacturing in the field of next generation engineering
components and systems in diverse industries such as automotive, aerospace,
marine, health, sporting equipment, and electronics. Accurate mechanical
behavior data is important to the design and manufacturing of these products.
The current data is obtained in deformation speed conditions which are largely
irrelevant to the service operations of these products. This gap between
measurement and use has led to cost-prohibitive overdesign and sluggishness in
materials and system discovery. This project is expected to lead to a mechanical
testing system that will enable generation of accurate mechanical data and as
such, superior manufacturing of next generation intelligent materials and
components that will save energy, reduce cost, and increase safety. For
instance, automotive designers may improve crashworthiness and increase
passenger safety by at least 10%. Aerospace engineers may be able to achieve up
to 25% weight savings. The technology is expected to penetrate the $700 million
market of mechanical testing machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is the optimization and demonstration of a novel mechanical testing
system able to produce reliable mechanical behavior data under controlled strain
rates, especially in the intermediate strain rate regime of 5 s-1 and 500 s-1.
This novel mechanical testing system features the integration of two improved
technologies based on high tech materials and systems – a coaxially embedded
serpentine bar (CESB) and a piezoelectric braking transducer (PBT). The project
will improve the current state of these two patented technologies by reducing
the dimension of the CESB and increasing the load rating of the PBT, such that
the final system may be strongly marketable and used in conventional labs. The
industrial partner has a deep understanding of customer needs and provides the
means to inform the academic partner with regard to the essential features for
integrating the two technologies and manufacturing the final demonstrating
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.