* 2016275
* I-Corps:  Low-Cost and Highly Efficient Hydrogen Production from Water Splitting
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Susan Lu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
development and commercialization of a green hydrogen production technology. The
proposed technology will benefit the water splitting manufacturers who currently
suffer from high manufacturing costs associated with expensive catalyst
materials and manufacturing, low efficiency, and short lifetime in operation.
The technology also will benefit pure-hydrogen consumers who suffer from the
impurities in current hydrogen sources. The technology will advance the hydrogen
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a technology for hydrogen production from water splitting. The proposed
catalytic water-splitting technology has demonstrated enhanced performance with
greatly reduced use of noble metals. In the existing market, customer needs
arise from specific requirements to provide pure hydrogen production from
renewable sources that help to effectively manage energy consumption, provide a
clean environment with zero pollution, as well as provide high-energy
efficiency. Hydrogen production from water splitting has the potential to
address many of these challenges. However, high material costs, low efficiency,
and poor durability constitute major barriers to industrial and residential
applications. The proposed hydrogen production technology in this project will
overcome these barriers by significantly decreasing the amount of noble metals
in the catalysts. The reduction of the loading of noble metals in the catalysts
without sacrificing the activity and durability will reduce the materials cost
for manufacturing water splitting system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.