* 2016267
* High Throughput Experiments to Determine Structure-Performance Relationships for Oxide Photocatalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Gregory Rohrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 640,001.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The production of hydrogen fuel by solar water
splitting is a sustainable technology that could be used to decrease our
reliance on fossil fuels. However, the technology is materials limited because
currently available water splitting catalysts cannot produce hydrogen at a cost
that is competitive with fossil energy sources. The scientific process for
discovering improved catalysts has been hindered in part by the pace of
experimentation. This research employs a new technique that makes it possible to
measure the rates at which more than 100 different catalysts evolve hydrogen at
the same time, effectively increasing the number of measurements that can be
made by a factor of 100. This measurement technique makes it possible to
systematically explore the relationships between the characteristics of a
material and the rate at which it produces hydrogen and, therefore, identify
improved water splitting catalysts. The project also uses demonstrations of the
technology for informal science education events and educates undergraduate and
graduate students who are prepared to work in the renewable energy
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of this project is to
design improved oxide water splitting catalysts using experimentally measured
structure-performance relationships. Catalyst performance depends on many
parameters related to the composition, processing, and structure of the
material, as well as the conditions in the reactor. The experiments leverage a
newly developed parallel and automated photochemical reactor that makes it
possible to measure the hydrogen yield from up to 108 catalysts in a single
experiment, systematically determining the influence of particle shape, particle
size, dopants, charged surface domains, protective coatings, co-catalysts, and
many other catalyst characteristics on the hydrogen production rate. The
experiments produce a database of calibrated hydrogen production rates from
thousands of catalytic materials based on strontium, barium, lead, and iron
titanate, as well as some solid solutions of these compounds. The structure-
performance relationships developed from these data are the basis for the
development of improved catalysts. The importance of these catalysts is that
they can be used to produce a sustainable solar fuel whose combustion does not
contribute carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.