* 2016759
* A Method for Assessing Scour Nuclei in US Inner-to-Mid Continental Shelf
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ervan Garrison, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 178,056.00

This project will study submerged prehistoric archaeological sites drowned after
the end of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). The sites are expected to be found on
the Atlantic Ocean’s Continental Shelf of the Georgia Bight. Such sites are
difficult to discover and study but are extremely relevant to understanding
human entry adaptations in the Americas. This research seeks to develop a new
method of underwater survey designed to overcome many of the costs and
difficulties currently associated with underwater archaeological exploration.
The study will exploit existing erosional features created around wrecks or
artificial reefs. These exposures are compelling targets for archaeological
testing because excavation has already been done by natural forces such as tidal
currents. A successful study of scour nuclei offers us the ability to advance
our understanding of the now drowned paleolandscape of the southeastern coastal
plain along the Atlantic. This study will seek to improve current methodologies
for survey and recovery of submerged archaeological sites. By so doing, it will
broaden the typological and chronological framework for prehistoric sites on the
southeastern U.S. continental shelf and it will contribute more broadly to
research on drowned paleolandscapes nationally and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine how natural oceanic
forces may reduce effort and costs currently associated with the location and
characterization of submerged archaeological sites. Such costs can be
significant, and the technology required, while commercially available, does not
normally provide an acceptable success rate with regard to prehistoric sites.
The researcher will lead a small team of archaeologically and geologically
trained students and colleagues. The datasets generated by this team will
provide new insights into the feasibility of the methods as well as into the
larger picture of the nature and survivability of submerged prehistory in the
U.S. offshore. The collaborative focus of the team will provide new and exciting
educational opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.