* 2016729
* Support for collaborative projects in the Elemental Analysis Facility at The Field Museum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 169,230.00

This award will continue National Science Foundation (NSF) support for the
Elemental Analysis Facility (EAF) at the Field Museum in Chicago, which hosts
instrumentation for the rapid compositional analysis of ancient materials like
ceramics, glass, metals, and pigments, to enhance research on a very wide range
of anthropological topics. Researchers are able to analyze archaeological
samples for major, minor, and trace elements in a non-destructive manner to
address questions related to the archaeology of cultural production, interaction
and exchange and advance the cause of material conservation of The Field
Museum's renowned anthropology collections. The EAF serves the Field Museum
community as well as scholars and students from the Chicago area, the Midwest
and elsewhere by offering financial support to offset travel and accommodation
expenses as well as part of the analytical costs. The presence of an on-site
laboratory at the Field Museum creates the opportunity to study artifacts from
the unique collections of the museum that could not be moved easily to outside
analytical facilities. The EAF also supports undergraduate and graduate student
research and training. Students are initiated into the analytical process by
undertaking their own analyses and are trained in method development, the
statistical processing of the data, and interpretation. Results of this research
will inform future exhibits and education activities of The Field Museum, which
provides science education and outreach for hundreds of thousands of school
children and millions of visitors annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EAF
includes a scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive spectrometer
(SEM-EDS), and inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). The ICP-
MS can be fitted with two lasers. One of the lasers is dedicated to the sampling
of small objects with a high throughput, whereas the second laser, a totally
unique, custom-transformed apparatus, accommodates large objects. A new
experimental portable laser is able to sample artifacts outside the lab and can
be used for elemental analysis with LA-ICP-MS or for isotope analysis (in
collaboration with outside facilities). This equipment is complemented by three
portable XRF instruments for totally non-invasive investigations of artifacts on
the premises of the Museum or in the field. The intellectual merits of the
project include the establishment of extensive new datasets of archaeological
and ethnological material from around the world that directly inform hypotheses
about ancient trade and exchange, technology, and their relationship to the
development of social complexity around the world. By providing expertise for
the investigation of ancient material, linking leading scholars and graduate
students to the museum's extensive collections, and giving them the tools to
analyze these one-of-a-kind assemblages, the project will significantly enhance
understanding of the role of cultural production in the development of complex
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.