* 2016758
* 2020 Workshop: Materials from Engineering Biology, an Engineering Biology Research Consortium Roadmap
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Douglas Friedman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 02/28/2022
* USD 173,161.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The Engineering Biology Research Consortium
(EBRC) aims to produce a roadmap for the advancement of materials from
engineering biology, to be published in Summer 2020. The goal of the roadmap is
to serve as a resource for the research community, to spur creativity and
promote significant advancement and innovation over the next 20 years. This
roadmap will be focused on the engineering of biology to produce, augment, and
improve materials for a broad swath of applications. The roadmap will consist of
technical and application challenges, innovative technical goals, and concrete
but ambitious milestones for tool and technology development that build a path
toward achieving the goals and overcoming the challenges. Creating a successful
roadmap consists of a synergistic process of structured scoping, drafting,
discussion, review, and revision of material. EBRC accomplishes this, in part,
through writing workshops with the research community and stakeholders. These
workshops are an invaluable part of achieving a roadmap that represents the
diverse views of researchers and those that support future research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;To support the
production of a materials roadmap for engineering biology, EBRC seeks financial
support for two, 2-day writing workshops. Of particular importance in producing
a materials roadmap is the engagement of a diverse group of scientists and
engineers from the materials research community, who may or may not have
experience or expertise in engineering biology. These individuals encourage a
holistic approach to understanding and reporting the unique challenges of
producing usable, effective, and functional materials, and will be enlisted as
workshop participants, draft contributors, and community reviewers. Past EBRC
writing workshops have proven to be incredibly productive in bringing together
experts and stakeholders to draft, review, and revise the roadmap content and
substance. Financial support will help to cover costs of participant travel,
accommodations, meals and expenses and any necessary facility and support fees.
EBRC workshops are designed to be accessible and are held on dates and in
locations that serve as many participants as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.