* 2016241
* International Mind, Brain and Education Society (IMBES): 2020 Biennial Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Nora Newcombe, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2022
* USD 64,524.00

The International Mind, Brain, and Education Society (IMBES) conference has
taken place every 2-3 years since 2007. IMBES aims to facilitate cross-cultural
collaboration in biology, education, and the cognitive and developmental
sciences. The IMBES meeting is an opportunity for scholars and educators to come
together to engage in reciprocal dialogue about research and practice.
Researchers investigating learning processes have the opportunity to share
results with educators and receive feedback on the translational opportunities
for the research. Educators can update their understanding of the cognitive and
neural bases of learning and impart their knowledge of efficacious techniques,
tools, and classroom practices with researchers. This type of interaction
between researchers and practitioners is crucial for generating research that
contributes to usable knowledge for education. This conference aims to assess
the degree to which scientific ideas are ready for the classroom, consider the
extent to which further educational research is still required, evaluate the
potential of current research in meaningfully shaping pedagogy, and recognize
opportunities to use the classroom to challenge the robustness of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to Temple University will provide
partial support for the International, Mind, Brain, and Education Society
(IMBES) conference to be held in Montreal in June 2020. This award will
specifically support teacher practitioners from the U.S. to attend the
conference and learn more about educational neuroscience and its potential
implications for practice. The teacher practitioners will also have
opportunities to share with researchers the nature of effective educational
practice. The project is supported by the Discovery Research preK-12 program,
which supports research and development efforts to improve STEM teaching and
learning in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.