* 2016484
* PFI-RP: Development and Commercialization of a Sensor for Lead in Water
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Noe Alvarez, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 714,485.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project addresses lead poisoning in drinking
water. Currently, there is a lack of devices that continuously monitor lead on
the market. As a result, in multiple cities across the US, thousands of children
are exhibit increased lead concentration in their blood. This project will
develop a lead monitoring system for drinking water that will be accessible,
inexpensive, and simple to operate in households. The device will operate in a
similar manner to a fire alarm alerting households when lead concentrations
exceed safe levels. The innovations in this research will enhance the scientific
and technological understanding of mechanisms and devices to detect low
concentrations of toxic metals in water. The proposed research will build an
Accademia-Industry partnership needed to address lead poisoning in drinking
water through continued monitoring by an advanced sensor. The industrial partner
commits to commercializing the technology from the proposed research and to
bring the sensor to the market. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
focused on creating a sensor and related technology for measuring lead
concentrations in drinking water. Reliable detection and quantification of low
concentrations of lead in water is a challenging but important task, given the
negative health impacts of this heavy metal, particularly on children.
Currently, there is a lack of continuously monitoring lead devices on the
market. To address this, a new sensing element is proposed based on carbon
nanotube fibers that lower the limit of detection and allow the sensor electrode
to be miniaturized. The sensor uses an electrochemical analytical technique to
sense lead in water. This approach offers simultaneous multielement detection
for lead, copper, cadmium and mercury with 3.5 parts per trillion limit of
detection for lead, outperforming any similar devices. Due to its simplicity and
compactness, the sensor allows deployment in industrial facilities processing
water as well as in households. Factors that control the reliability and
robustness of the sensors and electrochemical reactions will be determined in
preparation of the device for mass production by a leading national water
processing industry. The main goal of this project is to provide water consumers
with a simple and inexpensive tool for lead
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.