* 2016022
* Evolution of the Biophysical Properties of the Septin Cytoskeleton
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Amy Gladfelter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,052,400.00

Fungi are integral to the productivity of all terrestrial ecosystems as they
play critical roles in nutrient cycling, soil structure and as parasites and
symbionts. The estimates for the number of fungal species on the planet range
from 1.5 to over 5 million and it is thought that likely over 90% of fungi
remain to be identified. To date, a relatively small percentage of the
identified fungi are associated with marine environments. However, fungi have
been found from the surface of the ocean to depths of many kilometers in ocean
sediment, and these organisms have potential key roles in carbon cycling and
degradation of anthropogenic materials. Fungi that survive in the marine
environment have remarkable abilities to respond to the myriad of stresses,
including UV exposure, limited nutrients and high salinity that are features of
the ocean. This work examines how marine fungi cope with environmental stresses
by changing cell shapes and controlling how the cells divide. Fundamental
understanding of growth, division and stress response is a missing link to
understanding how marine fungi can contribute to the function of oceans. The
work will involve the training of undergraduate and graduate student researchers
along with several community outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell
function is intimately tied to cell morphogenesis across the biosphere. This is
especially clear in fungi where combinations of spherical, ovoid and hyphal-
shaped cells build diverse structures across many scales. From micrometer-sized
spores, centimeter-sized mushrooms and kilometer-spanning hyphae, a conserved
family of cytoskeletal proteins called septins is integral to creating this
morphological diversity. Despite their ubiquity, the basic biophysical
properties and regulation of septin polymers are only beginning to be
understood. This project links biophysical properties of septin polymers at the
nanometer scale to their function in cell morphology at the micron scale. Septin
form and function will be analyzed across highly morphologically diverse fungal
systems called “black yeasts” that were isolated from the ocean. Fungi in this
group are considered to be amongst the most stress tolerant eukaryotes.
Comparative analysis of protein sequence variation, biophysics and cell biology
of septins in these diverse black yeast species will reveal how plasticity in
the septin cytoskeleton supports diversity in cell shape, function and stress
tolerance. The research will analyze this problem from three scales: 1. Polymer
properties: How do biophysical properties of septin filaments control higher-
order structures? 2. Dynamics: How are septin dynamics used to sculpt assemblies
and enable stress responses? 3. Morphogenesis: How do different septin
assemblies promote distinct cell morphologies. These questions will be addressed
using interdisciplinary approaches including biochemical reconstitution,
advanced live cell imaging, molecular genetics and quantitative modeling.
Integral to this research plan is the training of undergraduate and graduate
student scientists, along with several community outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.