* 2016010
* EAGER: Microcredentials for Integrating Computing Responsibly into Other Domains (MICRO)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Brendan Calandra, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,182.00

Computing is fundamentally changing Americans’ professional and personal lives.
Beyond the workforce demand for computer scientists, computing is becoming part
of many fields, from engineering to art. Moreover, computing literacy is a
fundamental and necessary skill for safely navigating information and systems in
the world today. While the public education system wants to incorporate
computing into standard educational practices, there is a dire shortage of
teachers who are qualified to teach computing. Schools in rural and low-income
areas are particularly unlikely to be able to offer computing courses, feeding
existing underrepresentation problems that have contributed to a large number of
vacant computing jobs, and to lack of diversity in the workforce. With the goal
of increasing the number and diversity of students who participate in computing,
this project will create a professional development (PD) model for teaching
computing to K-12 science and math teachers who teach in rural and low-income
areas so that they may spread computational literacy in their communities. The
project’s model for doing this is based on online, competency-based
instructional modules through which teachers can earn micro-credentials that
demonstrate their knowledge and skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project team
includes researchers from the International Society for Technology in Education,
Georgia State University, and the Georgia Department of Education and aims to
create and test the foundations for a computing education teacher preparation
ecosystem that leverages the flexibility and accessibility afforded by micro-
credentialing and online learning. The goals of this project are 1) to use
purposeful and theory-driven instructional design to adapt existing Computer
Science instruction into online modules that prepare preservice and in-service
teachers to integrate computing into their non-computing courses; and 2) to
produce and pilot a competency-based micro-credentialing system that will assess
teachers’ knowledge and skills. The research component of this project will
explore the following topics: (1) Effectiveness of online modules and micro-
credentialing system to support teachers to integrate computing across grade
bands and primary disciplines, (2) Self-efficacy of teachers while implementing
computing-integrated activities in their classrooms, and (3) Perceived value of
micro-credentials by teachers and their districts compared to university course
credit. The researchers will collect data from teachers through assignments,
assessments, and artifacts created by engaging with the modules and completing
the micro-credentials. Data sources will also include a) surveys given before
and after the modules, b) written individual reflections, c) collaborative
discussions within the module, and d) lesson plans that integrate computing and
computing integration activities. Methods for data analysis will mix qualitative
and quantitative procedures for collection and analyses, depending on the type
of data and research question that the data address. The project will contribute
to our knowledge of how to support teachers in rural and low-income areas to
learn and teach computing by examining the process of how they acquire and
implement computing concepts, and by examining the efficacy of a micro-
credentialing system that is designed to evaluate their
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.