* 2016444
* PFI-TT: Multi-Frequency Acoustic Device for Rapid Infrastructure Damage Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Didem Ozevin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 314,947.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to ensure the safe operation of
critical civil infrastructure (such as pipelines and bridges) using a more
reliable and cost-effective means of monitoring their health. Subjected to an
increasing number and magnitude of extreme weather events, the performance of
aging infrastructure is a concern; Unexpected failures cause significant
disruption in transportation and negatively influence human lives and the
environment. Fortunately, acoustic emission, can “listen” for cracks in the
infrastructure and detect defects before they are visible. The innovation is to
build a low-cost and low-power acoustic emission device for instrumenting
infrastructures with hundreds of sensors and detecting the damage initiation at
the earliest state. The technology for the sensors is micro-electro-mechanical
systems, MEMS. Mass manufactured MEMS acoustic emission devices may take the
technology to the next level by collecting big and reliable data from
infrastructures. The aim is to instrument infrastructures with voluminous
sensors that can rapidly inform about the structural state and safety. When the
majority of structural systems in the US are instrumented with MEMS acoustic
emission devices, the initiation of failure can be detected at its earliest
stage and necessary precautions can be taken, preventing greater expenses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to transition multi-frequency
MEMS acoustic emission devices integrated with noise isolation capability into a
field-deployable technology. Acoustic Emission is a nondestructive evaluation
method based on detecting the propagating elastic waves due to active defects or
movements such as crack growth or landslides. It is well-known for detecting the
initiation of damage, pinpointing its location, qualitatively assessing the
severity of damage, and classifying the damage mode using pattern recognition
tools. However, current acoustic emission sensors are bulky, expensive, and
significantly influenced by background noise; They require complex post-
processing to understand the signal characterization, which delays the decision-
making process. MEMS sensors are manufactured using micromachining techniques,
that allow mass manufacturing with repeatable intrinsic characteristics. MEMS
acoustic emission devices will be built by multiple super-narrow bandwidth MEMS
piezoelectric resonators connected in an array such that the total response is
amplified by the constructive interference of carefully selected frequencies.
The signal can easily be decomposed into its frequencies in order to understand
the frequency-dependent damage modes and severity. To distinguish artificial
noise sources from active structural defects, the MEMS acoustic emission device
will be coupled with broadband elastic metamaterials to block unwanted signals
for the reduced-data wireless transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.