* 2016727
* CCRI: Medium: Collaborative Research: 3DML: A Platform for Data, Design and Deployed Validation of Machine Learning for Wireless Networks and Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yingyan Lin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,532,000.00

The ever-increasing complexity of wireless networks and their emerging novel
user applications (such as autonomous cars, virtual reality, and e-health) have
spurred a significant demand to develop machine learning (ML) empowered,
intelligent network management and optimization. However, there are still two
main barriers to unleashing such innovations: (i) ML-based approaches require
many large labeled datasets, which are difficult to acquire in the wireless
context due to both privacy and cost challenges; and (ii) the challenge of
deploying complex ML models into resource-constrained wireless devices. This
projectâ€™s overarching goal is to design, develop, and disseminate a community
platform called 3DML, for facilitating the development of ML-based innovations
for next-generation wireless networks and mobile applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3DML will be the first platform, designed from the ground
up, to meet the urgent need of exploring ML-based innovations for wireless
applications, featuring three integrated key components. First, this project
will develop 3DML-Data which has the ability to operate in networks with
different scales and capture diverse network operating states and enable the
collection of unprecedentedly diverse labeled datasets. Second, this project
will design 3DML-Client, which consists of automated tools and compression
libraries to (i) automatically generate efficient ML models and deployment
strategies for achieving optimal trade-offs between task performance and
resource consumption given diverse devices and applications, and (ii) provide a
comprehensive pool of efficient ML modules and functions for fast development.
Third, this project will develop 3DML-Infrastructure, which can make use of
3DML-Client with data collected from 3DML-Data, to generate efficient ML
algorithms deployed into wireless infrastructure, and include a methodology for
researchers to use ML algorithms to customize key modules for massive MIMO
channel estimation, detection, decoding, beamforming, and spectrum sharing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a pressing need of the wireless
research community to develop a platform for ML-empowered intelligent network
management. The success of this project will provide data and tools to enable
automated and self-customized exploration and deployment of ML-based approaches
for wireless applications. The educational program with workshops, online
courses, and internships will involve not only undergraduate and graduate
students from various institutes, but also practitioners from industry. Overall,
3DML will open up a host of new possibilities for developing innovations towards
next generation intelligent wireless networks, including enhanced mobile
broadband, massive Internet-of-things and ultra-low-latency applications in
order to support numerous emerging applications. All of the developed datasets,
tools, and libraries will be released at
https://3dml.rice.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.