* 2016279
* A Systematic Dopant-selection Strategy for Advanced Manufacturing of High Strength Transparent Magnesium Aluminate Spinel
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Animesh Kundu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 531,383.00

Optically transparent magnesium aluminate spinel (MgAl2O4, MAS) is one of the
candidates to use in extreme environments such as spacecraft and military
vehicle windows, in which conventional silicate glasses or polymers are not
suitable. Currently, the processing of MAS materials with high strength and high
transparency requires high costs, which is one of the major limiting factors to
prevent the MAS materials from the applications. A promising path for achieving
high density without loss of strength and transparency is via modification of
grain boundary (GB) structures and chemistry with the addition of ppm-level
impurities. These impurities at the GBs can alter the motion of boundaries
leading to improved materials strength. The work will develop a system for
identifying appropriate dopants to modify GB atomic arrangements for improved
mechanical strength and transparency. MAS materials with enhanced strength and
sufficient transparency can be produced by chemical additives identified through
this work. the results. This approach will provide a new route for manufacturing
transparent polycrystalline MAS, applicable for the large-scale manufacturing of
polycrystalline MAS and potentially other ceramics needed to maintain the
nationâ€™s global competitiveness and enhance national defense. The information
and approaches will be disseminated through an annual microscopy
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four different types of earth-abundant elements
will be doped into polycrystalline and controlled bi-crystal MAS materials,
instead of rare-earths to alter the GB strength and hence mechanical
performance. The dopant selection is based on the following criteria: (A)
dopants must be larger cations than the native cations Mg2+ and Al3+ for
effective GB segregation, (B) dopants ideally take 3+ state rather than 2+ to
occupy both cation sites, and (C) dopants should have higher stability in their
oxide forms (i.e. stronger bonding with oxygen anions) than either Al or Mg. If
these criteria are proven experimentally, this approach would provide a new
strategy for designing GB configuration and chemistry, and hence controlling the
GB strength by selecting dopants. The GB structures and chemistry will be
quantitatively characterized by advanced electron microscopy together with
sophisticated micro-mechanical testing to measure the GB fracture toughness.
Based on experimental results, we will establish a concept for identifying
appropriate dopants to modify atomic arrangements for improved mechanical
strength and transparency. The concept established in this project should be
relevant to other ternary or more component ionic compounds such as the
perovskites SiTiO3 and LaMnO3 and be applicable to other binary ceramics
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.