* 2016205
* Community Climate Intervention Strategies Workshop; Boulder, CO; April 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Elizabeth Page, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 48,000.00

This grant is in partial support of the Community Climate Intervention
Strategies Workshop to be held April 15-17, 2020 at UCAR/NCAR in Boulder.
Experts in emissions mitigation, carbon dioxide removal (CDR), solar radiation
management (SRM), integrated assessment modeling (IAM), observations, ecological
and societal impacts, ethics, and communication will collaboratively develop a
unifying research framework and initiate working groups that will identify and
address critical combined climate intervention research questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A climate intervention strategy framework that coordinates
existing work and identifies innovative research efforts and future research
needs across mitigation, climate intervention areas, and climate change impacts
would be of great benefit. The objective of the workshop is to create such a
unifying framework that will fortify climate intervention research through new
partnerships to achieve the following: (1) construction of a portfolio of
ethically-informed future scenarios that integrate mitigation, CDR, and SRM, (2)
development of methods for collaborative impact analysis relevant to society and
ecosystems so that common and relevant metrics and shared datasets can be
developed and distributed, and (3) facilitation of communication to ensure
research goals and methodologies balance the priorities of research communities
as well as key climate-affected stakeholders. The workshop has the potential to
transform many distinct assessments of climate intervention strategies into a
comprehensive, interdisciplinary approach. The targeted result is end-to-end
climate intervention assessments with societally-relevant outcomes. Planned
participants in the workshop include nationally-recognized climate researchers,
early career scientists, and graduate students from across the United States as
well as internationally-recognized experts. Also planned is participation by
attendees from underrepresented groups from the Arctic, developing countries,
and indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.