* 2016586
* CCRI: Planning: Collaborative Research: A Platform for Conducting Software Engineering User Studies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Joshua Sunshine, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 57,991.00

A key goal of software engineering and programming languages research is to
create new environments, tools, languages, and techniques through which software
engineers create software. Evaluating claims with direct evidence about the
expected value of a tool or language for developers requires conducting user
studies with developers. Yet researchers looking to conduct these studies face a
number of significant barriers, including recruiting participants, administering
tasks, and reusing materials. As a result, conducting user studies of software
engineering tools and programming languages remains infrequent. Reducing these
barriers may increase the frequency of these studies, increasing the ability of
tools and languages to support developers and enabling developers to be more
productive and effective in their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
encompasses planning activities to construct a shared community infrastructure
for conducting user studies of developers. Planning activities will be conducted
to gather community input to better understand the nature of the problem and
obtain feedback on ways in which a future community infrastructure for
conducting studies might reduce the barriers researchers face. Community
feedback will be obtained on potential configurable components addressing key
barriers. A survey and interviews of software engineering and programming
languages researchers will be conducted to understand the barriers researchers
face and how infrastructure might reduce these barriers. A workshop will
facilitate exchange of best practices, and a working group will explore the
detailed design of the infrastructure with researchers experienced in user
studies. Finally, a summative survey will assess the ability of potential
infrastructure to support the studies researchers
conduct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.