* 2016264
* Collaborative Research:CIBR:VectorByte: A Global Informatics Platform for studying the Ecology of Vector-Borne Diseases
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Leah Johnson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 537,970.00

A wide variety of terrestrial plant and animal pathogens have evolved
transmission cycles that require vectors, typically arthropods, that transmit
the pathogen when it feeds on a host. These vector-borne diseases (VBDs)
represent a serious threat to human, animal, and plant health as well as
negatively impacting economic welfare worldwide. For example, approximately a
third of the human population is at risk for infections transmitted by
mosquitoes alone, and vectors transmit many important diseases of plants and
livestock. Yearly, VBDs account for 17% of human infectious diseases and
billions of dollars in crop and livestock losses. In order to better prevent and
predict outbreaks of VBDs, many types of information and data on interactions of
vectors with their environments over space and time need to be combined.
However, efforts to do this have been hindered by data collected on vectors
being isolated, difficult to access, and kept in disparate formats. The main
goal of this project is to build a centralized open access data platform called
VectorByte. It will contain standardized data on vector traits and population
abundance. This will allow data to be more easily shared and used by the disease
ecology community and by other interested communities. Further, freely available
tools to analyze and model these data will be developed, combined with
educational materials, including tutorials on using the databases and data
analysis tools. Training early career scientists will be accomplished through
workshops and mentoring of postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduates within the project. Training workshops covering use of the
databases and statistical methods appropriate for the data will target early
career scientists from underrepresented groups and regions, as well as
practitioners from the broader public health and vector control community. This
combined audience will enable feedback from the applied realm about best user
practice and will promote collaborative opportunities to bridge between tools
developed within the academic community and real world decisions. The platform
and training will in turn support research and mathematical modelling efforts
that will lead to a better understanding of why outbreaks occur when and where
they do and will allow for development and assessment of potential control
strategies for these diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is mounting empirical
evidence that the traits of vectors vary across time, environmental conditions,
and within and between populations. This variation has knock-on effects for the
dynamics of vector populations, and therefore also for transmission of vector-
borne infections and the efficacy of control strategies. Mathematical and
statistical models can be used to better understand the links between traits,
populations, and transmission. However, doing this well requires detailed data
ranging from laboratory measurements of individual-level traits of vectors to
observed population dynamics of the vectors, all of which are often difficult to
obtain or use. Further, data for VBD systems are often archived in inconsistent
formats and locations. The VectorByte project will develop a user-friendly
informatics platform with a global scope for depositing, accessing, and
visualizing data in order to fill these gaps for the VBD community. The
VectorByte platform has the potential to transform VBD disease research by
providing Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) data,
necessary to build, test, and validate models of VBDs not currently possible
with available open data. This project will enable VBD researchers to increase
the impact of their data through standardized formatting and centralized
location, increasing the sustainability of data while simultaneously increasing
the potential for reuse. These data standards will also facilitate comparison of
VBD systems and the construction of open and testable models of VBD
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.