* 2016922
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Linguistic and visual cue competition in novel L2 structure learning and thematic role assignment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Kiel Christianson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2022
* USD 16,409.00

This project examines how American English speakers learn a case-marking,
flexible word-order language as a second language under different context
conditions (with supporting images or translations). It links the real time
processing of the new language, as learners read sentences, to the learning
outcomes. Learning languages whose structures are different from English poses
great difficulty for learners. This project examines the origins of this
attested difficulty, and how visual information (images) can guide learners’
attention and help them notice and understand new grammatical structures. It
considers the role of the learning environment for grammar learning and can
illustrate the way language input is better integrated with non-linguistic,
multimodal contextual support. It can guide educators and policy makers in the
development of educational software and game design, and online language
learning. It can inform the design of successful language programs for U.S.
adult learner populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies include a language
learning and a subsequent testing phase. During the learning phase, self-paced
reading and eye-tracking will show where learners allocate their attention as
they read second language sentences, and how attention to different parts of the
sentence is modulated by the type of contextual support (images or
translations). The goal is to examine how linguistic and visual information
interact and compete for learners’ attention. The hypothesis is that visual
scenes can make some aspects of grammar ‘stand out’ as learners compare their
sentence interpretation to the visual information. During the testing phase,
multiple measures will assess participants’ ability to comprehend and produce
the new grammatical structure. These studies can show how multimodal input
influences the focus of learners’ attention during real-time sentence reading
and how this processing affects their learning. This will advance our
understanding of how the mind processes and integrates linguistic and visual
information when learning a second language, which has clear educational
applications especially in online and multimedia language
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.