* 2016333
* I-Corps:  Vacuum Stripping and Absorption to Recover Ammonia from Wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Wendong Tao, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is the development of technology that
lowers the operating costs for treatment of ammonia-rich wastewater and
generates revenues by turning the removed ammonia into a sellable nitrogen
fertilizer. The ever-increasing number of anaerobic digestion systems at
municipal wastewater treatment facilities and concentrated animal feeding
operations are shifting the paradigm of wastewater treatment from contaminant
removal to recovery of bioenergy in the form of biogas, nutrients, and water.
The technology may be fabricated in different sizes of modules, providing
operational ease and flexibility of scaling. The ammonia extracted from
wastewater also has the potential to be used for production of certified organic
fertilizers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of technology termed vacuum stripping and absorption (VaSA) for
recovering ammonia in wastewater with high purity. VaSA couples vacuum thermal
stripping and acid absorption to pull ammonia out of ammonia-rich wastewater to
form ammonium sulfate granules. Moreover, recovering ammonia in wastewater may
be a sustainable alternative to the energy-intensive Haber-Bosch process for
ammonia synthesis. Using a weak vacuum, the boiling point is reduced from 100 to
65 degrees C for safe, efficient stripping of ammonia without the need for
pretreatment. It has been recognized as the most practical method for ammonia
recovery and fills the gap for an efficient, versatile, and scalable ammonia
recovery technology. When VaSA is incorporated into anaerobic digestion systems,
it avoids ammonia inhibition to methane-producing microorganisms, thus enabling
stable anaerobic digestion at a higher loading rate. The vacuum-assisted low-
temperature thermal treatment in the VaSA process enhances solids solubilization
and biodegradability of digestate, further increasing methane production as
stripped digestate is returned to the digesters. When employing VaSA to recover
ammonia from digester effluent, it improves the ability to separate solids from
digester effluent and upgrades the from Class B biosolids to Class A for
unrestricted land application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.