* 2016057
* Collaborative research: Quantifying incoming plate hydration and role of fluids on megathrust properties in and around the Guerrero Gap, offshore Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Donna Shillington, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 129,753.00

The plate boundary in subduction zone settings is known to exhibit a wide
spectrum of behavior for how the two tectonic plates slide past each other. Many
questions remain about what controls the wide spectrum of slip behavior within
and between different subduction zone systems worldwide. Seawater delivered into
the subduction zone by the incoming oceanic plate is commonly invoked to explain
variability of plate interface slip behavior. However, the volume and
distribution of seawater incorporated into the downgoing oceanic plate and its
fate at depth vary between subduction zones and is poorly known owing to the
limited amount of existing observations. The Guerrero Gap and neighboring
segments at the Middle America subduction zone, offshore Mexico, is one of the
best-known examples in the world of along-strike variations in slip behavior of
the plate boundary. The Guerrero Gap has not ruptured in a M&gt;7 earthquake in
more than 100 years but the largest known relatively shallow slow-slip events
that release energy slowly without generating strong seismic waves occur
approximately every 4 yrs. In contrast, the neighboring segments have ruptured
in M&gt;7 earthquakes and appear to be strongly locked. This project will
involve the acquisition and analysis of marine, active-source seismic data
within the Guerrero Seismic Gap and neighboring segments in order to obtain
critical constraints on the properties and geometry of the subduction zone
faults, including the abundance and distribution of fluids in both the incoming
oceanic plate and within the subduction zone. Results from this project will be
valuable for understanding the role of fluids (e.g. seawater) in influencing the
contrasting slip behavior both at this margin and similar subduction zones. This
project will support two early career scientists and one pre-tenured scientist
and will involve a strong collaboration between US, Mexican and Japanese
scientists. The proposed study will also strongly complement an ongoing
amphibious geodetic and seismic deployment led by Mexican and Japanese
collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 47.5 day, combined 2D wide-
angle seismic reflection/refraction and ultra-long offset multi-channel seismic
(MCS) survey will be conducted onboard the R/V Marcus G. Langseth. This project
includes six primary profiles along which both MCS and Ocean Bottom Seismometer
(OBS) data will be acquired, and additional MCS profiles that extend seismic
imaging over a larger extent of the margin. This study of the Guerrero Gap and
neighboring segments will yield unique insights into two core questions: (1)
What is the hydration state of the incoming, young sediment-starved Cocos
oceanic plate at the Middle America subduction zone, and how does it vary along-
strike and relate to changes in subduction zone behavior? MCS imaging and P and
S- waves velocity models from OBS and streamer data, including full-waveform
inversion as well as joint inversion of shots and earthquakes, will provide the
first estimates of the amount and distribution of water in the incoming plate
prior to subduction from the ridge axis to the trench axis and both in and
outside of the Guerrero Gap, allowing us to examine the role of fluids in
subduction zone processes and results will be compared the young but well-
sedimented Cascadia and Nankai subducting plates, (2) How do geometrical and
material properties of the subducting and overriding plates influence slip
behavior along the megathrust fault? Controlled- source seismic data will bring
new, high-resolution constraints on the architecture and properties of the upper
20-30 km of this subduction zone on parts of the megathrust that have different
degrees of coupling and slip behavior. This will enable the testing of competing
ideas for controls on slip behavior developed at other subduction zones, such as
variations in pore-fluid pressure or fault zone heterogeneity. Addressing this
question will require a synthesis of constraints on plate boundary properties
from this project with results on slip behavior from an ongoing multi-year
deployment of geodetic and seismic stations within the Guerrero
Gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.