* 2016646
* RAPID: Emissions and Fate of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) Emitted from Australian Wildfires during the COALA-JOEYS Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Jennifer Kaiser, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 103,950.00

This RAPID project takes advantage of the ongoing participation of a US
investigator in an Australian campaign to study the vegetative emissions of
atmospheric compounds in pristine and in polluted conditions in New South Wales
Australia, enabling the investigator to extend these efforts to study the
emissions from the massive wildfires now occurring in that region. The data from
this project will be evaluated in comparison to wildfire studies in the US, and
help to develop a better understanding of how the chemical composition of
wildfire emissions vary depending on the material burned. The results have
immediate relevance to the general public, as large populations are currently
being exposed to Australian bushfire smoke with unknown chemical
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COALA-JOEYâ€™s (Characterizing Organics and
Aerosol Loading over Australia - Joint Organic Emissions Year-round Study)
campaign in Australia will be extended to focus on emissions from ongoing
Australian wildfires. Samples will be obtained in the plumes of smoke from the
fires using a proton-transfer-reaction time-of-flight mass spectrometer to
identify volatile organic compounds (VOCs), including intermediate oxidation
products and semivolatile VOCs. This data is expected to help resolve some of
the large uncertainties in the formation of oxidized VOCs in fire plumes. In
particular, the emissions of fire-related formic acid (HCOOH) are especially
uncertain in Australian fires. Atmospheric HCOOH contributes to precipitation
acidity and chemistry, and its sources are generally not well captured in global
models. Constraining primary emissions of HCOOH and investigating secondary
formation mechanisms will provide a valuable constraint on global HCOOH budgets
as well as on the ultimate fate of biomass burning emissions. This project will
advance the knowledge of VOC emissions from Australian wildfires, their
variability and dependencies, and subsequent VOC
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.