* 2016909
* EAGER: Ultrasound Studies in High Fields and High Strain of the Normal State in Unconventional Odd Parity Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Bellave Shivaram, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 199,620.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials are driving advances
that will revolutionize many areas ranging from standard to quantum computing.
One type of material of particular interest are unconventional superconductors.
These materials, which are often described as strongly correlated electronic
systems, have several novel properties in both their normal and superconducting
state that make them a desirable platform for new applications. Such
correlations can make the electrons exhibit novel effects such as chirality i.e.
handedness and nematicity or orientational order. These novel electronic effects
can be exploited in new quantum technologies for computing and secure
communication. Mastering the control of different quantum phases is an integral
part in the development of such high pay-off new technologies. This research
will use velocity of sound measurements in high magnetic fields and with the
application of uniaxial pressure to locate the various magnetic phases and study
how they evolve. The project will also support the involvement of students in
research as well as outreach activities to local schools and
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is for experimental work in very high magnetic fields and high pressures,
applied uniaxially, on the heavy electron system UPt3. This is a unique metal
which exhibits multiple phases in its superconducting (SC) as well in the normal
magnetic states. In UPt3 a minute trigonal distortion, i.e. a departure from its
nominal hexagonal crystal symmetry is known to exist. Such symmetry breaking
effects are quite general in many families of strongly correlated electronic
systems (SCES). Multiple states such as charge (CDW) and spin (SDW) density
waves, unconventional superconductivity and novel magnetic phases can coexist in
SCES and precisely controlled experiments are needed to tease out the various
physical interactions. Through a combined application of high magnetic fields
and large uniaxial stress the PI proposes to delicately tune the broken crystal
symmetry in UPt3. Such a conjoint application of two very large external fields,
magnetic and pressure, has hitherto never been employed and hence the proposed
work is risky. The different magnetic phases and how they evolve under
simultaneous application of high magnetic fields and high pressure will be
studied by measuring the velocity of ultrasound passing through crystals of
UPt3. Sound velocity is a very sensitive measure of how electrons in the
different magnetic and SC phases behave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.