* 2016725
* CCRI: Medium: Developing a Multi-Channel Naturalistic Audio Corpora for the Natural Language Processing Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John H. L. Hansen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,227,500.00

This project is focused on developing a massive audio resource of real-world
speech communications related to task solving by engineers/scientists working to
ensure the success of one of history’s greatest scientific and technical
accomplishments - the NASA Apollo missions. Major challenges exist in exploring
team based voice communications due to a lack of any comprehensive time-
synchronized and transcribed audio resource. The research team will create the
framework needed to recover and make available the entire team communications.
This includes digitizing the extensive 50-year-old Apollo 30-track analog tape
collection, and advance the necessary speech technology tools/resources to
automatically generate meta-data that includes when speech occurs, all text
transcripts, speaker identity, as well as aspects relating to speaker traits.
The resource is expected to encompass 150,000 hours of audio from all Apollo
missions. The research team will provide open user access to explore and
navigate the community resource using an interactive web platform: Explore
Apollo, as well as download audio and corresponding meta-data: Fearless Steps –
Explore Apollo. ‘Finding Waldo’: a resource to identify all instances of
individual NASA members across Apollo missions and to make this available to
surviving personnel and family members as a tribute to the ‘Heroes behind the
Heroes of Apollo’. The focused research communities include speech technology,
speech and language communications, team psychology in social sciences,
education/STEM, historians and preservation archivists. Outreach efforts will be
through mini-workshops, tutorials, community challenges, and special sessions
across various fields, providing opportunities to distribute and receive user
feedback to enhance the resource. This resource will allow engineers,
scientists, educators and historians unique data to develop new theories and
models for how people work and respond rapidly to challenging problems, as well
as promote science and math based (STEM) goals for space, history and team based
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on developing a massive
audio resource of real-world team-based speech communications by
engineers/scientists working to ensure the success of one of history’s greatest
technical achievements, the NASA Apollo missions. There is significant need from
the speech technology community for access to natural big-data speech corpora to
develop next generation technologies. A critical challenge is the ability to
employ audio that is team and task based and not simulated. This project will
establish a sustainable multi-speaker task-based corpora generation process
based on the recovery of Apollo missions, encompassing up to +150,000 hours of
audio. Research activities include (i) establishing the framework needed to
digitize the 50-year old Apollo 30-track analog tape collection, (ii) advance
speech technology tools/resources to automatically generate meta-data that
include speech activity, speech recognition transcript generation, speaker
identity, as well as aspects relating to speaker traits. Specific advancements
will address acoustic and expanded lexicon/language model requirements to
encompass communication traits for NASA engineers. The research team will
provide open user access to explore and navigate the community resource using an
interactive web platform: Explore Apollo, and download audio and meta-data:
Fearless Steps – Explore Apollo. The resource is significantly enhanced by
advancing extensive machine learning speech technologies in transcript/meta-data
generation for audio speaker diarization – the process of determining “who
spoke, what, and when”. The technology offers a unique opportunity to provide
portions of history, and tangible pieces of technology for multi-purpose use.
The open-access resource provides freely available meta-data to propose and
develop algorithms for speech activity detection, keyword spotting, speaker
variability, sentiment, accent, language identification, multimodal systems,
conversational analysis, speaker turn detection and individual as well as team
assessment. The concept of ‘Where’s Waldo’ is used as a metaphor to pay tribute
and yield personal recognition to the thousands of notable members across the
Apollo missions in addition to using deep learning strategies to develop
effective speaker tagging and hot-spot detection systems. This will impact the
lives of the Apollo members and their families and provide additional education
resources for future generations while also aiding as a historical
archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.