* 2016650
* CCRI: ENS: Enhancement of Trust-Hub, a Web-based Portal to support the Cybersecurity Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Ramesh Karri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Concerns about electronic hardware and supply chain security have received a
tremendous amount of attention over the past decade or so. Although researchers
have offered solutions and security mechanisms to mitigate the issues, they do
not still evaluate their effectiveness in a systematic manner. Some research is
still being carried out in an ad-hoc fashion where the published results rely on
figures of merit that limit objective cross-field comparisons. However, this has
become vital as system-on-chips (SoCs) become pervasive in virtually every
application (mobile, internet of things (IoT), and critical systems). This
project aims to build platforms to validate benchmarks, develop tools and
metrics to validate SoC security, and create a web-portal to disseminate and
promote research and development in securing electronics devices and systems.
The intellectual merits of this project include development of (i) a
comprehensive SoC vulnerability database, (ii) a comprehensive set of metrics
based on the vulnerability database, (iii) SoC security validation tool suite,
and (iv) SoC benchmarking. This project leads a community-wide framework, called
the Trust-Hub, toward stronger assurances in SoCs, computational platforms, and
the electronics supply chain. Based on the demonstrated success of information
sharing, Trust-Hub will serve as an important web-based repository for
benchmarks, tools, databases, platforms, evaluation software, source codes, and
much more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will interest major semiconductor
companies, US government agencies and university researchers worldwide. The
broader impacts include benefits to the society by building secure and
trustworthy electronic devices and systems for healthcare, defense, military,
space, finance, transportation, automotive and other critical applications. The
scientific results will be presented to the hardware and electronics security
community, and to semiconductor companies and government agencies. Students will
use the benchmarks and tools in the annual competitions. Finally, this project
will support development of a workforce who understand the much-needed
protection of electronics supply chain and intellectual property
(IP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.