* 2016806
* The Expanding Role of the State in Professional Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Gorman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 90,440.00

This project conducts a case study of attempts to reform regulation of a United
States profession in the late 1990s and early 2000s, culminating in reforms
enacted in 2002. Professionals can use their expert knowledge in ways that cause
harm to clients, third parties, and society in general. A variety of regulatory
approaches are possible for limiting or preventing such harm, including self-
regulation, state regulation, or “regulation” by private market mechanisms.
Professions have traditionally regulated themselves, but in recent years many
countries have seen a gradual shift away from this model toward an increasing
regulatory role for states. We know relatively little about why change is
occurring in this particular direction. This study is a step toward increasing
our understanding that additionally permits the development of theory explaining
how and why similar shifts toward increased state regulation of professions have
occurred in a number of settings and might occur in the future. More generally,
the study sheds light on the circumstances that facilitate or impede change in
the regulation of professional services, and begins to identify the limits on
the possibilities open to societies to curb the misuse of expert
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design is a case study in which the
interactions among key actors and stakeholder groups involved in seeking,
resisting, and shaping state-based regulation during the late 1990s and the
early 2000s are traced. The case presents a kind of natural experiment:
revelation of serious misconduct in the profession in 2001-2002 allows
comparison of the same actors, decision options, and arguments before and after
this key event. The data are primarily documentary: speeches, transcripts of
hearings, government reports, and articles from both the professional trade
press and the general news media. In addition to developing new theory and
informing future efforts at regulatory change, the project will build
intellectual bridges between the study of professions and other subfields and
disciplines. It will also contribute to revitalizing research on professional
and expert work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.