* 2016809
* The UMass Simultaneous Frequency Microwave Radiometer (USFMR): Improvements for Retrieval of Winds and Precipitation in Non-tropical Cyclone Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Stephen Frasier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 474,969.00

Hurricanes and other oceanic storms have extreme winds that are difficult to
measure. This research project will enhance the ability of an airborne remote
sensing instrument to make high-resolution surface wind measurements in
hurricanes and to increase the accuracy of measurements in other large
extratropical storms. Ocean wind measurements are important for coastal
communities, maritime commerce, and national defense. The project will also
provide multi-disciplinary training to a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to improve the retrieval of
extreme winds and precipitation via microwave radiometry at C-band. The Stepped
Frequency Microwave Radiometer (SFMR) measures upwelling C-band emission from
the wind-driven sea surface and from rainfall. Using brightness temperature
measurements over a range of discrete C-band frequencies, the SFMR retrieval
algorithm solves for both wind-speed and rain-rate. However, the currently
deployed SFMR suffers from inadequate resolution and a tuning of the retrieval
algorithms to hurricane environments. This project will assess the performance
of the University of Massachusetts Simultaneous Frequency Microwave Radiometer
(USFMR) which is a version of the SFMR that is able to make measurements in
parallel over the frequency range, enabling more rapid updates. The USFMR would
be flown on a NOAA aircraft in high-latitude extratropical storms through a
collaboration with the NOAA Center for Satellite Applications and Research.
Adjustments to the retrieval algorithms for high-latitude locations would also
be a significant part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.