* 2016701
* CCRI: Medium: Rogues Gallery: A Community Research Infrastructure for Post-Moore Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Young, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,351,699.00

The forthcoming post-Moore computing era speaks to a time in the near future
when Gordon Moore’s Law of easy and cost-effective transistor scaling will end,
and computers will no longer be faster just because they can incorporate more,
smaller transistors. Future computers need to be specialized for certain tasks
and designed differently to achieve the consistent gains in performance that
drive our modern economy. Some possible examples of these specialized computer
architectures include unique or “rogue” designs like neuromorphic or brain-
inspired computers, computers that operate at a quantum scale, and reversible
computers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project provides the first publicly
available testbed for investigating these novel post-Moore computer designs, or
“rogues,” as part of the Rogues Gallery testbed. The Rogues Gallery provides a
unique research infrastructure with neuromorphic, reconfigurable, and near-
memory platforms as well as capabilities for novel networking, including 5G.
Additionally, the testbed is supplemented by training resources, software and
tools, and a collaborative community to assist researchers and developers in the
best ways to use these novel computer designs for everyday applications as well
as challenging research problems. The expected outcomes of this testbed effort
include a better understanding of specialized computer designs for post-Moore
systems as well as improved capabilities and training for the next generation of
US researchers in how to use these critical technologies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a next-generation, community-focused hardware
and software testbed and associated hardware design facility to evaluate
possible architecture directions for post-Moore computing. These computer
architectures and systems differ significantly from today’s standard processor
models and in many cases can be considered “rogue” approaches to the future of
computing. The infrastructure, or the Rogues Gallery, will provide a community-
accessible hardware testbed hosted by Georgia Tech that will enable related
research into software tools and programming interfaces, data management
techniques for large data sets, and algorithmic strategies for post-Moore
hardware. This collaborative, community testbed represents a future-looking
investment that is not currently satisfied by any existing academic or industry
resources. The community need for a testbed for near-memory, neuromorphic, and
next-generation networking devices has already been demonstrated by IEEE’s
Rebooting Computing efforts; the rapid growth of conferences and venues for
areas like thermodynamic, neuromorphic, and quantum computing; and a growing
interest in researchers looking to map applications like deep learning and data
analytics to these architectures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To further develop this
testbed as a community resource, the investigators are working to acquire unique
hardware (rogues) and are building a common infrastructure to host this hardware
and future prototypes, while also developing tutorials and training, access
management, integration, and measurement techniques for post-Moore hardware and
software research. The deployment and success of the Rogues Gallery
infrastructure will create a new testbed and associated research community that
is focused on future hardware prototypes that are not served by existing cloud,
academic, national lab, or NSF resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.