* 2016246
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Estuarine dam removal as an ecosystem disturbance: Examining the impacts of seawater intrusion on functional stability of benthic N cycle communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Bongkeun Song, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 165,835.00

Large dams (&gt; 15m high) are a major man-made disturbance to watersheds
altering the structure and function of river ecosystems. The Nakdong River is
one of the watersheds heavily affected by the dam constructed at the mouth of
the river to stop tidal seawater exchange. When it was built in 1987, the dam
caused dramatic shifts in lower river ecosystems converting the area to a man-
made freshwater reservoir. The alteration of river water flows resulted in
seasonal harmful algal blooms and water quality degradation. Increasing concerns
about these negative impacts along with associated social and economic demands
have led to restoring the river ecosystem by removing the dam. The dam removal
will be done in a controlled way through a series of events that open the dam's
gates, thereby allowing seawater intrusion into upstream ecosystems. This
provides a unique and immediate opportunity to study the impacts of seawater
intrusion on a freshwater ecosystem. The series of planned dam openings can be
effectively used as a large-scale, unprecedented, manipulative ecosystem
experiment. This RAPID project takes advantage of this unique opportunity to
study the sediment microbial communities responding to the programmed seawater
intrusion in the river. The project will include training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, and results will disseminated via public
lectures and a scientific network for river researchers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study the functional stability of sediment
nitrogen (N) cycling communities responding to the disturbance of seawater
intrusion in the Nakdong River, where dam removal is in progress via a series
openings of dam gates. Multi-omic approaches including metagenomic,
metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic analyses will be conducted to evaluate both
sensitivity and resilience of individual N metabolisms in a community, while the
measurements of N cycling processes (fluxes and rates), including
denitrification and dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium, reveal a whole
community metabolism responding to the seawater intrusion. This is a unique and
transformative project to determine the functional stability of different
metabolisms within the community exposed to a programmed seawater intrusion in a
freshwater ecosystem. The combined multi-omics and biogeochemical measurements
will provide novel knowledge of sensitivity and resilience in different
systematic levels from genes to individual organisms to the community level.
Dissimilatory N cycling metabolisms in sediment communities are selected as a
model of microbial functions since benthic N cycling is critical to attenuate
excess N loading, a cause of eutrophication. Given the importance of benthic N
cycle, the impacts of seawater intrusion on sediment N cycling communities and
their functions have been mainly examined with ex-situ experimental designs such
as microcosms and mesocosms or field survey along salinity gradients of rivers
and estuaries. This first project represents the first ecosystem-scale
manipulation examining sediment N cycling communities responding to seawater
intrusion. Two graduate students will be involved in the project and will be
trained in multi-omic and biogeochemcial methods. The project will also include
training activities for undergraduates at the two institutions, dissemination of
results in public outreach lectures and via the Worldwide Hydrobiogeochemical
Observatory Network for Dynamic River Systems
(WHONDRS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.