* 2016750
* Enhancing the Perception and Recognition of Spoken Words in a Second Language: A Cue-Weighting Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Annie Tremblay, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,961.00

This project examines the perception of English lexical stress (e.g., “desert”
vs. “dessert”) by listeners from various language backgrounds in order to
advance several important questions about the nature of speech perception and
learning. The sound system of a person's native language influences not only how
second-language learners produce words but also how they recognize words, making
it difficult for second-language learners to hear sound contrasts that do not
distinguish words in the native language or that differ in how they distinguish
words in the native and second languages. These difficulties can in turn impact
second-language learners’ ability to understand speech in their second language,
thus causing important communication breakdowns, and they can exacerbate the
degree of foreign accent that second-language learners typically evidence in
speech production. This project seeks to clarify and explain the nature of this
native-language influence by investigating a linguistic phenomenon that plays a
critical role in spoken-word recognition across languages but has been under-
investigated: lexical stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s specific goals
are threefold. First, the project will elucidate whether the cue-weighting
theory of speech perception can provide a strong theoretical framework for
understanding the listening difficulties that second-language learners encounter
with lexical stress, and for developing training stimuli and methods to enhance
the perceptual learning of lexical stress. Second, it will help resolve
theoretical debates about the mechanisms underlying second-language perceptual
learning, the nature and robustness of second-language perceptual
representations, and the degree to which adult second-language perceptual
learning remains malleable. Third, it will provide a theoretical foundation for
the teaching of second-language speech perception, enabling instructors to
tailor teaching practices according to students’ native language and individual
abilities, and the effectiveness of training stimuli and methods. Participants
will complete cue-weighting perception experiments, sequence-recall experiments,
visual-world eye-tracking experiments, and perceptual training experiments, as
well as proficiency and perceptual aptitude tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.