* 2016404
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Experiments in Sustainable Farming in North Americas Non food Agricultural Sector
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Heather Paxson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 29,668.00

This doctoral research investigates how and to what extent growth in the non-
food agricultural sector is impacting efforts towards environmentally
sustainable and socially equitable farming practices. Through a comparative case
study of an emerging agricultural sector, ethnographic research will be
undertaken in three farming regions specializing in botanical health products.
The goal is to understand how different policies and scales of emerging
agricultural markets affect labor organization, consumer demographics, and
sustainable practices. The project contributes to training a graduate student.
Findings will be shared with governmental and non-governmental organizations,
farmers, industry associations, and others with the aim of informing
agricultural policy and oversight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on the
anthropology of food and agriculture and the anthropology of science and
medicine, the project asks how farming practices and cultures are developing in
response to different regulatory regimes. These questions will be addressed
through open-ended interviewing and participant-observation undertaken on farms
cultivating health products and their partner organizations. This will provide
rich data to assess farmers' and stakeholders' knowledge of cultivation
practices and plant ecology, as well as how these are affected by different
policies across sites. The researchers will additionally conduct archival and
online research to establish historical and contemporary contexts affecting
policy-making and its consequences. The research will provide important insights
on how changes in regulation impact agricultural production, exchange, and
sustainability, as well as the networks of individuals and corporations involved
in these processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.