* 2016168
* I-Corps:  Coupled High and Low-Frequency Ultrasonic for the Destruction of Organics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Jay Meegoda, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to advance
the development of power ultrasound for the destruction of hazardous chemicals.
This technology can potentially be used for industrial and laboratory organic
waste treatment, remediation/treatment of polluted soils/sediments, and water
and wastewater treatment. The technology offers a cost-effective method for
degrading toxic organic pollutants, eliminating the use of costly activated
carbon or other adsorbents, and generating in situ removal of organic
contaminants at the source.

This I-Corps project explores translation of the sonochemistry associated with
power ultrasound to develop a new environmental remediation technology for the
degradation of pollutants such as PFAS, PCB, PAH, etc. Commercially available
remedial approaches use sorption and stabilization techniques or incineration,
but these are ineffective for certain classes of pollutants and incineration is
an expensive alternative. This project explores sono-chemical reactions and
sono-physical pyrolysis without requiring additional chemicals; the project will
characterize the future optimization of parameters including frequency,
transducer selection, and reactor geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.