* 2016608
* CCRI: ENS: Collaborative Research: Open Computer System Usage Repository and Analytics Engine
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Richard Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,920.00

In science and engineering research, large-scale, centrally managed computing
clusters or “supercomputers” have been instrumental in enabling the kinds of
resource-intensive simulations, analyses, and visualizations that have been used
in computer-aided drug discovery, high strength materials design for cars and
jet engines, and disease vector analysis to name a few. Such clusters are
complex systems comprised of several hundred to thousand computer servers with
fast network connections between them, various data storage resources, and
highly optimized scientific software being shared with several hundred other
researchers from diverse domains. Consequently, the overall dependability of
such systems relies on the dependability of these individual highly
interconnected elements as well as the characteristics of cascading failures.
While computer systems researchers and practitioners have been at the forefront
of designing and deploying dependable computing cluster systems, this task has
been hampered by the lack of publicly available, real-world failure data from
supercomputers currently in operation. Prior practice has largely involved
tedious, manual collection and curation of small sets of data for use in
specific analyses. This project will establish seamless, automated pipelines for
acquiring, processing, and curating continuous, detailed system usage,
monitoring, and failure data from large computing clusters at two organizations,
Purdue University and the University of Texas at Austin. This data will be
disseminated through a publicly accessible portal and complemented by a suite of
in-situ analytics capabilities that will support and spur research in dependable
computing systems. The data acquisition pipeline and analytics software will be
made open-source and designed for ease of federation, extension, and adoption to
cluster systems operated by other organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cluster
computing systems are a key resource in time-sensitive, computationally
intensive research such as virus structure modeling and drug discovery and have
been at the forefront of efforts to tackle global pandemics. Both unanticipated
system down-times and lack of actionable feedback to researchers on
computational failures can have adverse effects on research timeliness and
efficiency. This project will allow the practitioners and administrators of
these systems to develop data-backed best practices for ensuring high
availability and utilization for their clusters. The resulting large, public
data repository consisting of data from clusters with diverse workloads spanning
traditional high-performance computing, modern accelerator-based computing (for
example on graphics processing units (GPUs)), and cloud-style applications will
allow the systems research community to consider forward-looking research
questions based on real system data. The project will train a cadre of students
in data analysis on live production systems and this will provide them with a
unique learning experience, interfacing with a variety of
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.