* 2016516
* PFI-TT:  Prototyping a mobile app and paper test card system to detect dangerous opioids and stimulants in the field
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Marya Lieberman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create a functional prototype
system for presumptive detection of illicit opioids and stimulants. This new
technology could prevent some of the 45,000 fatal opioid overdoses per year in
the US and reduce the chances of false drug arrests, which disproportionately
affect certain minority populations. The technology uses a mobile phone app
coupled with a paper test card and machine vision algorithms. The paper card
runs twelve chemical tests on the sample at once, producing a color bar code
that reveals the chemical composition of the sample. The mobile app will use
machine vision software to read the results of the test. The system will be less
likely to erroneously identify a harmless substance as an illicit drug than
current commercially available presumptive drug tests and may be able to measure
drug concentrations and identify multiple drugs present in mixtures. The latter
are capabilities that the current presumptive tests do poorly, if at all.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a prototype illicit drug
identification system for further commercial development. The paper card will be
accessorized with a dose metering device and solvent reservoir to facilitate
field use. The number of color tests on the millifluidic card will be increased
by 50%, targeting opioids and stimulant drugs. Human ability to sense colors is
subjective and may be affected by differences in color vision, so the analytical
metrics of reading test card results “by eye” will be compared with the results
of using principal component analysis, a neural network classification approach,
or a generative adversarial network (GAN) approach. Harmless stimulant drugs
will be used in field tests to evaluate different prototype card designs, and to
demonstrate the potential of the mobile app + card system for geotemporal
detection of a “product” responsible for an overdose outbreak. The team will use
a business model canvas framework and regular group meetings to ensure that all
participants receive training in entrepreneurship and that the research and
development activities result in a commercializable system for detecting illicit
drugs in field settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.