* 2016966
* Collaborative Research: Cyberinfrastructure for Robust Learning of Interconnected Knowledge
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Noboru Matsuda, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 434,884.00

Improving student success in subject domains that serve as gateway courses to
STEM careers, such as chemistry and math, is of great interest. These subjects
are difficult to teach and learn, partly because they involve a complex network
of interconnected knowledge. Current online instructional materials generally
follow a linear sequence, tracing a single predetermined pathway through the
knowledge network. The CyberBook technology developed in this project instead
guides students through the knowledge network along pathways chosen to optimize
their learning of both the individual concepts and the relations between these
concepts. The pathways adapt to individual students, with information gathered
from a student’s interaction with the online materials to select a pathway that
is optimal for that individual student. Although the primary focus is on
chemistry and mathematics, the approach can be applied to other STEM domains.
CyberBook combines traditional online courseware with intelligent tutoring
systems. It also provides a research platform for learning scientists to conduct
studies on how students learn. Beyond learning science, the proposed research
has the potential to advance the literature on education (both domain-specific
and domain-general), educational data mining, and artificial intelligence in
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop several advanced
learning-engineering methods to facilitate the creation of high-quality and
effective online courseware: (1) an application of reinforcement learning to
compute optimal sequencing of topics and scaffolding, (2) a text-mining method
to automatically discover skills to be learned from text in written instructions
and assessments, (3) a web browser-based method to rapidly create intelligent
tutoring systems and seamlessly integrate them into online courseware, and (4)
an application of reinforcement learning for an evidence-based quality control
for online courseware content. As a proof of concept, instances of CyberBook for
a college level chemistry (stoichiometry) and high school math (coordinate
geometry) will be created. To validate the feasibility of implementation, the
proposed learning engineering methods will be applied to two existing online
course platforms—Open Learning Initiative and Open edX. The effectiveness of the
proposed intervention will be measured through a pilot evaluation study at the
partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.