* 2016717
* CCRI: Planning: ScooterLab: Development of a Programmable and Participatory e-Scooter Testbed to Enable CISE-focused Micromobility Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Anindya Maiti, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Single-rider micromobility vehicles, such as dock-less battery-powered
e-scooters, are a fast-growing and popular short-distance transportation
mechanism in our urban communities. This upcoming transportation paradigm not
only provides new research opportunities in Computer and Information Science
&amp; Engineering (CISE) focused areas of large-scale data management, computer
hardware/software systems design, cyber security and user-privacy, but also
serves as an excellent instrument to collect contextual data that could enable
research in a variety of other CISE and multi-disciplinary areas such as machine
learning, high performance computing, urban planning, transportation engineering
and public policy. However, currently a large-scale, easily customizable, and
publicly-accessible research instrument comprising of micromobility vehicles to
support these opportunities is unavailable, which hinders scientific advances in
these areas. The goal of this project is to plan for the creation and eventual
deployment of such a community infrastructure - a testbed referred to as
ScooterLab. The ScooterLab testbed involves retrofitting off-the-shelf
micromobility vehicles with customized sensors and controller computers and
developing a management portal to support inter-disciplinary research
collaborations. It will be available to community researchers for deployment of
customized sensing experiments and trials of new algorithms/systems. Carefully
curated datasets from these experiments and trials will be publicly-available
and will enable new, ground-breaking research breakthroughs in CISE and other
multi-disciplinary domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CISE Community Research
Infrastructure (CCRI) planning project will make the following key
contributions: (1) reach out to CISE and other inter-disciplinary communities
focusing on micromobility research in order to further understand the
requirements of researchers within this space, (2) implement proof-of-concept
vehicles for the planned testbed and continuously improve the design of these
preliminary prototypes based on community feedback, and (3) organize focused
workshops and tutorials to update the community about these preliminary vehicle
designs, testbed deployment plans and related research goals. This planning
project is a necessary step towards implementation of the ScooterLab community
testbed, which can prevent time-consuming and expensive duplication of research
testbeds that are not shared with others. The outreach activities of this
project and the planned ScooterLab testbed will provide opportunities for
attracting and sustaining faculty and students working on intelligent
micromobility solutions and transportation systems, and will bring together
researchers from computer science, electrical engineering, urban planning, and
public policy for inter-disciplinary research in this emerging area. The testbed
will also be a foundational instrument for University of Texas at San Antonioâ€™s
(UTSA) planned Urban Science Institute, which is part of the ten-year plan for
the Downtown campus. As a minority-serving institution (56% Hispanic and 51%
Female), UTSA as a home for this testbed will provide extensive research and
participation opportunities for people of color and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.