* 2016301
* Support for Beginning Investigators to Attend the 17th SEDI Symposium; Taipei, Taiwan; July 6-10, 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Michael Bergman, Simon's Rock of Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 03/31/2023
* USD 24,000.00

This award will provide funds to partially cover beginning investigator
participant costs for the 17th Symposium on Study of Earth’s Deep Interior
(SEDI), to be held in Taipei, Taiwan from July 6-10, 2020. Beginning
investigators are defined as graduate students, post-docs and, under some
circumstances, very junior faculty. SEDI meetings are particularly conducive for
beginning investigators as the meetings are small but cross-disciplinary, and
they provide ample time for discussion of the pressing scientific questions. The
objective of this proposal is to support the next generation of deep Earth
scientists. Applications will be broadly solicited through the SEDI listserve,
and applicants will be supported based on their abstracts and a statement of
their situation. This workshop will contribute to the interdisciplinary
education of US graduate students and beginning researchers by fostering dialog
with researchers at all levels at a relatively small workshop-style meeting. The
international format complements efforts by US national groups such as CIDER and
will be useful to those funded under or seeking funding from the NSF CSEDI
program. The structure of SEDI and its meetings is intrinsically
interdisciplinary, providing many opportunities for intra- and international
collaborations on a broad range of topics that contribute to our understanding
of the deep earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEDI is an international scientific
organization dedicated to the Study of the Earth’s Deep Interior. The ultimate
goal of SEDI is an enhanced understanding of the past evolution and current
thermal, chemical and dynamical state of the Earth’s deep interior, and of the
effect that the interior has on structures and processes observed at the surface
of the Earth. The ‘deep interior’ includes the core and lower mantle, but
interest often extends to the surface, for example, in the study of mantle
plumes or dynamics of descending lithospheric slabs. The scientific questions
and problems of interest to SEDI include the geomagnetic dynamo and secular
variation, paleomagnetism and the evolution of the Earth’s deep interior,
material properties at extreme conditions, structure and dynamics of the core
and mantle, core-mantle interactions, and the nature and location of deep
geochemical reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.