* 2016472
* PFI-TT: Electrochemically Reactive Membrane Filtration for Enhanced Recalcitrant Pollutant Removal
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Wen Zhang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to promote industrialization and
commercialization of innovative electrified or electrochemically reactive
membrane filtration systems for water treatment and pollutant degradation.
Decentralized or point-of-use water and wastewater treatment facilities (e.g.,
landfill leachate, surface and groundwater remediation, and hospital discharge)
could benefit from this membrane process to eradicate potentially hazardous
water pollutants, improve downstream treatability or degradation efficiency, and
lower environmental and health risks from the exposure or discharge of water
pollutants such as industrial solvents or additives. The research outcome will
provide information for the rational design of electrochemical membrane systems
that exhibit new features of both pollutant degradation and fouling mitigation.
The project may pave the way toward a new generation of reactive membrane
filtration development. Moreover, valuable research experiences and
commercialization training will be offered to postdoctoral fellows and students
to become technology innovators and business leaders in membrane technologies.
Under-represented and minority students will be recruited through the Garden
State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (GS-LSAMP) program as
well as student organizations or chapters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will provide a new fundamental insight into electrochemical degradation
for emerging water micropollutants on membrane filtration platforms in an effort
to transform traditionally passive filtration processes to chemically reactive
systems. The project will explore novel electrical polarizations to induce
pulsed surface electrochemical reactions to improve reaction efficiencies and
longevity of the electrode membranes. The project will explore membrane
synthesis, characterization, and filtration experiments to promote the
fundamental science and engineering principles of electrochemical membranes. The
specific goals are to (1) devise novel electrochemical applications of porous
electrode membranes to empower pollutant rejection, degradation and fouling
mitigation; (2) delineate the chemical stability and longevity changes of the
electrode membrane under various electrochemical reactions; (3) demonstrate
potential new membrane fouling mechanisms (e.g., dielectrophoresis); and (4)
understand new degradation pathways of highly refractory micropollutants such as
poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.