* 2016108
* EAGER Germination: Project Confluence: Engineering and Science to Address Community Needs
* ENG,EFMA
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Darshan Karwat, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Many communities across the US face persistent environmental and energy
challenges, particularly those who have high proportions of minority or
socioeconomically disadvantaged individuals. Community groups may have limited
access to engineering and scientific expertise that could help their efforts to
address these challenges. This award to Arizona State University will fund an
integrated set of efforts to build the skills, resources, and knowledge of
engineering and science academic researchers to enable them to conduct research
and development (R&amp;D) in support of underserved communities. A key goal of
the research is to test whether collaboration with community groups increases
the ability of academics to formulate societally impactful research questions.
Importantly, underserved communities stand to derive benefit through having
academic researchers work with them to identify and address critical questions
for their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create approaches
and resources for establishing interactions between engineers and scientists and
underserved communities with the goal of identifying research needs. Primers and
resources on effective collaboration with community groups will be developed and
incorporated into an online knowledge-sharing and collaboration platform. In
parallel, collaborative technological and scientific needs assessments (CNAs)
will be conducted involving both academic researchers and community groups.
Importantly, the structure of these CNAs is designed to emphasize community
assets and avoid simply focusing on problems or deficits in the community. The
CNAs are anticipated to lead to the creation of R&amp;D roadmaps which address
important environmental and energy challenges faced by underserved communities,
and which can be leveraged for subsequent collaborative work. An important
corollary goal will be to determine whether this process impacts the ability of
academic researchers to germinate transformative research ideas that address
important societal challenges. Self-efficacy of researchers with respect to this
question will be assessed through pre- and post-CNA surveys that use a modified
version of the Engineering Professional Responsibility Assessment (EPRA)
expanded to include the work of scientists. Additionally, empirical testing of
question formulation capacity and question value will focus on analysis of
responses to a prototype R&amp;D road-map related to community group needs.
Positive outcomes in this study would lay the foundation for scaling on a
national level, particularly given the planned establishment of an online
platform for communicating resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.