* 2016431
* CCRI: Planning: Towards Building a Community Data Infrastructure for CyberSecurity Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Jack Davidson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The long-term vision of this project is to create a multi-campus data collection
and sharing infrastructure for use by machine-learning cybersecurity and privacy
researchers. These datasets will be multimodal in nature (network logs, host
logs, authentication logs for kill-chain detection), provide continuous data
(for long-term temporal and topological analysis), and be timely in nature
(necessary to handle the constantly evolving nature of cyber-attacks). The
specific initial steps under this Planning Grant are: (i) organize a workshop to
engage the community to formulate a vision and roadmap for this infrastructure
and to discuss legal, ethical, privacy, organizational and sustainability
considerations, and (ii) create a team of multiple data providers and data users
and submit a Grand Ensemble CCRI proposal to build and use the data
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The envisioned infrastructure will be
invaluable for detecting zero-day (new, previously unseen) attacks and large-
scale attacks with complex kill-chains, e.g., the Wannacry ransomware attack,
Mirai Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks and Advanced Persistent
Threat (APT) attacks. It will be built with input from a selected group of early
adopters, i.e., data users who can develop and test their machine learning
techniques. Later, the Shibboleth Single Sign-On Access of Incommon Federation
members will be used to broaden access to the entire CISE community. Community
outreach and dissemination activities are part of the planning grant workshop. A
number of undergraduate and graduate students will participate in this project
at University of Virginia (UVA), Indiana University (IU), and George Washington
University (GWU). Diversity enhancing activities are planned through centers at
UVA and IU, and the GWU co-PI’s research Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.