* 2016223
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Norm stasis and change in the context of cooperative farming
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Minhua Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/28/2022
* USD 14,806.00

This research will examine how norms are maintained and how they change, a
poorly understood phenomenon that is key to explaining human social evolution
and contemporary cultural change. Its findings will shed light on how people
make decisions in normative contexts, and what factors determine whether and how
a norm changes under new social, economic, environmental or political forces.
The findings will be disseminated widely through web forms, news reports and
outreach events. In addition, the research will strengthen the STEM workforce
and research infrastructure, and will provide training to U.S.-based graduate
and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how a
surplus division norm from cooperative farming is maintained despite preferences
against the norm. The norm specifies that households that cooperate in farming
should divide the gains equally by household, regardless of the relative land
and labor contribution. Data will be collected through 1) surveys to document
people’s farming practices, 2) vignettes to elicit normative attitudes and
preferences on cooperative farming arrangements, and 3) recordings of each
household’s daily activity and goods flow. The data will be analyzed with
multinomial logit models to identify how individuals acquire private preferences
about what to do when social pressure is absent, how they determine the optimal
choice when social pressure is present, and how such normative decision
algorithms lead to the observed behaviors. The data and analyses are designed to
pinpoint individual decision-making algorithms and allow for tests of normative
shift models. By developing fieldwork-compatible methodologies to measure all
the elements of a norm at the same time and study the norm as a complex system,
the research advances the use of holistic frameworks to examine norm stasis and
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.