* 2016515
* Role of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 in regulating RNA polymerase II elongation and mRNA splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Michael Fried, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2022
* USD 780,000.00

PARP1 (poly-ADP-ribose polymerase), a chromatin-binding protein, is crucial for
maintaining genomic integrity in mammals through regulation of proliferation,
differentiation and aging. Control of gene expression occurs at different levels
– importantly, at transcription initiation and mRNA splicing. Recent studies
show that transcription and splicing are co-regulated and that chromatin
structure plays a key role in this process. In an earlier study, the research
group found that PARP1, which is well known for DNA repair, also regulates
alternative splicing. This project aims to understand how PARP1-chromatin
complex coordinates RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) elongation, RNA, and splicing
factors to regulate co-transcriptional splicing. The outcomes will provide
insights into PARP1 function, especially in RNA biogenesis. The project will
offer training opportunities for underrepresented high school and undergraduate
students during summer months. Outreach activities will include mentoring
graduate students at local and regional small colleges, as well as early career
faculty at US minority-serving institutions as part of a unique University of
Kentucky mentoring program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanistic details of how
PARP1 regulates co-transcriptional splicing are lacking. This research project
will test the hypotheses that PARP1 regulates co-transcriptional splicing in two
non-mutually exclusive ways: i) by acting as an adapter to recruit splicing
factors to RNA; and/or ii) by modulating chromatin structure in ways that affect
RNAPII elongation and kinetics. Large-scale genomics and gene-specific
approaches will be applied to map the genetic and biochemical interactions of
PARP1-RNA-chromatin. These studies will provide significant new knowledge about
this newly identified activity of PARP1 in alternative splicing. Furthermore,
deciphering the mechanism(s) by which PARP1 modulates chromatin to regulate
alternative splicing and RNA processing will provide fundamental insights into
the complex role of chromatin structure in eukaryotic gene
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the
Biological Sciences Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.