* 2016421
* PFI-TT: Using Artificial Intelligence to Identify Additional Educational Resources Based on What was Discussed in Class
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Perry Samson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 331,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI- TT) project is to create the Contextual Linkaging
for Undergraduate Education (CLUE) Service that analyzes transcriptions from
class recordings and automatically identifies related resources in a student’s
learning ecosystem. This system will allow students to search class videos to
find when a concept was discussed, indicate moments during a class when they are
confused, and subsequently receive additional information on the confusing
topics. By automatically identifying when key concepts were discussed during
class, this project will enable educational platforms to deliver content to the
learner personalized to the material presented during each class session.
Instructors will receive feedback on which resources students find valuable for
each topic. The CLUE Service will be designed to help educational resource
providers by providing contextual linkages to resources in other educational
platforms. University Chief Information Officers will find value as a way to
contextually integrate the numerous learning resources they
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project builds on former NSF-funded
projects and requires technical expertise in natural language processing and
design of educational technologies. The CLUE Service will use computer-generated
transcriptions from class captures to identify key terms and phrases discussed
during class sessions. The combination of analyzed key terms and corresponding
timestamps will allow contextual linkages to be created between moments in class
captures and other educational resources. The envisioned prototype will be a
subscribable Application Programming Interface (API) that will allow contextual
linkages between educational services. Technical challenges for this project
include how to best design unsupervised machine learning to either identify
keywords and/or topics in a class session along with the best timestamp(s) in
class to represent those keywords or topics and how to provide a resource that
can be used with any video delivery system so the student can make known when
they would like additional information during a streaming or recorded class
session. Initially, the results of this research will be made available to
participating instructors or their assistants with tools that will allow them to
assess the potential value of the recommended resources to their students. This
feedback will inform improvements in resource selection for the CLUE
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.