* 2016260
* University of Washington - R/V Thomas G. Thompson and R/V Rachel Carson SSSE
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 204,414.00

Requests are made by the University of Washington for Shipboard Scientific
Support Equipment (SSSE) on R/V Thompson, a 274-foot general purpose, global
class research vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a newly outfitted 72-foot coastal
research vessel, both operated as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF).
In 2019, Thompson completed 296 funded days with 251 (85%) of them for NSF. For
2020, the vessel is scheduled for 287 total days with 255 days for NSF. Carson
had 116 days in 2019 but there were no NSF days involved. For 2020, there are 61
days scheduled, 7 of which are for NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal,
UW provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the
following Shipboard Scientific Support
Equipment:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relocation of SeaTel Antenna on R/V Thompson
$121,110&lt;br/&gt;Boat Davit on R/V Rachel Carson $51,807&lt;br/&gt;Replace Aft
Working Deck Crane on R/V Rachel Carson $113,349&lt;br/&gt;Refurbish sheaves and
blocks for trawl winch on R/V Thompson $166,608&lt;br/&gt;Replace Deep Sea Winch
on R/V Thompson $2,683,788&lt;br/&gt;
$3,136,662&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.