* 2016522
* PFI-TT: Mobile device-based detection of toxins in food crops to monitor food safety and improve public health
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* David Erickson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is enabling food safety testing at most
stages in the food-systems value chain by multiple stakeholders, including
farmers and consumers at the individual level, the food industry at the points
of procurement, storage, and distribution, and by aid agencies to monitor the
safety of food aid packages. The initial focus will be to detect two mycotoxins,
aflatoxin and fumonisin, both of which are known cancer-causing food
contaminants and are found in several food crops including corn. The maximum
concentration levels for mycotoxins have been prescribed by many countries;
however, these cannot be enforced in most settings because of lack of tools to
assess their concentration at the point-of-need. The present work will develop a
rapid, low-cost, point-of-need assay for ascertaining food safety with required
sensitivity and specificity as recommended by domestic and international food
safety agencies. In addition, the team will work with the business partner to
optimize the technology for transfer and commercialization to enable it to reach
market. It is anticipated that this technology has the potential to
significantly reduce unsafe food from the marketplace and improve public health
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is focused on developing a
technology for point-of-need assessment of food safety by detection of aflatoxin
(AF) and fumonisin (FM) in food crops. These mycotoxins can contaminate several
food crops including corn, rice, and peanuts. Consumption of contaminated food
can lead to cancer and other adverse health outcomes. The current approach of
sending food samples to centralized labs for food safety testing requires
expensive equipment, is time-consuming, requires skilled technicians, and is not
cost-effective. The proposed technology comprises of a mobile device, a custom-
made test strip that accepts food sample extracts and performs the analysis with
the help of a smartphone application. The smartphone app operates its imaging
system, interprets the test strip results, and displays the results in a few
minutes. The analysis results can be transferred to a remote server for
monitoring of food safety results. The primary goals of the project include the
development of lateral flow assays for AF and FM, optimization of techniques for
extracting AF and/or FM from food crops, updating existing smartphone apps to
customize them for AF and/or FM detection, and small-scale validation in the lab
to determine the performance parameters of the developed sample-in-answer-out
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.