* 2016555
* PFI-TT: A highly multiplexed readout system for single-molecule analysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 249,969.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop instrumentation that will
enable deep profiling of cellular proteins. The methods will be made broadly
applicable in fundamental biological research. The project’s central goal is to
develop and validate instrumentation for studying proteomics – the collection of
proteins constituting the molecular machinery underlying all life forms. Genes,
the molecular precursors of cellular machinery, are templates encoding how
proteins are constructed within cells. The genomics revolution has recently
enabled decoding of the human genome. Similar advances in proteomics technology
has not occurred since genomic studies rely upon gene amplification to making
billions of identical copies to enable analysis en masse. No similar molecular
amplification process exists for proteins, hence single-molecule analyses are
key. The proposed research relies upon the collaborative efforts of researchers
spanning physics, engineering, chemistry, biology, and mathematics – from both
academia and industry. Component technologies for a feasible, commercializable
instrument will be pursued. This project’s highly collaborative and rich
research environment provides an opportunity for the graduate student who will
be involved in this effort to gain important career skills.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop instrumentation to unravel the
staggering complexity of protein biology. An individual mammalian cell comprises
roughly 3B proteins, spanning about 7,000 unique types, with concentrations
spanning 8 orders of magnitude – ranging from cellular proteins present with
just a few copies, to those with expression levels of order 100M. In human blood
serum this range is a 1000X greater, spanning 11 orders. Resolving the full
spectrum of protein constituents is essential to fundamental questions in
biology and medicine. Detailed analyses – at the population level, yet with
single-molecule resolution – will stratify fine details lost in existing
consensus-type approaches to proteomics that “average over” the protein
population, thus providing information only about the most prevalent species.
Critical processes in health and disease are often determined by only a few
copies of a protein molecule within a cell. Accordingly, single-molecule
resolution of proteins and protein complexes in the presence of an immense
overabundance of the most prevalent species is
essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.