* 2016053
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Nicolas Christin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This project supports students attending the 19th Workshop on the Economics of
Information Security (WEIS), held in Brussels, Belgium, on June 15-16, 2020.
WEIS is an annual event that serves as a leading forum for interdisciplinary
scholarship on information security, combining expertise from the fields of
computer science and electrical engineering, economics, social science,
business, law, and policy. Participation in WEIS is a critical part of the
educational experiences of students with interdisciplinary interests related to
security and privacy. WEIS provides them an opportunity to interact with senior
researchers and be exposed to leading work in the field. The support requested
in this proposal will enable the participation of students who otherwise would
face financial challenges to attend WEIS due to travel
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student travel grant will support approximately
12 graduate and undergraduate students. All students supported by the grant will
be associated with US universities and/or US citizens. Funds will be used to
offset costs including airfare and lodging. The grant will support advanced
stage graduate students with papers appearing on the program, students from
underrepresented groups including women, undergraduates and underrepresented
minorities, and students attending WEIS for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.