* 2016481
* PFI-TT: Next Generation High Energy Storage, Light Weight Capacitors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* James Turner, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 350,887.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to commercialize the next generation
of capacitors based on nanoengineering and high performance materials.
Capacitors are ubiquitous components of electronic circuits; There are over 500
capacitors in every cell phone. Capacitor manufacturers need to improve,
miniaturize, and extend the lifetime of commercial capacitors in order to
improve commercial applications. With a manufacturing partner, commercialization
of the capacitors that meet these needs will be sought. Initial applications in
control circuits and energy storage for extending battery lifetimes are critical
to the end-user industrial partners. Proof of operation and manufacturing
processes in their commercial applications will serve as a base to expand the
use of the capacitors across the electronics industry, generating a large
market. Initial analysis indicates that the capacitors may provide functionality
not commercially available and at lower cost than present capacitors. By using
commonly available materials, the team avoids the rare elements in present
commercial products and their significant environmental impacts and uncertain
availability. The capacitors are scalable and ultimately will be used widely
from integrated circuit chips to power systems. The partnership includes a
developer of the critical manufacturing tool, and a capacitor manufacturer who
will help guide the manufacturing and commercialization efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance capacitor energy storage
by significantly increasing the surface area of the electrodes, the dielectric
constant of the insulating layer, and the breakdown voltage with a very thin
dielectric layer. The surface area is maximized by fabricating oriented
nanostructures on a small footprint area. These structures, coated with a thin
film of high dielectric constant nanolaminates, are the capacitors’ electrodes,
and produce improved voltage operations and very high capacitance compared to
the present capacitors. The nanolaminate dielectric materials are stacked using
an advanced atomic layer deposition technique such that the dielectric constant
increases by at least an order of magnitude over that of the individual
materials due to a process called Maxwell-Wagner relaxation. The materials
chosen for the nanolaminate stack have similar Gibb’s free energy of formation
which leads to a high breakdown voltage and consequently a low current leakage.
This advantage is low current leakage will result in high energy density
capacitors that have smaller footprints and higher breakdown voltage than
commercially available ones. This technology has the potential to significantly
impact consumer electronics market as a component in electronic circuits and
small scale energy storage technologies such as wearable devices, sensors, and
battery-capacitor hybrids for power stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.