* 2016857
* Archaeal DNA Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Zvi Kelman, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 878,885.00

Archaea often thrive in extreme environments that accelerate DNA damage. There
is a lack of comprehensive understanding of the molecular features that impart
extreme resistance to DNA damage exhibited by many Archaea. This project aims to
resolve the processes that maintain, replicate and repair the genome of the
model archaeon Thermococcus kodakarensis. The focus is on elucidating unknown
fitness benefits, specificities, rates and mechanisms underlying many archaeal
DNA repair pathways. The outcomes will help clarify how DNA lesions are
recognized and repaired, and how replication proceeds on lesion-containing DNAs
in archaea and other organisms. The project provides research training and
career development opportunities for students at all levels, including
undergraduate and high school students, notably with immersive research
experiences in academic, private and federal laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a scaled approach, from purified
enzyme kinetics in vitro to whole cell phenotypic assays and growth
measurements. Novel, high-throughput assays will be used to probe mechanisms of
archaeal DNA repair, discover new repair factors and establish the contributions
of different DNA polymerases to DNA repair. Examination of multiple DNA repair
and replicative pathways by complementary experimental techniques will yield a
comprehensive mechanistic view of archaeal DNA repair and how the pathways
collectively impart fitness to these organisms in extreme
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.