* 2016186
* Summer Institute in Statistical Genetics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Bruce Weir, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

General awareness of the power of genetic knowledge is evident in the rapid use
of direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies for people to learn about their
own ancestries and to find previously unknown relatives, and the consequent
solving of long-cold crimes by genetic genealogists. More generally, the genetic
constitutions of plants, animals and humans influence their fitness for survival
and their behavior and also can reveal their evolutionary histories. Advances in
genetics rest on observations made in nature or in the laboratory, and numerical
representations of those observations inform scientific theories as well as the
decisions made by conservationists, plant and animal breeders, forensic
scientists and physicians. Turning data into knowledge is the realm of
statistics, and statistical genetics is changing as fast as genetics itself to
meet the challenges Mendel could not have imagined when he collected data on
seven characteristics of peas. Human geneticists now have data sets with over a
billion genetic elements per individual, and the statistical tools of even ten
years ago are often not sufficient to reveal the underlying information in so
much data. Students in the biological sciences need help in learning about new
statistical procedures and the Summer Institute in Statistical Genetics lets
them interact with the people who developed those procedures and who have proven
themselves effective as instructors and mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Summer Institute in Statistical Genetics is an annual program of 18 short
courses, held in three parallel half-week sessions over a period of three weeks
each July at the University of Washington. Each course is led by two instructors
from across the US and other countries. Participants can progress through a
series of courses, often over multiple years, that begin with basic concepts in
probability and statistics and end with advanced topics including Markov chain
Monte Carlo methods and pathway and network analyses. They can choose courses
that address data from natural or experimental plant and animal populations, or
human populations. They can follow population or quantitative genetic streams,
or learn about applications to conservation or forensic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.