* 2016636
* EAGER: Gate tunable thermo-plasmonic mid-IR coherent light emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2023
* USD 110,000.00

The goal of this work is to demonstrate wavelength-tunable, laser-like, mid-
infrared light emitters on a chip. This will be achieved, for the first time, by
coupling of surface resonance in silicon carbide with plasmonic resonance in
graphene films. The proposed tunable, mid-infrared source has many advantages
over existing coherent infrared sources such as tunable lasers which include
complete mechanical motion free tunability of wavelength, small size for various
lightweight and mobile platforms, and extremely fast response for high speed
applications. The small form factor, tunability and integration potential of
these devices will usher a new generation of optical lab-on-chip devices where
detection of relevant biomarkers, cells, and ligand chemistries can be
spectroscopically realized and thus will enable the development of inexpensive,
next generation point of care biosensors. The availability of frequency tunable
emitters is likely to open opportunities in the area of on-chip optical
communications and optical data transfer that are hitherto considered as
cumbersome. The potential bandwidth afforded by such systems may revolutionize
data transfer rates and volumes. A robust research and mentoring program
consisting of a graduate and undergraduate student working on the project is
proposed for this 1-year EAGER proposal.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
explore, investigate, and demonstrate the possibility of achieving tunable,
coherent radiation sources in 11 - 12 μm wavelength range. To accomplish this,
we propose to hybridize the localized surface resonance of bulk thermo-plasmonic
materials such as silicon carbide with gate-tunable surface plasmonic resonance
of two-dimensional materials such as graphene to manipulate the emission
characteristics of thermal radiation sources. The proposed experimental study
will examine the relation between applied gate-voltage modulated optical
properties of graphene, and the corresponding shift in coupled plasmonic and
phononic resonance. The study is aimed at deepening the understanding of the
coupling between surface phonon resonances of a radiating surface and gate
tunable surface plasmon resonance of graphene sheets. The fact that surface
phonons and surface plasmons are consequences of resonant ions and electrons
respectively raises interesting questions of how momentum matching is balanced
between particles of different rest masses. This study will present details of
theoretical and the experimentally obtained emission/absorption properties at
different temperatures and different wavelengths, specifically, the minimum
resolution of wavelength shift that can be achieved with gate-voltage and
temperature. From an experimental standpoint, the proposed work will
systematically investigate plasmonic tuning of the emission characteristics.
Heterogeneous integration techniques with novel micro and nanofabrication
methods will be used. The electronic control will allow for programmability of
the emitter to auto-sweep through a band of wavelength of interest, to determine
the absorption spectrum of samples in spectroscopy applications. The wavelength
sweep timeframes of the spectrometers can be potentially accomplished in the
milli – nano seconds allowing for the realization of ultrafast IR tunable
sources. The fast, narrowband emission characteristics of the gate-tunable
plasmonic emitters can provide nearfield infrared communication solutions in the
context of next generation neuromorphic computing and sensing devices.
Preliminary calculations show that these sources can generate an intensity of
~200 µW/mm2 and should be enough for spectroscopy and communication
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.