* 2016900
* NSF Cyberlearning: Context-Aware Metacognitive Practice: Instrumenting Classroom Ecosystems to Help Introductory Computer Science Students Develop Effective Learning Strategies
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Haoqi Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 748,957.00

Technology is increasingly important across all areas of our society, and as a
result, there is a pressing need to train more computer scientists. While many
students are taking introductory computer science courses (CS1) in college, they
often struggle to learn programming. CS1 concepts are challenging, but students
also struggle to plan their work effectively, seek help when needed, and reflect
on their understanding. Such skills, which are metacognitive, are important for
successful learning. While many initiatives aim to help students learn content
more effectively, few focus on helping students develop these learning
strategies. To address this gap, this project will develop new technologies that
provide personalized, contextually relevant supports and practice opportunities
to help students develop metacognitive skills in large CS1
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supporting metacognition is challenging because
students struggle with different planning, reflection, and help-seeking skills,
and their struggles arise across a diverse set of contexts. While personalized
mentoring is effective, this approach is not scalable to the large number of
students enrolled in CS1 classes. This project aims to overcome these challenges
through “Context-Aware Metacognition Practice (CAMP),” a theoretical model and
platform that supports metacognition by: (1) instrumenting classroom ecosystems
to surface student learning strategies, (2) scaffolding reflection on
ineffective strategies and their underlying root causes, and (3) scaffolding
contextual practice of more effective strategies. This research will study the
effectiveness of the CAMP model using a design-based research approach to
generate empirically validated principles that advance our understanding of
metacognitive scaffolding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.