* 2016934
* Collaborative Research: Future Directions for Seafloor Geodesy Workshop 2020
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Donna Charlevoix, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/28/2022
* USD 27,000.00

This workshop will bring together members of the established and emerging
scientific community interested in seafloor deformation using geodetic tools
deployed on the seafloor. The workshop will offer the first opportunity to
foster communications between scientists and engineers to explore how to utilize
existing resources to maximize science goals. Geodetic instruments can capture
motions offshore that give us important insight into earthquakes and submarine
volcanic activity. The workshop is focused on seafloor deformation because
ninety percent of Earth's active tectonic plate boundaries are underwater and
our ability to measure the deformation that leads up to an earthquake is
predominantly on-land, which doesnâ€™t capture most of the seafloor movement. This
is particularly important along subduction zones, where tsunamis may be
generated by the movement on a fault during an earthquake. The conference will
include 90 participants. The timing of the conference is important because a new
resource is being developed for the community, a set of seafloor geodetic
instruments that can measure precise long-term horizontal and short-term
vertical movements. At the workshop, the community will discuss how to apply
these resources to maximize science and accessibility of data, leading to
proposals for future offshore projects. The workshop will broaden participation
in the field of seafloor geodesy and a significant number of the participants
will be early career scientists. The workshop will offer an opportunity to
foster connections between scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together and
build the seafloor geodesy community, including scientists from academic
institutions, government agencies, and international partners focused on
understanding scientific and engineering problems associated with measuring
deformation on the seafloor. During the workshop the organizers will address the
current status of existing, the development of emerging, and plans for future
technologies in the field. As well, the workshop is essential to develop plans
for the use of a recently funded pool of GNSS-Acoustic and Bottom Pressure
Recorder seafloor geodetic instruments. The workshop will identify high priority
scientific questions and targets for this pool of instruments and the community
preferred structure for managing the instrument pool. The community will help
identify the highest priority scientific questions and targets addressable with
the instrument pool and develop a plan for managing the equipment to effectively
answer geophysical questions in earth deformation in the offshore
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.