* 2016437
* Collaborative Research: Microbes, memory, and moisture: leveraging DroughtNet to predict how microbial moisture responses will impact carbon cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Evans, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 492,306.00

This project will determine how soils and soil organisms respond to severe
drought, a condition that will be more common in the future, and how this
response will impact the global carbon cycle. The increasing frequency of
drought due to changing rainfall patterns is threatening the world's ecosystems
and food security. Rainfall frequency also can affect whether the immense amount
of carbon present in soil stays there, or is emitted by soil microbes into the
atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2). In order to accurately predict the impact of
drought on soils, soil microbes and the carbon cycle, this project will use
samples from the Drought-Net Research Coordination Network supported by NSF.
Drought-Net consists of a series of simple, inexpensive experiments that control
rainfall at over 150 plots of land worldwide using the same standard protocols.
Soil samples from 39 Drought-Net sites that have been exposed to drought for
four years will be manipulated in the laboratory to determine how they respond
to different amounts of moisture. Soil microbial community changes and CO2
emission will be measured, and the results will be incorporated into computer
models of global carbon cycling. These models can then predict how drought will
cause changes and feedbacks in carbon cycling and, in turn, ecosystem function
and stability. The studies will also involve training at of postdoctoral
researchers, graduate and undergraduate students, and other educational and
outreach activities. Successful completion of the goals and objectives of this
project will help society understand how it needs to adapt and respond to global
environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the recent inclusion of
microbial mechanisms in ecosystem models has improved our ability to predict
soil carbon (C) cycling, even the most advanced of these models explains only
50% of the variation in current C pools, leaving little confidence in
projections of future soil C stocks. Past efforts have mainly focused on
microbial temperature responses, but moisture and drought may be an even more
important constraint on microbial activity. Thus, an understanding of microbial
moisture responses is required to improve ecosystem C models. This research
addresses four key questions: (1) what drives differences in moisture response
functions across ecosystems? (2) how does severe drought alter moisture response
across ecosystems? (3) what microbial mechanisms influence differences in
moisture response functions? (4) what are the implications of different moisture
responses for C storage? In order to build a robust predictive framework for
soil microbial moisture functions, this project will leverage the Drought-Net
Research Coordination Network, which has implemented standardized, coordinated
rainfall manipulation experiments across the world. Intact soil cores from
ambient and drought treatments at 39 sites will be exposed to a range of soil
water potentials to quantify how the moisture response of heterotrophic
respiration depends on historical climate and soil factors. Underlying microbial
mechanisms will be examined by characterizing physiological traits and
tolerances at individual and community levels. Results will be scaled to the
ecosystem level by first testing how aggregated community responses influence
function in a trait-based model, and then by incorporating response functions
into conventional and microbially-explicit ecosystem models of soil C
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.