* 2016322
* Collaborative Research: The Roles of Community Assembly and Consumer Impacts in Shaping Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Holly Jones, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 01/31/2024
* USD 501,482.00

Ecosystems provide important services such as supporting biodiversity and
providing clean water and air for people. These functions are driven by the
plants and animals living in that ecosystem and determined by the
characteristics of those species—their “functional traits.” When new species
arrive in an ecosystem, or they leave or die off, it changes the number of
species and the combination of functional traits present, so ecosystem functions
can change as well. Knowing which species are most likely to arrive or die off,
and how they contribute to ecosystems, can help ecologists predict how benefits
to people will change over time. Such information is especially important for
predicting how ecosystems will respond to disturbances like climate change, and
for helping to understand how we can best restore damaged ecosystems. This
project will use a carefully designed experiment to change the number and
functional traits of prairie plant species growing together and measure the
effects of these changes on ecosystem functions. Those results will then be
compared to patterns in real-world prairies to test their realism. Throughout
the project, students, conservation practitioners, and members of the public
will engage with the research process. A course-based undergraduate research
experience will be created between the two partner universities; networking
field trips for students from underrepresented groups will take place at both
universities; and at least 9 students and early-career researchers will be
trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecologists’ efforts to understand the
relationships between variation in biodiversity and ecosystem function have led
to a consensus that the trait diversity of communities influences their
function. Biodiversity change includes both changes in richness and community
assembly – the non-random additions and subtractions of species from
communities. The project will establish a biodiversity–ecosystem function
experiment in which species richness, composition, and functional trait
diversity are independently manipulated in plots. Species combinations will be
parameterized using empirical field data from restored tallgrass prairies to
ensure the experiment retains realism. Further, herbivory treatments will
simulate bison grazing effects on prairie plants. In this way, the project will
use experimental plots with realistic communities to determine how variation in
the number of species and their assembly affect ecosystem functions, including
above- and belowground biomass, leaf litter decomposition, and ammonium uptake.
Community and ecosystem measurements in real-world prairie restorations with
bison present will then be compared to results obtained from experimental plots
to determine if experimental results can be used to predict dynamics at larger
spatial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.