* 2016982
* From Data Literacy to Collective Data Stewardship: Technology-Supported Community-Driven Solutions for Urban Youth
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jaime Booth, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2023
* USD 609,180.00

In the past decades, cities across America’s rust belt have suffered economic
decline due to the exodus of manufacturing jobs and have faced a significant
shift towards Information and Computational Technology industries. In many
cases, the historical residents are being left behind, due to lack of job
readiness and the influx of a new workforce into these industries. The goal of
this project is to develop technology that will engage youth in learning
computational skills by applying big data analytics to neighborhood problems as
well as skills that will allow youth to succeed in the new economy. The project
will equip members of the community in contextually relevant learning
experiences to train them as data trustees in their communities, and provide
them with a pathway from data literacy to data stewardship and higher education
in technology-related fields. The project will target two economically
challenged and marginalized neighborhoods of Pittsburgh, engaging youth that
have been excluded from the new labor market, and addressing neighborhood issues
that arose as part of the economic decline. Teaching youth to use big data to
address community problems will not only build computational skills but also
foster a stronger civic identity among participants. The technology and
curriculum developed through this project will be accessible to other
communities for a broader implementation of similar
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through partnership with local after-school
programs, the project will engage 15 to 18 years-old youth in developing
computational thinking through critical data literacy and cultivation of
understanding of how data and data-driven technologies influence their lives.
Defining data literacy as “access to, interpret, critically assess, manage,
handle, and ethical use of data”, the project aims to understand the learning
mechanism of data literacy, including individual and collective learning
processes as well as required supporting technology. It will involve developing
educational technology to support collaborative learning of data science in an
informal learning environment as well as conducting field studies to understand
the process of technology-supported community-focused learning of data-science.
To understand the efficacy of the developed tools and processes on youth’s
learning gain and civic engagement efficacy, the project will collect data by
logging actions within the system as well as conducting pre- and post-
questionnaires. Mixed qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to
identify emerging themes in data, and to statistically analyze the patterns in
data. The technological advancement is a suite of novel collaborative data
literacy tools that provide multiple entry points for participation tailored to
different levels of domain-related, metacognitive, and collaborative data
literacy competencies. The research contributes to learning sciences
understanding of how critical data literacy situated in community context and
real world experiences of individuals in marginalized communities can foster
technological knowledge, foster the development of a civic identity and motivate
a pathway towards higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.