* 2016245
* QLCI-CI: NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Present and Future Quantum Computing
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Umesh Vazirani, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 23,936,988.00

The classical computers in our laptops, smart phones, and cars, together with
those in large supercomputing facilities, have completely revolutionized modern
life. The quantum computer, which harnesses the quantum-mechanical behavior of
physical systems to gain a revolutionary advantage over existing computer
technologies, will have greater computational power than any conceivable
classical computer and an inestimable impact, not only on all manners of
scientific research, but also in every type of human activity. Motivated by this
potential impact, several large-scale efforts have been pursued by industry,
national laboratories, and others to bring about the quantum computer. The
Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Present and Future Quantum Computation
engages the academic community to support these large-scale efforts by
addressing fundamental obstacles that all of them face. Additionally, the
Institute provides education and workforce development at several levels -- a
Master's program, online courses for everybody ranging from high-school students
to trained professionals, programs to boost the involvement of computer science
and mathematics faculties in quantum computing, and other activities -- in order
to build the quantum-smart workforce that the Nation will need. The Institute
has a large footprint within several campuses of the University of California
and will leverage their breadth and diversity to bring a large and diverse pool
of talent into quantum information science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the Quantum Leap Challenge
Institute for Present and Future Quantum Computation is to help bring about the
quantum computer. The realization of large-scale quantum computation is the
central scientific challenge of our times. Several fundamental obstacles stand
in the way of the practical quantum computer, including the development of
algorithms that utilize quantum computers to reduce the complexity of generic
computational tasks, the use of the smaller-scale quantum technologies available
at present and in the near future for specialized computational tasks, and the
scaling-up of quantum technologies without degrading the high fidelity and
modularity needed for large-scale quantum computing. To address these
challenges, the Institute mobilizes an interdisciplinary team of scientists and
engineers that includes experts in physics, computer science, chemistry,
mathematics, electrical engineering, and materials research. Theoretical
research on quantum algorithms for present and future quantum computing
technologies will be motivated and tested by the experimental development of
atomic, molecular, and optics-based quantum computing testbeds. The Institute
will also promote the development of quantum science and technology nationwide
through extensive education and workforce development programs; research
coordination and partnership activities that draw together stakeholders from
academia, industry, government laboratories, and other consortia; and
influential engagement with the computer and mathematical sciences communities
through the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing and the Institute for
Pure and Applied Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.