* 2016189
* SG: Leveraging massive song databases and deep learning to examine the mechanisms causing diversification of bird vocalizations.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Bryan Carstens, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,298.00

Bird songs provide a fascinating example of animal communication that help birds
find mates, hold territories, and more. Like human language, bird songs can
change over time and across the range of a given species. The evolution of song
differences is thought to be an important component in the formation of new bird
species. However, biologists' understanding how bird songs evolve over space and
time, and what causes their evolution, is incompletely known. This project will
analyze decades of field recordings made by ornithologists and birding
enthusiasts, combined with existing genetic data, to test hypotheses related to
the evolution of bird song in multiple species across the continental United
States. It will develop software to evaluate differences in bird calls across
the range of many species and integrate these data with data on genetic,
geographic, and environmental variation to test hypotheses about the causes and
consequences of bird song evolution. This project will involve collaboration
with computer scientists and software engineers to advance the field of
computational biology and "big data" analysis for biological questions.
Undergraduate students will have the opportunity to participate in the research,
learn important skills in computational biology, and have novel experiences
inside and outside of the classroom.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Birds are well known
for possessing a diverse array of songs and calls that mediate social behavior,
reproduction, and communication. Within a single species, bird vocalizations
change through space and time due to the influence of drift, selection and mate
choice, but there is a relative lack of knowledge about how biogeographic
history and community dynamics across larger regions influence the evolution of
bird vocalizations and speciation. This project will use large datasets
available both for bird vocalizations and phylogeography to analyze
relationships between vocalizations, geography, history, and community
composition, for multiple species, on a continental scale. The project will
assess the impact that Plio-Pleistocene glacial cycles had on phylogeography and
vocalizations within species and across communities and test hypotheses
regarding the evolutionary drivers of song divergence. The proposed work will
develop pipelines to collect massive amounts of song data, process it
algorithmically, integrate it into existing pipelines for the analysis of
phylogeographic data, contrast these data to environmental predictor variables,
and ultimately test hypotheses of divergence. This work will provide the
groundwork for the integration of phenotypic and genetic databases to
investigate diversification of bird vocalization on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.