* 2016434
* Workshop on New Frontiers of Thermal Transport; Orlando, FL; March 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Yoav Peles, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,777.00

This award is to support the Workshop on New Frontiers of Thermal Transport to
be held on March 9-10, 2020 in Orlando, Florida. Thermal transport processes are
critical in many traditional and emerging engineering applications, ranging from
energy, electronics and aerospace to manufacturing, food and health care.
However, the scientific community is lacking in providing innovative thermal
solutions in order to improve existing technologies or to address emerging
challenges. Communications between industry and academia need to be strengthened
so that the researchers can better target technology bottlenecks. This two-day
workshop will bring together academicians, industry experts, researchers from
national labs, and program managers from funding agencies to brainstorm and
develop a shared vision and future opportunities for the community at large. Six
focused panels will cover emerging challenges that will need to be resolved to
enable future technological advancements. Subsequently, participants will
convene in breakout sessions to explore future directions to address these
roadblocks. Outcomes from these discussions will then be presented and a report
will be disseminated to summarize major findings and recommend future research
opportunities. This workshop will promote the societal impacts of academic
research and advance the professional development opportunities for participants
that are early in their career or are under-represented in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-day workshop will bring together experts from
various disciplines to identify critical challenges, advancements, and new
directions in thermal transport research. Six panels on energy, advanced
manufacturing, thermal management, aerospace, artificial intelligence, and
health and sustainability will be included. The goal is to identify key
research, development, and design needs and provide a guideline for future
endeavors. The outcomes of this workshop will focus on the development of a
roadmap that will define the needs for future generation of thermal transport
process technologies, as well as documentations in archival review articles and
a dedicated website. This workshop is expected to (i) promote the societal
impacts of academic research, (ii) reinforce a scientific community of
university-industry researchers who are active across disciplines and (iii)
advance the professional development opportunities for early-career
participants. Special attention will be paid to the inclusion of under-
represented minorities and women both in invited speakers and in participants.
The ultimate goal is the eventual development of solutions to address current
and future thermal transport challenges in a range of critical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.