* 2016372
* EAGER: Poison Frogs and Toxic Arthropods – Diversification and parallel evolution of frog predators with their alkaloid-bearing prey
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Juan Santos Garcia, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 199,877.00

Poison frogs have venomous substances in their skins, but they do not produce
these chemicals on their own. Instead, they harvest these venoms from their
arthropod diet: ants and mites. More than 800 different chemicals were found in
these frogs. However, the diversity of ants and mites is so vast that
understanding how poison frogs gain toxins from their arthropod food remains a
mystery. This project will examine the connection between frog predators and
toxic arthropods, which are valued more by the toxins they contain than by their
nutritional value. This project will examine the diversity, genetics and
evolution of toxic arthropods and their poison frog predators. The relevance of
this project resides on the discovery of new knowledge that can then be shared
with the community to advance our understanding of megadiverse regions like the
South American rain forest. This basic research will provide insights into how
the recycling of toxins occurs in natural ecosystems. The research team (St.
John’s University, European and Latin-American partners) will provide learning
experiences to underrepresented groups in STEM with workshops for students and
open lectures for the public in NYC and beyond. SJU is an institution in the
heart of the most ethnographically diverse county in the US with a large
concentration of minority students. This work will involve training these
scholars in tropical ecology, genomics and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical defenses in poison frogs have a
well-documented dietary origin. Yet little is known about the functional,
phylogenomic biodiversity and ecological processes that connect the toxic
arthropod base with their poison frog consumers. The movement of such defenses
in trophic chains requires an intricate ecosystem of connections among
interacting species. To answer this question, this project examines a model
system centered on a section of the trophic chain that includes poison frogs and
their alkaloid-bearing arthropod diet. The project addresses two major
evolutionary and ecological dimensions: (1) phylogenomic and alkaloid
diversities across poison frogs and their dietary ants and mites and (2)
transcriptomics, physiological adaptations and evolutionary parallelisms
evidenced by differential gene expression among the origins of alkaloid
sequestration in poison frogs and their toxic arthropod diet. These goals will
address how parallelisms, coevolution/codiversification and convergence evolved
in poison frogs and their toxic arthropod under the context of bioaccumulation,
differential gene expression and gene diversification. Such comparisons will
contribute to a new level of understanding of the cycling of defensive toxins
across biodiverse Neotropical communities. The proposed research will use
predator-prey dynamics involving chemical defenses in some of the most
threatened ecosystems, the Chocoan and Amazonian tropical forests, where
biodiversity is being lost daily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.