* 2016227
* Enhancing the U.S. Chemical Economy through Investments in Fundamental Research in the Chemical Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeremy Mathis, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Greg Collins
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded by the Chemistry Division of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate through the Special Projects mechanism. The principal
Investigator is Maggie Walser and the coprincipal investigator is Jeremy Mathis,
both of the National Academy of Sciences. This work is conducted through the
Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology in the Division of Earth and Life
Studies. The overall goal is to conduct a consensus study of the current state
of the United States chemical economy. The study is being conducted by an ad hoc
committee with a range of expertise across academe and the private sector. The
chemical economy will be defined and assessed in terms of its domestic and
international impact. Within this framework, the impact of sustainability and
diversity on economic growth will be explored. A primary goal is to examine
future investment opportunities so that the U. S. can continue to provide
international leadership in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last similar
study was conducted by the National Academy of Sciences in 2005. Since that time
the chemical economy has been impacted by changing supply, demand, and cost of
chemical feedstocks. Innovative technologies and energy demands have also
impacted the cost of doing chemistry. Given the size, significance, and
relevance of chemical activities in the U. S. economy, including exported goods
and manufacturing, it is vital to understand the U. S. chemical economy so that
informed decisions and strategies can be formulated for future investments.
Workforce development and sustainability aspects are included in the considered
components. The study will result in a publicly accessible report that outlines
a strategy for the strategic targeting of research investments in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.