* 2016779
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interspecific competition, niche partitioning, and community structure of primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 26,872.00

In nonhuman primate communities, between-species competition is hypothesized to
dictate species diversity and community assemblages, but there is often a lack
of fine-resolution data on species interactions. This doctoral dissertation
project will use innovative methods to examine the relative influences of
competition and niche differentiation on the structure of a community of four
nocturnal lemurs from Madagascar. Species ecologies will be described in
dietary, spatial, and temporal dimensions. The project will provide extant
models for identifying driving forces in primate community evolutionary history
as well as critical data for informed, targeted protection of endangered lemur
species. The investigator will work with local NGOs to encourage sustainable
development projects in the study region. Additionally, the investigator will
engage women undergraduates, including from underrepresented groups, to work on
arthropod curation and laboratory analyses and will visit high schools to give
lectures about conservation and career paths for women in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competition is a primary mechanism underlying current
community assemblages, particularly in sympatric, closely related species. The
evolutionary history of lemurs was likely defined by such competition, resulting
in pronounced niche differentiation, which allowed for coexistence in sympatric
lemur communities. However, these concepts remain to be rigorously tested due to
a lack of fine-resolution data regarding between-species interactions within
lemur communities. To fully understand these processes, the investigator will
combine innovative technologies, such as DNA metabarcoding, with traditional
methods, such as transect surveys, to conduct a fine-resolution analysis of the
relative influences of competition and niche differentiation on the structure of
a sympatric community of nocturnal lemurs. Specifically, the investigator will
evaluate: 1) niche differentiation and interspecific competition as governing
forces of current cheirogaleid community structure, 2) which niche dimensions
(i.e., diet, space, or time) most greatly facilitate coexistence and drive
competition in this community, and 3) how niche differentiation shifts in
response to seasonal variation (as some species exhibit hibernation/daily torpor
during the dry season). Fine-resolution niche differentiation (i.e.,
differentiation that would have been undetectable using only traditional
methods) is hypothesized to be responsible for the development and maintenance
of the current assemblage of the study community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.