* 2016390
* PFI-TT: Harnessing the power of uncompressed number representation for modern computations
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Douglas Franz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to harness “Unary computing” to
significantly improve the performance of select modern applications. Cloud-based
machine learning, high-frequency trading, and video / audio / signal processing
used in security cameras, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and video streaming
are examples of such applications. The proposed methodology improves application
speed while lowering hardware cost (chip size) and power for moderate resolution
computations (8-12 binary digits). Cooling costs are also reduced as a direct
result of reducing the power consumption of the circuits. Speed and cost are
important computer processing metrics that have real impacts on industry costs.
Many modern computer applications can readily benefit from these improvements
using a “plug-and-play” scheme in which traditional implementations of functions
are replaced with their unary counterparts without changing the rest of the
system. Cloud-based machine learning, high-frequency trading, and video / audio
/ signal processing used in security cameras, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
and video streaming are examples of such applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project develops design methodologies harnessing unary computing, which
is a new, unconventional paradigm in digital computing. An “uncompressed” data
representation (unary) is used instead of the traditional binary representation
of numbers to make computations very efficient. Limited hardware resources can
perform complex calculations. Conventional methods of computer code often
require many multiplications and addition operations to calculate functions such
as cosh(x), tanh(x) and y=x0.45 through polynomial expansions. Unary computing
is able to perform these calculations cheaply and directly without costly
multiplications. These functions are widely used in applications in signal
processing (image / video / audio / radar). Furthermore, unary computing can be
used in significantly reducing the computation complexity of constant
coefficient multiplication, which is widely used in machine learning (ML)
applications. As validated by experiments, reducing computation complexity
increases computation speed, reduces hardware area (size and cost of the chips
to perform computations), and reduces power. The goal of this project is to
develop a design toolset for automatically generating circuits for unary
computing. Furthermore, a library of highly optimized hardware intellectual
property (IP) blocks will be developed. The objectives of this research include
developing the necessary toolset and design flows to help designers integrate
the proposed technology in their electronic designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.