* 2016984
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive explicit and implicit feedback in second language pronunciation training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Evgeny Chukharev-Hudilainen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2024
* USD 416,978.00

Over one million international students study at US universities, and the
majority study in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
fields. All need to communicate in English, which requires intelligible
pronunciation. The conventional wisdom is that simple immersion in the English-
speaking environment will, over time, improve pronunciation. Research, however,
rejects this view: without instruction that is explicitly focused on
pronunciation (e.g., the vowels in "bad" vs. "bed"), learners are only likely to
improve within the first year in the new environment, and instruction is needed
after that. Unfortunately, face-to-face pronunciation instruction is infrequent,
thus making computer-assisted pronunciation training (CAPT) the best option for
pronunciation training at scale. CAPT programs are common, but share a critical
weakness of not providing effective feedback to the learner. This project will
examine the usefulness of two complementary forms of pronunciation feedback in
CAPT: explicit feedback (focused on delivering precise instruction to the
learner about the location and nature of pronunciation errors) and implicit
feedback (relying on the learner's ability to perceive their mispronunciations).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the investigators will develop
mispronunciation-detection algorithms that can highlight errors in the learner's
speech (explicit feedback), and they will create accent-conversion algorithms
that can generate personalized speech samples for the learner: their own voice
producing native-speech (implicit feedback). Specifically, the investigators
will develop a machine-learning framework to solve the problems of
mispronunciation detection and accent conversion simultaneously. Research in
machine learning shown that solving multiple tasks simultaneously can improve
learning efficiency and generalization performance, so long as the tasks are
related. Thus, this award offers the potential to advance the state-of-the-art
in both problems. The two forms of pronunciation feedback (explicit and
implicit) will be integrated into a CAPT system that automatically adapts to the
learner's current performance to maximize the benefits for the learner as they
develop their accuracy. The system will use an adaptive tutoring algorithm to
guide the learner in first establishing perception of their pronunciation
difficulties and then enhancing their production
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.