* 2016409
* PFI-RP: Value-Added Products from Decommissioned Composite Material Wind Turbine Blades
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Lawrence Bank, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 643,164.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project lies in the development of an enterprise
that uses as its feedstock large-scale infrastructure waste – demonstrating that
a focus on innovation and environmental sustainability can drive profitable
business opportunities. The project will build on previously developed
intellectual property from NSF-sponsored research to demonstrate value-added
products from decommissioned composite material wind turbine blades. These wind
turbine blades, coming out of service in the United States, will be converted to
electrical power transmission structures and other large-scale civil
infrastructure using proprietary software and hardware developed by the research
team and covered by two provisional U.S. patents. The commercial enterprise
resulting from this PFI grant will accrue value from a two-sided market with
revenues coming from the wind farms decommissioning the wind turbine blades, and
the clients who receive products created from the wind blades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is enabled by software that creates
geometric and structural models of the wind turbine blades from data created
from laser scans or photographs of the wind blades. The algorithms create the
structural property data required for analysis of the new structures under civil
engineering loading conditions, which are quite different from the aerodynamic
loading for which the wind blades were originally designed. Additional
algorithms developed by the team are used to estimate the residual life of the
composite materials. The structures in the wind turbine blades are used to match
the capacity of the de-commissioned blades to the new application. The initial
target market for the technology is large power transmission poles, typically 70
to 120 feet high, used to transmit electricity from electrical generation plants
to the grid. Products developed by the team will adapt the wind blade into an
electricity pole by adding foundations, supports for cable-stays, cross-arms,
and other electricity carrying interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.