* 2016049
* Collaborative Research: Deconstructing the contributions of muscle intrinsic mechanics to the control of locomotion using a novel Muscle Avatar approach
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Monica Daley, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,286.00

Moving animals achieve impressive athletic feats of endurance, speed, and
agility in complex environments. Animal locomotion is particularly impressive in
contrast to that of human-engineered machines. The stability, agility and energy
economy of current robots, prostheses and exoskeletons remains poor compared to
animals. This pronounced gap between animal performance and technology stems, in
part, from fundamental gaps in the understanding of muscle physiology and
mechanical function. Muscle is the only actively controlled tissue in animal
musculoskeletal systems, and therefore plays a central role in enabling and
controlling movement. Yet, developments over the past 20 years have led to
growing recognition that important problems in muscle physiology and movement
sciences remain unsolved and the theoretical foundation of the field remains
incomplete. In particular, the ability to model and predict muscle function
under dynamic and perturbed locomotor conditions remains poor. This project will
combine innovative experimental techniques with modeling approaches to develop
new muscle models that can explain and predict muscle movement under a broad
range of conditions. The findings have potential to transform numerous fields—
enabling neuroscientists, biologists, clinicians and biomedical engineers to ask
questions about human and animal behavior, control of motion, function of
muscles and bones, and capacity of the nervous system and muscles to change. The
research team will collaborate with colleagues in clinical and engineering
fields to translate the findings into applications in human rehabilitation,
treatment of disease and injury, and the design and control of assistive
technology such as prosthetics and exoskeleton devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the field of animal neuromechanics, a pronounced gap exists between ‘top down’
approaches — those that focus on whole-animal behavior but lack insight into
underlying mechanisms— vs ‘bottom-up’ approaches — those that characterize
mechanisms but lack insight into their contributions to animal behavior. The
team will develop new tools to bridge this gap: 1) predictive muscle models that
include intrinsic viscoelastic properties; and 2) experimental approaches that
integrate across levels. This project’s novel ‘muscle avatar’ approach will help
bridge this gap, and enable rigorous analysis of intrinsic muscle property and
neural activation contributions to control of locomotion. Aim 1 tests the
ability of the muscle avatar approach to replicate steady and perturbed in vivo
work loop patterns in mouse and guinea fowl muscles. In Aim 2, in vivo muscle
strain, activation, and force will be measured during steady and perturbed
running in guinea fowl muscles, and the muscle avatar will be used to
quantitatively assess how intrinsic muscle properties and neural drive each
contribute to stabilizing responses. In Aim 3, alternative muscle models will be
developed, and the ability of each model to predict in vivo muscle function in
high strain and perturbed contraction conditions will be compared.
Computationally tractable muscle models are essential for closed loop
neuromechanical simulations of locomotion, which are increasingly used to
understand how muscle function and sensorimotor control change in response to
aging, injury and neuromuscular disorders. The findings could inform clinical
rehabilitation strategies and the design of assistive
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.