* 2016557
* PFI-RP: Organic Photoredox Catalysts for Improving Commercial Pharmaceutical Production
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Niels Damrauer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 709,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the establishment of a new technology
enabling the pharmaceutical industry to expedite drug discovery and improve
manufacturing capabilities. This technology facilitates access to new chemical
reactivity that will provide enhanced abilities to synthesize pharmaceutical
products while also allowing milder and safer reaction conditions. The
capabilities of this technology to beneficially impact pharmaceutical syntheses
will be identified and developed, ultimately providing a needed methodology for
rapid and economical drug discovery and pharmaceutical manufacturing. This work
will enhance the scientific understanding of using energy from light to drive
chemical transformations. Through this work, the societal need for new and
affordable medicines will be addressed through commercialization of this
breakthrough chemical technology. A catalyst technology implemented across the
patent life of a single drug has a commercial potential exceeding $100M. This
collaborative effort also supports the training and education of student
researchers through a multidisciplinary effort. Student researchers will be
exposed to industrial research environments and processes and commercialization
concepts that will help build a stronger foundation for becoming future leaders
in innovation and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will establish a new catalyst technology for the reduction of arenes in
medicinally important, chemical transformations. Catalysis reactions often
require harsh reaction conditions or unsustainable, expensive, and toxic
precious metal complexes. This project will develop a new class of organic
molecules as catalysts that use light energy to perform reactions under mild
reaction conditions. This team will use a combination of computational
chemistry, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to identify improved
catalyst designs and discovery of new chemical reactions. Specifically, the team
will establish new capabilities for chemical synthesis that have been largely
underdeveloped by the pharmaceutical industry. Success in achieving the goals of
this work will result in new photoredox catalysts and the discovery of new
chemical reactivities. Overcoming the technical challenges of this work will
accelerate the adoption of photoredox catalysis in the pharma and chemical
industries and academia. Furthermore, this project will extend artificial
intelligence and machine learning to develop predictive models for accelerated
catalyst and reaction discovery. Lastly, capabilities to scale photoredox
catalyzed reactions will be developed to promote reaction efficiency throughout
the broader chemical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.