* 2016125
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Multimodal signaling in rhinoceros beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Brook Swanson, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 246,175.00

This study seeks to understand biodiversity by focusing on animal weapons and
courtship displays, which often diversify more rapidly than other traits. Male
rhinoceros beetles wield a giant, pitchfork-shaped horn on their head that they
use in battles between rival males over feeding territories visited by females.
Males with the longest horns win, in part because horn length accurately
reflects body size and fighting ability of males - it is an honest signal of
male quality. Prior work by the investigators revealed that winning fights is
not enough, however. Even after battling to hold a territory, males must still
spend hours each night "singing" to females using a novel file on their wing
covers that they rub against a plate on their abdomen, and they produce blends
of scents in their waxy outer cuticle that appear to communicate male body size
and nutritional state. This study will explore the link between male condition
and both song and scent signals, examine female preferences for these signals,
and characterize the diversification of this suite of courtship signals across
the range of the species. How do females discriminate among males, and why do
they ignore the obvious signal of male quality (the horn)? The investigators
will also work with the Gonzaga department of dance to design performances
inspired by animal behavior, develop an interactive exhibit on insect songs for
the Missoula Insectarium, and design interactive online curricula for K-16
students through the University of Denver to share information about beetles
with the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work on the Japanese rhinoceros
beetle, Trypoxylus dichotomus, a heavily weaponed species characterized by a
textbook resource defense mating system, led the investigators to suspect that
these beetles show elements of lekking behavior. Females are reluctant to mate
with resident males guarding feeding territories despite those males
consistently being among the largest, longest-horned individuals in the
population. Using a combination of laboratory manipulation experiments and field
observation and perturbations, this study will rigorously characterize
stridulatory song and cuticular hydrocarbon (CHC) profile signals in rhinoceros
beetles (Aim 1), and evaluate their importance to female mate choice (Aim 2) and
male rival assessment during contests (Aim 3). In addition, this study will
compare song dialects and CHC profiles across the range of this species (Aim 4),
to contrast the relative rates of evolution of agonistic and mate-choice
signals. Finally, they will perform a quantitative trait locus mapping study of
adjacent, genetically similar but phenotypically divergent populations,
combining the resulting linkage maps with a re-sequenced reference genome, and
FST 'outlier' results from a prior PoolSeq study of the same populations, to
delve into the genetic architecture of this suite of multimodal signal
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.