* 2016185
* CAREER: Developing Accurate Crystallography Without Diffraction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2021
* James Harper, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 255,406.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurements and Imaging Program of the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. James Harper of the University of Central Florida to
extend the capability of theoretical methods to accurately predict crystal
structures. Presently, many compounds and even entire classes of compounds are
unsuitable for analysis by conventional crystallography methods. This project
combines lattice prediction methods with experimental NMR data to provide new
methodology capable of solving structural problems that are now intractable.
This outcome will impact society by improving the ability to characterize a host
of new materials. For example, nearly 60 cephalosporin antibiotics have been
described since 1955, yet over 93% in the structures have never been
characterized crystallographically. The project focuses on characterizing key
cephalosporins as well as other challenging materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on improving the theoretical prediction of crystal structure by
including experimental solid-state NMR data in the prediction process. The NMR
data serve to identify a single high-probability conformation before the
prediction process. Because many lattice prediction programs robustly and
accurately treat rigid structures but are challenged by flexibility, the NMR
data improves prediction by limiting the conformational space searched. The
experimental NMR measurements focus primarily on 13C and 15N chemical shift
tensors because such data provide three measurable parameters for each molecular
position. Uncertainties in atomic positions are provided through a molecular
dynamics process, to ultimately create structures suitable for deposit into
crystallographic databases. The broader impact of this work includes training
students from a primarily undergraduate institution (Washington and Jefferson
College) in an annual three week NMR course involving 6-8 students, the creation
of a series of Open Courseware lectures describing basic NMR concepts and the
more specialized tensor measurement methods, and outreach into the scouting
community of central Florida through lab tours and voluntary teaching of merit
badge courses.