* 2016368
* Scientific Program Overview (SPO): Cold Air Outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Paquita Zuidema, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 28,156.00

The Arctic is the region on planet Earth warming the most rapidly with rapid sea
ice loss and increasing air temperatures reinforcing each other. Changing ice
cover posts great uncertainties on Arctic winter weather and significant impacts
upon coastal communities and local transportation. In addition, how the high-
latitude changes connect to the mid-latitude and the global climate system is
another challenging question. One particularly poorly understood weather regime
is cold-air outbreaks when cold Arctic air streaming over relatively warm open
ocean water. During cold-air outbreaks, relatively warm moist air is transported
up in forming lines of clouds. Little is known about the cloud properties and
their rain and snowfall amount in relation with the accompanying vertical air
movement and sea surface conditions. Cold air outbreaks occasionally spawn into
intense circular air movements, “polar lows”. Cold-air outbreaks have
significant impacts on the global heat and water transport as well as ocean
circulations. Despite their impacts on weather and climate, cold-air outbreaks
remain difficult to predict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This awarded project is to
plan a dedicated field study, Cold Air Outbreak Experiment in the Sub Arctic
Region (CAESAR) that has the goal to gather the necessary measurements to
understand the mysterious cloud regime associated with cold-air outbreaks. The
planned field campaign will be in collaboration with Scandinavian scientists and
provide unique training opportunities to students to be the next generation of
atmospheric scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAESAR field campaign is
anticipated in February-March 2022 over the Norwegian Sea, a spot where cold-air
outbreaks are prevalent. The NSF/NCAR C-130 aircraft with a suite of radars,
Lidars, radiometers, aerosol, cloud, precipitation and trace gas probes will be
deployed from northern Sweden or Norway. The goal is to study the structure of
marine boundary layer clouds during cold-air outbreaks with a focus on fully
sampling microphysical (liquid and ice) properties of cloud particles and the
accompanying dynamics. Flight plans are designed to investigate cold-air
outbreaks throughout their entire evolution from their initiation over the
Arctic sea ice edge to well-developed cloud structures far downstream. The
CAESAR measurements will not only afford new insights of development of fine-
scale cloud structures but also constrain a hierarchy of numerical models
ranging from eddy simulations capable of capturing the nuanced small-scale cloud
and dynamical processes to numerical weather and climate models. A dedicated
model-observational intercomparison project is planned to improve numerical
models particularly their performance in the ‘grey-zone’ where state-of-the-art
weather models fail to capture the relevant cloud and dynamical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.