* 2016838
* WORKSHOP: Broadening access to research opportunities at PUIs and HBCs in the Memphis region
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 02/28/2021
* USD 4,535.00

This project will support a two-day grantsmanship workshop designed to increase
the success of predominately undergraduate institutions (PUIs) and Historically
Black Colleges (HBCs) in obtaining grant funding to support science education
and research, and to broaden access to science careers for undergraduate college
students. Rhodes College, which is located in Memphis, TN, will host the
workshop for faculty, administrators, and undergraduate college students of
Rhodes College, the University of Memphis, three HBCs (LeMoyne-Owen College,
Lane College, and Rust College) and other colleges in the larger Memphis region.
Rhodes College’s geographical location in Memphis places it within the same city
as LeMoyne-Owen College and within short driving distances of Lane College and
Rust College. During the workshop, faculty and administrators will participate
in workshop sessions on successful grant-writing and identifying funding
opportunities that align with their institutions’ science research and
educational missions. Students will learn strategies for identifying and
applying for summer research internships across the country. Students will also
learn about the National Science Foundation's Graduate Research Fellowship
Program and how to become a competitive applicant for this prestigious award,
which supports outstanding students who are pursuing a Master’s or doctoral
degree in a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines. The
Broader Impacts of this project include the participation of three HBCs,
providing the potential to increase access to science careers for students from
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. As a result of
the workshop, faculty and students at these three HBCs will be better prepared
to apply for grant funding to enhance science infrastructure and education at
those institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty at Rhodes College and
neighboring research institutions surrounding Memphis, TN have been active in
pursuing external funding. However, success in obtaining large research grant
awards in recent years can be challenging for many faculty. Thus, one goal of
this workshop is to improve grantsmanship skills and provide faculty the tools
to identify new funding opportunities, with the goal of increasing access to
research grants for science faculty at Memphis area institutions. Rhodes College
and Memphis-area faculty not only train undergraduate students via summer
research positions, but also recruit students from LeMoyne-Owen College, Lane
College, and Rust College, three Historically Black Colleges (HBCs) in the
greater Memphis region. Strengthening these longstanding partnerships is
expected to increase the number of summer research internships that are
available to undergraduates from regional HBCs. The Broader Impacts of this
project are expected to increase participation of groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.