* 2016320
* Extracting the backbone of weighted networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Zachary Neal, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 148,879.00

In this project, methods to extract the backbone of weighted networks are
investigated and computer software to use these methods is developed. Social
networks are often complex, with the interactions between actors (e.g., people,
organizations, cities) varying in strength, which can be represented by weighted
networks. Because weighted networks are challenging to analyze and visualize, it
is often useful to focus on their backbones, which contain only the most
significant connections. Many approaches to backbone extraction exist, but we
know little about whether they work or how to choose one approach over another.
By providing guidance on and tools for network backbone extraction, this project
will enable researchers to analyze better information-rich network data in a
wide range of socially significant contexts, and to communicate their findings
more easily to diverse audiences through visualization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to facilitate researchersâ€™
ability to correctly extract the backbone of weighted networks. Achieving this
goal involves six activities. First, bipartite ensemble methods are refined to
make them faster and more flexible. Second, the R backbone package is extended
to allow the extraction of backbones from all types of weighted networks, to
accommodate larger datasets, and to be interoperable with other network analysis
packages. Third, backbone methods are compared empirically using benchmark
datasets to explore their similarities and differences in practice. Fourth,
backbone methods are compared analytically to determine their computational
complexities and the functional form of their null edge weight distributions.
Fifth, backbone methods are compared numerically using synthetic weighted
network data, allowing identification of the conditions under which each method
validly reproduces a known ground truth. Finally, training materials are
developed to instruct researchers on the selection of backbone methods and on
the use of the backbone package for their extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.