* 2016423
* Collaborative research: BEE: Discovery and characterization of novel microbial lineages in an early Earth analog sulfur-based ecosystem.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Noha Youssef, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 06/30/2024
* USD 577,810.00

Evolution of life on Earth is closely linked to geological changes occurring at
its surface. Changes in early Earth’s geology and atmosphere drove the evolution
of new microorganisms adapted to the prevailing new conditions. Consequently,
growth of these newly-evolved microorganisms was associated with the production
of new end products such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and sulfides, that in turn
greatly impacted the physical conditions on Earth in a never-ending feedback
loop between biology and geology. So far, it is not clearly understood what
types of microorganisms inhabited early Earth. Early unicellular lifeforms are
fragile, boneless, and have not been preserved. Since direct sampling is
impossible, an alternative approach based on the identification of current
locations with conditions paralleling those prevailing in past eons is
warranted. The researchers have identified a unique site in southwestern
Oklahoma (Zodletone spring), where physical conditions at various locations in
the spring remarkably correspond to conditions prevalent at various geological
eons throughout Earth’s history. Therefore, spatial sampling in Zodletone spring
can substitute for inaccessible temporal time scales. The project will utilize a
range of cutting-edge laboratory methodologies to characterize the microbial
community in this unique site. This knowledge will contribute to our
understanding of how life evolved on Earth, and the prerequisites for its
potential evolution on other planets and celestial objects within the solar
system and beyond. The research will contribute to workforce training of
multiple high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students in two states with
special emphasis on students from groups that are underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to identify and
characterize novel bacterial lineages prevalent in Zodletone spring: a
surficial, light-exposed, and euxinic (anoxic, sulfide-rich) habitat
representing an early Earth analog. The researchers will characterize novel yet-
uncultured bacterial lineages encountered in the spring using a combination of
genome-resolved metagenomics, metabolic reconstruction, community
transcriptomics, targeted isolation, and global diversity and pangenomic
surveys. This will be achieved by: 1) Metabolic reconstruction to deduce the
metabolic potential and physiological preferences of uncultured lineages
recovered from various locations in the spring; 2) Validating the proposed
metabolic capabilities and ecological roles using expression studies and
reverse-genomics based isolation strategies, and; 3) Assessing the global
distribution patterns and pangenomic diversity of the identified lineages using
data mining approaches and comparative genomics strategies to trace the
ecological success/retreat/extinction of these novel
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.