* 2016261
* Collaborative Research:  Design and Advanced Manufacturing of Hexaboride High Entropy Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Victor Vasquez, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2024
* USD 332,747.00

New materials and processes are needed to address needs found in extreme
environments, such as nuclear reactors, near space (in the vicinity of Earth),
and deep space. These materials would be used in structural support, shielding,
and detectors. This research pursues fundamental research to provide the needed
knowledge for the development and manufacturing of a new class of multicomponent
materials, called high entropy ceramics, High entropy ceramics have properties
which are tunable through the choice of composition and they require a new
approach to their synthesis and manufacturing. Isotopically enriched,
multicomponent hexaboride materials, as a member of this new class of ceramics,
will be studied in an alternative approach to achieve high performance, complex
neutron detectors needed for national security and medical and nuclear
technologies, fostering national prosperity. Forming such complex materials
presents a unique opportunity for the development of new ceramics and methods of
high-throughput advanced manufacturing and multi-scale modeling of hexaborides.
The educational impact includes involvement with the Native American and
Hispanic communities including cross-border
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comprehensive project looks to design
and manufacture new high-entropy, 10B-enriched, hexaborides for applications in
radiation detection, with a special focus on the detection of thermal,
epithermal and slow neutrons. The work focusses on the discovery of new high-
entropy hexaboride materials and the synthetic processes to make these multi-
component materials without phase separation. The multicomponent materials will
be tuned through composition, guided by computation, altering the band gap of
the material. The unique aspects of this project are: (1) this will be the first
study that will design and manufacture high-entropy hexaboride ceramics, opening
the door to the concept of band gap engineering in these unique materials, and
their potential for use in extreme environments, and (2) this will be the first
study that will combine the use of multi-scale modeling techniques for the
design and manufacturing of high-entropy hexaboride materials, with a special
focus on the determination of electronic structure, neutron response and defect
burden, as well as grain boundary effects and interphases, on the electronic
properties of the materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.