* 2016580
* The IT College and CAREERS Readiness Project: Career Academy Research on Educational Experiences and Related Successes
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Edward Fletcher, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2024
* USD 121,230.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITEST project involves the
University of South Florida, in collaborations with the National Academy
Foundation, and three high school career academies, to study the impact of
participation in the career academy model implemented by National Academy
Foundation under different levels of implementation fidelity. The goals of the
project are: (a) to examine the nature of organizational and implementation
elements (mission, curriculum and instruction, internal and external supports)
of information technology (IT) career academies with different levels of
fidelity; (b) to determine student experiences in National Academy Foundation IT
career academies with different levels of fidelity; and (c) to document
indicators of college and career readiness (engagement, performance,
transitions) of students in National Academy Foundation IT career academies with
different levels of fidelity in comparison to National Academy Foundation
students in non-career academies. The project will rely on extant student-level
data from the dataset and comprehensive site visit data to meet the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the proposed research is to
study the impact of participation in the career academy model implemented by the
National Academy Foundation under different levels of implementation. Using a
mixed methods approach, the project will be driven by three research questions:
(1) What is the nature of organizational and implementation elements (mission,
curriculum and instruction, internal and external supports) of IT career
academies with different levels of fidelity? (2) What are the student
experiences in NAF IT career academies with different levels of fidelity? (3)
What are the indicators of college and career readiness (engagement,
performance, transitions) of students in NAF IT career academies with different
levels of fidelity in comparison to students in non-career academies?