* 2016206
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Ocean Instrumentation for UNOLS fleet CY 2020-2021
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,12/31/2021
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 12/31/2021
* USD 245,439.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation on R/V Atlantis, a
274-foot general purpose research vessel, and R/V Armstrong, a 238-foot
multidisciplinary vessel. Both are operated by WHOI as part of the U.S. Academic
Research Fleet (ARF) which is scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS). Both are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-of-the-
art instrumentation and support all disciplines of oceanographic research. The
vessels work in all the worldâ€™s oceans supporting science funded primarily by
U.S government agencies. R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching
and servicing Alvin, the human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of
the National Deep Submergence Facility (NDSF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2019,
R/V Atlantis completed 284 days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 90% of
the total sailing schedule (254 days). In 2020, Atlantis is scheduled for 138
days with NSF accounting for 72 of those or 52%. R/V Armstrong sailed 217 total
days in 2019 and 43 of these, 20%, were for NSF. Additionally, 78 days (36%)
were for NSF-OOI. The vessel is scheduled for 295 days in 2020, 25% of which (59
days) are for NSF and 33% (79 days) are for NSF OOI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this proposal, WHOI provides technical descriptions and rationale for the
acquisition of the following Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Hidex
300SL automatic LSC $128,175&lt;br/&gt;(3) McLane Submersible Bio Pumps
$122,475&lt;br/&gt;(1) DAVPR Battery Case $6,406&lt;br/&gt;(2) EK80 portable
calibration systems $5,992&lt;br/&gt; $263,048&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.