* 2016735
* CCRI: ENS: BugSwarm: Enhancing an Infrastructure and Dataset to Support the Software Engineering Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Cindy Rubio Gonzalez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,470,431.00

As technology advances, software plays an ever-increasing role in our daily
lives. The prominence of defects is a troublesome fact of software development.
Software defects can have serious consequences leading to significant loss of
financial capital for businesses or even loss of life. These facts have led to
rich areas of research studying previously found defects and their fixes in
order to prevent or find future defects. These areas of research span many
disciplines from security to software engineering and sub-fields such as program
analysis, verification, software testing, and automated program repair.
Important to these fields is the availability of a large number of real-world
defects for study and evaluation. Recently, the BugSwarm infrastructure was
developed to automatically create a continuously growing dataset of reproducible
real-world failures and fixes. BugSwarm mines pairs of failures and fixes from
open-source GitHub projects that use the continuous integration service Travis
CI. The novelty of BugSwarm lies in the automated generation of scripts to
compile and test the code, and the use of Docker images to provide the required
environment to reproduce each failure and its corresponding fix. The BugSwarm
infrastructure has led to the creation of the BugSwarm dataset, which currently
includes over 3,000 reproducible failures and fixes from projects written in
Java or Python.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance the BugSwarm
infrastructure and dataset to enable growth at the scale and direction required
by the research community, and to possess the long-term sustainability required
for such an infrastructure to continue evolving. Specifically, the research aims
to solve five challenges necessary to make the dataset larger, more robust,
diverse, and useful: (1) devise novel techniques to increase the reproduction
rate of failures and fixes mined from open-source projects, (2) incorporate user
feedback to guide the mining of failures and fixes of interest to the research
community, (3) provide a richer classification schema for the dataset, (4) build
support for additional programming languages such as JavaScript, and (5) provide
a tool ecosystem to facilitate the use of the BugSwarm dataset. As part of this
effort, workshops and tutorials will be organized to gather feedback from the
community, and to share the BugSwarm resources. Going forward, BugSwarm will not
only facilitate experimentation, but also avoid the duplication of work among
software engineering researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.