* 2016009
* 2020 Flow and Transport in Permeable Media GRC/GRS; Switzerland, July 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Marc Hesse, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 31,300.00

Permeable media are materials that allow fluids to pass through them and they
are everywhere in our natural and built environment. The flow of fluids through
permeable materials and how they transport reactants determines vital aspect of
our own physiology, the functioning of many ecosystems, the generation and
extraction of natural resources, and many industrial processes. As such the
field is very broad and highly interdisciplinary with participation from a
variety of engineers, physicists, chemists, geoscientists, hydrologists and
biologists. The field of Flow and Transport in Permeable Media aims to improve
our fundamental understanding of these complex systems and apply it to broad
range of societal problems. The goal of the proposed work is to sponsor a
meeting as part of the Gordon Research Conferences on Flow and Transport in
Permeable Media. The meeting will be held in Les Diablerets, Switzerland, June
19-24, 2020. A significant number of the participants will be U.S. researchers,
and 2/3 of the meeting participants are early stage investigators (graduate
students, postdoctoral associates, and early stage professors). Gordon Research
Conferences are week-long immersive experiences in which cutting edge,
unpublished science is presented, with long question and answer periods, poster
session, discussion of science over meals, and social engagement between
sessions. This particular meeting will also have a Gordon Research Seminar, two
days before the main meeting, for solely graduate students and postdoctoral
associates to present their work. In all, the meeting is designed to address the
important ideas and concepts in the field of Flow and Transport in Permeable
Media by international leaders in the field, with significant participation a
new generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary field
of Flow and Transport in Porous Media focuses on developing a fundamental
understanding of wide range of natural and engineered permeable media and the
complex multi-phase flow, reactive transport, and deformation processes within
them. The field is crucial to subsurface energy recovery and storage, hydrology,
soil science, and represents a core focus of research activity of several
programs at the National Science Foundation. Planned sessions include Mixing
dynamics, Multi-phase flows, CO2 sequestration, Micro-scale fluid dynamics,
Innovative sensors, Biochemical processes, Hydromechanics, and Flow and
transport in ice. The meeting will focus on the fundamental challenges in Flow
and Transport in Permeable Media. This proposal is to support the registration
of 35 participants in the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Flow and Transport
in Permeable Media. The format and structure of the GRC is designed for
immersion of scientists into new and emerging concepts in Flow and Transport in
Permeable Media â€“ with an emphasis on breaking results and unpublished data -
though long question and answer periods, interactive discussion over meals,
significant poster sessions and social activities between sessions. This
particular meeting will also have a Gordon Research Seminar, two days before the
main meeting, for solely graduate students and post-doctoral associates to
present their work. The emphasis on early stage investigators and
underrepresented groups will significantly enhance the broader impact of this
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.