* 2016973
* I-Corps: Adaptive Robotic Nursing Assistants for Physical Healthcare Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Dan Popa, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of robotic technologies to assist healthcare workers deliver better
and more efficient services to patients in hospitals and nursing home
environments. The Bureau of Labor statistics indicates that there are millions
of registered nurses in the United States, which makes them the largest
workforce providing healthcare. The proposed technology has the potential to
augment the nursing workforce and help offset personnel shortages in hospitals,
long-term care facilities, and nursing homes. Adaptive robotic nursing
assistants may reduce nurses’ exposure to infectious agents, reduce
musculoskeletal injuries, and increase job satisfaction by freeing up time spent
on item fetching, repetitive measurements of vital signs, and lifting. A robot
that can communicate with the electronic health records to document completed
tasks may have greater impact by saving nurses’ time devoted to paperwork. With
the predicted shortage in nursing workforce, nurse workloads are expected to
increase, and robot nursing assistants have the potential to handle some of the
physical and administrative nursing tasks. Patients and hospitals may gain in
terms of quality of care, prevention of falls, and faster service through
automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of adaptive robotic nursing assistants for physical and
administrative tasks in hospital environments. The technology consists of a
mobile manipulator with an omni-directional base, a 6-degrees of freedom (DOF)
robotic arm, and sensors to assist with nursing scenarios such as sitting and
walking with patients. The sensors include both non-contact proximity and
contact tactile skins to allow the robot to operate safely in busy healthcare
environments while interacting physically with nurses and patients. The
technology also incorporates human-machine interfaces (HMIs) that allow users to
interact with the robot in an intuitive manner that may be tailored to
individual preferences. The proposed technology’s neuroadaptive learning control
technology may adapt to each user’s behavior during physical human-robot
interaction, ensuring both high quality interaction, programmable adaptive HMI
behaviors, and robust performance under operational uncertainties. Using this
technology, the robot can navigate the environment, fetch objects, and automate
mundane nursing tasks while keeping healthcare workers in the decision
loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.