* 2016552
* PFI-TT: Highly Flexible and Bendable Photovoltaic Module Architectures for Enhanced Usability
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Stanislau Herasimenka, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of a flexible,
bendable photovoltaic module technology that features the benefits of
crystalline silicon, efficiency and long service lifetime, and a bending radius
that is seven times smaller than the current state-of-the-art crystalline
silicon module. The technology chosen enables a 25-year warranty on these
modules, which is common for rigid solar panels. Bendable modules can be used
where traditional rigid modules cannot because there is no space for mounting,
the panel is too heavy for the supporting structure, the module will not
withstand wind forces, or it is not aesthetically pleasing. The modules
developed in this project will enable photovoltaic projects that were impossible
previously, for example building-integrated photovoltaics or smart city
infrastructure that features energy harvesting. The technology helps to grow the
existing market of photovoltaic energy harvesting and opens new market
opportunities. Non-rigid modules can be easily mounted to curved surfaces,
making installation of these panels much easier and more attractive for
recreational and even residential use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
seeks to develop thin silicon wafers that can be processed without causing
breakage and defect, which could affect the reliability of the photovoltaic
cells in the modules. Understanding the nature of defects and how defects are
introduced in the manufacturing process is key to reducing waste and keeping
manufacturing costs down, which will ultimately affect the module price. The
goal is to identify issues in the production process and improve the
manufacturing yield to levels common for thick silicon wafer processing, used in
rigid solar panels. The trade-off between using mitigations like handle wafers
and process tool modifications will be investigated. A second problem to be
addressed is the reliability of electrical interconnects in flexible solar
modules. Electrical interconnects in rigid panels are a common source of
problems due to mechanical stress fractures. The team will investigate
alternative electrical bus connections that are resilient to mechanical stress
and have the added benefit of reducing silver resource consumption in solar
modules. Environmental tests will be conducted to determine the reliability of
these flexible and bendable modules to ensure a service life that is competitive
with rigid crystalline silicon solar panels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.