* 2016406
* 2020 African Diaspora Joint Mathematics Workshops (ADJOINT)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Helene Barcelo, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 49,991.00

This award will support the 2020 African Diaspora Joint Mathematics Workshop
(ADJOINT) to be held online from June 15 – 26, 2020. The Mathematical Sciences
Research Institute (MSRI) developed the ADJOINT program to provide opportunities
for research collaboration to U.S. mathematical scientists, especially those
from the African American community, who will work in small groups with research
leaders on various research projects. The underlying goal of ADJOINT in to
enhance the careers of its participants by catalyzing collaborative research
projects, by creating formal mentorship opportunities, and by facilitating
networking activities in the hope of creating a sense of belonging to a
community of peers. The members of the research groups will be encouraged to
build on the ADJOINT experience by planning and participating in research
activities in the following year and beyond. Having core, productive groups of
black research-active mathematical scientists in various fields will stimulate
further participation by this community in these fields, and thus stimulate the
fields as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For two weeks in the summer of 2020,
five research groups will participate in the ADJOINT program. During that time,
participants will be working intensely in small groups comprised of 4-5
participants and led by a respected African American mathematical scientist with
a well-established research program. Additionally, researchers will participate
in professional development activities and a weekly colloquium series. Due to
the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 research groups will collaborate virtually with
materials and technical support provided by MSRI. After the summer, MSRI will
provide researchers with the necessary support to travel (when it is safe to do
so) to meet with their team members and proceed further with their research
agenda, to attend and organize conferences to present results, and to become
part of a network of research and career mentors. Furthermore, at a future date
(possibly summer 2021) MSRI will host a one-week reunion onsite at MSRI’s
facilities in Berkeley, CA to allow for in-person interaction between
collaborators and to consolidate the sense of community among participants. More
information about the ADJOINT program can be found at
https://www.msri.org/web/msri/scientific/adjoint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.