* 2016004
* A Novel Approach to System Identification using Artificial Neural  Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jeffrey Moehlis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2024
* USD 383,389.00

The importance of accurate mathematical models for systems of physical,
biological, and technological interest cannot be overstated. These models allow
researchers to understand, analyze, and predict the behavior of such systems.
Unfortunately, it is often impossible to derive mathematical models from first
principles, in particular for many biological systems, for which important
underlying processes are exceedingly complex or are not well understood, but for
which ample data can be obtained. In such cases, system identification is a
powerful tool which can be used to deduce mathematical models from observed
data. The research will use artificial neural networks, a powerful form of
machine learning, to dynamically generate the terms in a model with the
necessary complexity and nonlinearity to accurately describe a system's
dynamics. This new method of system identification will be also useful for non-
biological systems, including virtually any system for which "black box"
modeling approaches, which make predictions without any detailed understanding
of the inner workings of the model, have been applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will accomplish system identification of ordinary differential equation
models through a multilayered, operation-based symbolic regression approach,
with the capacity to learn compound operations by training appropriate
artificial neural networks. Unlike many existing system identification
techniques, it does not require pre-specification of a dictionary of possible
terms, which constrain the possible models which can be obtained. This new
approach provides a powerful alternative to genetic programming strategies for
symbolic regression, and can exploit many of the attractive features of
artificial neural networks such as a straightforward learning strategy and a
large corpus of research on extensions and optimizations. This strategy will be
adapted to allow for symbolic dimension reduction, the treatment of symmetries
and constraints, the identification of stochastic differential equation models
for noisy systems, the determination of hidden variables for the models, and the
generation of candidate Lyapunov functions which can be used to prove the
stability of equilibrium solutions to given models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.