* 2016204
* Electrokinetic Flow on Nanostructured Superhydrophilic and Superhydrophobic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Carlos Colosqui, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 348,054.00

Electrokinetic flows result from the coupling of hydrodynamic and electrodynamic
effects when aqueous electrolyte solutions (e.g., saline) are confined by solid
surfaces with net surface charge. This electro-hydrodynamic phenomenon enables
numerous engineering applications that range from water treatment and membrane-
based separation processes, to energy storage and biomedical devices for drug
delivery and diagnostics. Conventional models for electrokinetic flows do not
properly account for nanoscale physical or chemical heterogeneities found on the
surface of typical engineering materials or on advanced nanostructured
materials. This project aims to develop a better fundamental understanding of
electrokinetic flows on nanostructured surfaces that are superhydrophilic (i.e.,
strongly water-attracting) or superhydrophobic (i.e., strongly water-repelling).
The knowledge gained will help in the development of key technologies for
sustainable production of drinking water, food, and energy, and the design of
more effective nanofluidic devices for analytical chemistry and biomedicine. Two
educational initiatives will be created with this project; the “Fluid Dynamics
Day at Stony Brook University” and “The Nanoscale Simulation Online School”.
Research and educational activities in this project will have strong focus on
the professional development and participation of underrepresented minorities in
STEM, which include undergraduate and graduate students from low-income
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research will be pursued
through three specific aims: (1) formulation of a compact hydrodynamic
description valid for electrokinetic flows on superhydrophilic and
superhydrophobic nanostructured surfaces, which will be validated against
experimental data and molecular dynamics simulations; (2) experimental
characterization of electrokinetic flows on superhydrophilic and
superhydrophobic nanostructured surfaces, to determine steady-state
electroosmotic and pressure-driven flow rates as a function of the nanostructure
period and height for different pH and electrolyte concentration; and (3)
fabrication of surface samples having well-controlled periods (30-130 nm) and
heights (20-200 nm) to enable the planned experimental study. In addition, the
ionic composition of the liquid-solid/vapor interfaces formed on the studied
nanostructured surfaces will be probed by x-ray and IR spectroscopy to
unambiguously establish the origin of the zeta potentials measured in the
electrokinetic flow experiments. The proposed work will provide answers to open
questions such as the specific mechanisms for electroosmotic flow and zeta
potential enhancement on different hydrophobic
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.