* 2016263
* Resolving Twin-Slip Interaction Mechanisms in Hexagonal Close-Packed Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Bin Li, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 268,696.00

Deformation of hexagonal close-packed metals, such as magnesium and titanium,
involves complex activities of defects in the crystal structure, called twins
and dislocations, respectively. Multiple modes of twinning and dislocation slip
in crystal planes can be activated, even under simple mechanical loading.
Interaction between twin boundaries and dislocations strongly influences the
mechanical properties of these metals, but the physics behind the interaction is
not understood. This award supports fundamental research on modeling the twin-
slip interaction mechanisms, which are difficult to be resolved experimentally.
The research will enhance fundamental understanding of the mechanical behavior
of important engineering materials, such as magnesium and titanium alloys, that
have shown promise in improving energy efficiency in automotive and aerospace
applications. Insights obtained from the research will also help design new
generation of lightweight alloys with improved strength and ductility.
Additionally, the project will promote education and diversity by facilitating
integrated computational materials engineering education for undergraduate and
graduate students and by engaging underrepresented groups in STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twin-slip interaction in metals with hexagonal
close-packed crystal structures plays a crucial role in the mechanical
properties of these materials. Such interaction has been considered an important
factor in the hardening behavior during plastic deformation, but the mechanisms
remain largely unknown. Twin-slip interaction occurs on the atomic scale.
According to classical theory of deformation twinning, a one-to-one lattice
correspondence exists between the parent and the product phase. Thus, if a
dislocation in the matrix is transformed into a dislocation in the twin, the
slip planes before and after twin-slip interaction must be corresponding planes.
These corresponding planes can be unambiguously identified with atomistic
simulations. The project will use atomic scale simulations to resolve lattice
transformations during interaction between various twinning modes and
dislocation modes in magnesium and titanium. By analyzing lattice
correspondence, the interaction mechanisms can be resolved with clarity.
Conditions for dislocation transmutation and dislocation absorption at different
twin boundaries can also definitively be established. And the results obtained
can be further extended to other important engineering metals such as zirconium
and cobalt alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovations Division in the Engineering
Directorate, and the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.