* 2016826
* Acidic pit lakes: Novel biogeochemical reactors evaluated via multi-omics approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* William Burgos, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Acid mine drainage is globally among the most widespread and expensive forms of
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how to use sunlight and
natural microbial communities to provide&lt;br/&gt;cost-effective remediation of
pollution caused by mining (acid mine drainage), thus improving&lt;br/&gt;access
to clean water for humans and the ecosystems that support them. In addition,
the&lt;br/&gt;project will contribute more broadly to the development of methods
and new understanding of&lt;br/&gt;how microbial populations interact with
minerals, organic compounds, and other microbial&lt;br/&gt;populations in the
environment. This understanding is crucial in order to harness the
enormous&lt;br/&gt;biotechnological potential of microbial systems that can be
engineered to provide essential&lt;br/&gt;services to human societies. The
proposed work will improve environmental health, increase&lt;br/&gt;diversity in
the STEM pipeline, and strengthen international scientific collaborations.
Women&lt;br/&gt;and underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students will be
recruited to work on this&lt;br/&gt;project. This project will promote
collaboration between U.S. and international researchers by&lt;br/&gt;building
on long-term relationships between the Spanish Geological Survey (IGME) and
Penn&lt;br/&gt;State, such that participants will benefit from international
science and engineering training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to identify strategies to stimulate sulfide production in acidic pit
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;As a model system, we selected the anoxic deep layer of Cueva
de la Mora (CM), a permanently&lt;br/&gt;stratified acidic pit lake in SW Spain
that is among the most intensively studied in the world.&lt;br/&gt;Two competing
hypotheses emerged from our previous research: 1) Sulfide production
is&lt;br/&gt;limited by organic carbon, or 2) Sulfide production is limited by
zero-valent sulfur. The project&lt;br/&gt;objectives are to: A) Stimulate
autotrophic and heterotrophic sulfide production in
laboratory&lt;br/&gt;incubations inoculated with the CM anoxic layer microbial
community; B) Resolve the metabolic&lt;br/&gt;potentials and activities of the
active populations in the stimulated communities; and C)&lt;br/&gt;Identify
interactions between microbial populations cycling C, S, Fe, N, and P under
sulfide producing&lt;br/&gt;conditions. Tasks to address these aims include: 1)
Conduct a field campaign to&lt;br/&gt;collect large quantities of biomass from
the anoxic layer of CM; 2) Conduct laboratory&lt;br/&gt;incubations to evaluate
sulfide production under different conditions; 3) Sequence&lt;br/&gt;metagenomes
and metatranscriptomes to identify the most abundant and active
microbial&lt;br/&gt;populations; and 4) Construct conceptual species-level and
community-level metabolic models&lt;br/&gt;to generate new hypotheses about how
to increase sulfide production and therefore&lt;br/&gt;bioremediation potential.
This project will contribute to a fundamental and mechanistic understanding of
how&lt;br/&gt;microorganisms interact to produce and consume sulfide in acidic
environments, which is&lt;br/&gt;crucial to mitigating the toxic effects of acid
mine drainage. The results will advance knowledge&lt;br/&gt;of previously
undescribed and novel microbial species, including details of their
metabolic&lt;br/&gt;potentials, enzymatic machinery, and evolutionary
relationships. There are currently only 1-2&lt;br/&gt;sulfide-producing isolates
able to grow at pH&lt;4, although the diversity of this group is
probably&lt;br/&gt;higher and remains undescribed. Microbial communities in
nature are made up of mutually&lt;br/&gt;dependent populations that exchange
metabolites, yet scientific studies rarely consider this&lt;br/&gt;complexity
explicitly. A significant merit of this proposal is that it focuses on a
natural&lt;br/&gt;environment with intermediate complexity, appropriate for
expanding and adapting modeling&lt;br/&gt;tools developed for laboratory
cultures for natural ecosystems. Documenting microbial&lt;br/&gt;interactions in
communities is key to understanding community assembly and to harnessing
the&lt;br/&gt;enormous biotechnological potential of engineered microbial
systems that can provide&lt;br/&gt;essential services to human
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.