* 2016321
* PFI-TT: Prototype Batteries Enabling Energy Efficient Seawater Desalination
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Kyoung-Shin Choi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to construct a prototype desalination
battery that can enable energy efficient freshwater production. Steady growth in
the human population and rapid industrial development have led to greater
demands for water production for agriculture, energy generation, and human
consumption. Thus, it is imperative to develop new desalination methods that can
address the limitations of existing technologies and to increase global access
to affordable freshwater. Like conventional batteries, the desalination battery
stores and releases energy during the charging and discharging processes but, in
the desalination battery, these processes are coupled with the storage and
release of salt ions, specifically sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl-) ions. As the
energy consumed during the charging process is recovered during the discharging
process, the net energy required for desalination is drastically reduced
compared with conventional desalination methods such as thermal distillation and
reverse osmosis. Successful technology translation of desalination battery
technology may have a significant impact on increasing the cost-effective,
global freshwater production of potable water, which in turn, will have an
enormous societal impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to build a
prototype desalination battery with a capacity 18,000 times larger than that of
the current proof-of-concept cell. Increasing the electrode size can adversely
affect the individual electrode capacities and cyclabilities as well as the net
energy required for desalination. Thus, the successful scale-up of the proof-of-
concept cell is a vital step to mitigate uncertainty about the commercial
viability of the proposed technology. Once the proposed prototype cell is
successfully built, it will enable the assembly of multiple modules to perform
desalination at any scale. The proposed technology will enable the performance
of accurate technoeconomic calculations and, thus, determine the cost of
constructing and operating the device; enable the evaluation of the best
product-market fit, and establish a viable path-to-market. Furthermore, the
prototype cell can be used to demonstrate desalination at a practical level
mimicking real-world conditions with the capacity to remove ~100% of Na+ and
~33% of Cl- present in 1 L of seawater in 1 cycle. This will allow the team to
engage potential commercialization, industry, and government/community partners
more effectively for successful technology
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.