* 2016749
* LTREB: Phenological responsiveness of plants and bees: consequences for species, interactions, community composition and biomass
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* David Inouye, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 11/30/2025
* USD 795,756.00

Plants and animals depend on the correct timing of seasonal events for survival
and reproduction. For example, flowers need to bloom when frosts won’t kill them
and bees will visit them, and bees need to begin flying when flowers are
available. It is well known that climate (temperature, rain or snow) can change
the timing (or “phenology”) of these important events, and that different
species change their timing by different amounts. Little is known about how
these differences in responses to climate will influence the ability of species
to thrive. When the snow melts earlier, do plant species with greater shifts in
flowering time become more common than plants that change less? Could the timing
of bee activity and plant flowering change so much for that they miss
interacting? Answers to these kinds of questions are important for predicting
how plants and animals in natural areas will change in the future, and for
managing the crop plants we depend on for food. The Rocky Mountain Biological
Laboratory Phenology Project maintains the world’s longest detailed record of
the timing of plant and insect activity. These records, together with new
measurements of plant growth, will be used to understand how changes in the
timing of flowering and bee activity with climate affect plant and bee success.
The project also trains elementary and high school science teachers and college
students in research, and provides science talks for children and
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has detailed measurements of climate
(daily) and the timing of flowering (three times per week) for all plant species
in 36 permanent plots in high mountain meadows in Colorado for up to 46 years,
and the abundance of all bee species (every other week) in nearby meadows for 11
years. Going forward, this project will measure the relative abundance of all
plant species and productivity of the plant community. With these new data, the
project will address three questions: (1) Does the phenological responsiveness
of plant or bee species explain differences in species' abundances, annual
variation in abundance, or resilience after extreme weather events? (2) How does
the phenological responsiveness of the plants used by each bee guild influence
bee communities? (3) Are the traits of plants in a local community related to
community-level responses to climate such as changes in species richness, or
ecosystem responses such as productivity? The project will also continue to
provide its long-term datasets, which are used by research groups across the US
and abroad, to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.