* 2016818
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance GPU/CPU Cluster for Research and Innovation in Computational Sciences and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Debasis Mitra, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 398,945.00

FIT is acquiring a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster with multi-core
Intel CPUs, NVIDIA V100 GPUs, and several layers of storage at Florida Institute
of Technology. The key research thrusts include natural sciences (chemistry,
physics, mathematics, and meteorology), computer science and engineering, and
medicine. The infrastructure would be added to the previous cluster funded by a
2009 MRI and will help establish the Institute for Computational Engineering and
Sciences (ICES) at FIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of this HPC cluster has
taken the cue from the CERN laboratory in Switzerland, arguably the largest
scientific center in the world. The CERN strategy to meet computing challenges
has a 3-prong approach: scale out capacity with public clouds and HPCs; increase
data center performance with hardware accelerators such GPUs, FPGAs and TPUs;
utilize new computational techniques based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML). The present design comprises a computing architecture
that includes an on-campus HPC cluster (the ICES HPC), which is based on GPU
machine learning accelerators, as well as CPUs, with highly efficient networking
to ensure rapid bi-directional access to other supercomputers and clouds to
allow super-large computational tasks beyond the local HPC capacity to run on
off-site hyperscale providers, such as those managed by Extreme Science and
Engineering Discovery Environment XSEDE), after development and testing at the
ICES HPC facility. The intellectual merit of the project pertains to the ICES as
a multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary computational center, with a computer
cluster equipped with the latest technologies for highto-performance computing
and data storage that could allow Florida Tech to work in a collaborative
environment to create new and innovative algorithms and techniques utilizing
AI/ML for conducting computational-intensive and big-data research in science
and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.