* 2016937
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Constructive and Destructive Exit: Understanding Treaty Withdrawal
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Bree Bang-Jensen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 21,034.00

The greatest challenges of the 21st century are cross-national, including the
environment, migration, epidemics, inequality, and financial corruption. As a
result, it is critical to better understand the factors that enable and imperil
international cooperation. The study of treaty exit will grant us additional
purchase on why international law influences the behavior of some countries more
than others and how design influences treaty durability. First, by shedding
light on the effect of treaty design on exit, this project will help future
policy makers consider exit risk when designing and negotiating agreements.
Second, this research will help inform policy makers who are invested in global
governance understand how concerned they should be about exit from international
agreements. Finally, this research will help policy makers understand the
conditions that lead to exit and the effects of
exit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a wealth of literature on treaty commitment
and compliance, we know very little about treaty exit. This project explores a
missing stage in the treaty lifecycle, and illuminates differences in the
strength of international law across states. To better understand historic
patterns of treaty exit and the factors that contribute to them, this project
leverages a combination of large-N analysis of treaty exits over the last
hundred years, text-as-data supervised machine learning analysis of treaty
design, and elite interviews. Cases include exits from the International
Criminal Court, and from several International Labor Organization conventions
that seek to protect women through restricting workplace participation, and the
U.S. exits from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and the Paris
Agreement. The resulting data will be useful to other researchers interested in
international cooperation or in design differences across treaties or over time
and may enable further research on the relationship between treaty design and
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.