* 2016133
* Resolving 20th Century Sea Surface Temperatures in the Central Equatorial Pacific with Laser Sr-U
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 660,664.00

Warming of the surface ocean in the central Pacific affects weather patterns all
over the world. But we currently know little about the past temperature history
of this region which affects model projections of future weather. This project
uses skeletons of 100-year old tropical corals to read ocean temperatures for
the last century. The chemistry of coral skeletons changes when the ocean
temperature changes and this information is stored in growth bands, much like
rings in a tree. Lasers are used to carefully sample the coral skeleton and
build new temperature histories at key locations across the Pacific Ocean. With
these new records scientists can evaluate the size and frequency of large-scale
weather events like El Niño and improve climate models used to predict future
weather conditions. This project supports research experiences and training for
undergraduate students as well as early career mentoring for a postdoctoral
student at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea surface
temperatures (SSTs) of the equatorial Pacific exert an outsize influence on
Earth’s climate system yet the observational record of equatorial Pacific SSTs,
in particular the Nino 3.4 region that is used to define El Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), is sparse prior to the start of the satellite era.
Consequently, ENSO variability and the secular trend in equatorial Pacific SSTs
are poorly constrained over much of the late 19th and 20th centuries with
important implications for validating model projections of future climate. This
project seeks to reconstruct century long, continuous, monthly resolved records
of proxy SST from strategic locations in the central equatorial Pacific (CEP)
using the coral-based Sr-U thermometer. A new laser ablation method is developed
and applied, targeting skeleton accreted between successive monthly
dissepiments, to enable Sr-U based SST reconstruction with monthly resolution.
New monthly-resolved records from Porites coral collected in the western,
central, and eastern equatorial Pacific will be generated to (1) calibrate
monthly-resolved Sr-U versus observed monthly-resolved SST over a temperature
range of 22 deg to 32 deg C and (2) apply the calibration to generate two
century-long SST records at sites in the Nino 3.4 and Nino 4.0 regions. These
sites are strategically located to capture the 20th century SST trend in the
CEP, the frequency and amplitude of ENSO events over the 20th century, and the
relative frequency of central versus east Pacific El Niño over this time period.
The new datasets will help to resolve outstanding questions regarding the
response of the equatorial Pacific mean state and variability to anthropogenic
forcing. Additionally, the project will develop new methods for generating
accurate monthly records of SST from modern and fossil corals and, in doing so,
transform knowledge of the climate of the tropical
Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.