* 2016021
* RESEARCH-PGR: Single-cell Transcriptomic Analyses of Shoot Meristem Ontogeny and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Michael Scanlon, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,545,445.00

The vast majority of cells, tissues and organs that comprise the adult maize
plant are formed long after embryonic stages, due to the activity and
proliferation of plant-specific stem cells called shoot meristems. Shoot
meristems generate organ initial cells, which undergo specific patterns of gene
expression during growth and development to give rise to the complex pattern of
cells and tissues found in the mature plant body. In this way, shoot meristems
arise during embryonic stages and generate all the vegetative structures of the
maize shoot. New advances in genomic technology now enable analyses of gene
expression within individual cells obtained at all stages of maize development,
which promises to generate novel insight into the genetic and genomic mechanisms
of shoot development in this agronomically important crop plant. Embryos make
shoot meristems and shoot meristems make organs. This study will examine the
specific patterns of gene expression in individual cells throughout shoot
development, from early embryonic stages before, during and after shoot meristem
initiation, and during formation of vegetative organs such as leaves, stems, and
branches. These studies will advance our understanding of the cell-specific
mechanisms underlying pattern formation in the maize vegetative shoot, and of
the structure and function of shoot meristems. This project will generate
original data for public release, while providing a framework for scientific
training and teaching of graduate students, undergraduates who are under-
represented in science, and people incarcerated in upstate New York State
prisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pattern formation in the maize shoot begins early
in embryogenesis and occurs across multiple scales, from individual cells and
tissues, to all the organs within the plant. Recent advances now enable analyses
of maize pattern formation at single-cell resolution. The maize shoot apical
meristem (SAM) is a stem cell reservoir responsible for the development of all
shoot-derived organs. This study will generate transcriptomic data from
individual cells in the developing maize shoot, and will decipher the effects of
cell position, cell signaling, rare cell types, and stochasticity on single-cell
gene expression. Single-cell transcriptomic data will be obtained from key
ontogenetic stages ranging from the establishment of embryonic axes, to
formation of the SAM and the first lateral organs of the shoot, to the
development of the seedling SAM and foliar leaf primordia, and during
morphogenesis of the lateral branch meristems that will ultimately give rise to
ears. Likewise, this project will investigate the single-cell transcriptomic
networks within specific, functional domains of the vegetative SAM, and in wild
type versus mutant shoot apices defective in leaf outgrowth to investigate the
transcriptomic networks underlying maize shoot pattern formation throughout
shoot ontogeny, at single-cell resolution. These studies will provide scientific
training and release of original data, and will host minority undergraduate and
high school students for summer research internships. Lastly, the Scanlon lab
will continue teaching at the Elmira Correctional Facility, as part of the
Cornell Prison Education Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded
by the Plant Genome Research Program and the Plant, Fungal and Microbial
Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.