* 2016342
* RUI: Mechanisms of Transcriptional Repression by Sequence Specific Transcription Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Casonya Johnson, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,017,171.00

This project uses an integrated sciences approach to further understanding of
how the cellular machinery coordinates gene expression as an embryo grows and
develops prior to birth and to test computational models of that coordination
from birth through adulthood, allowing scientists to correlate the regulation of
gene expression with critical developmental events like cellular specification
and embryonic morphogenesis. Through a combination of course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) and independent mentored research, undergraduate
students will use genetics, molecular biology, mathematical modeling, and
artificial neural networks to model protein-DNA interactions that inhibit gene
expression, while Masters students will engage in discipline-based education
research (DBER) to understand how CUREs promote student outcomes and student
retention in STEM. This project also promotes the engagement of students and
faculty with scientists from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in
STEM, through a seminar/workshop series titled “Representation Matters” that
aims to increase the retention of underrepresented scientists in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
understand the molecular mechanisms by which HES proteins mediate
transcriptional repression during embryogenesis and to use that information to
test predictions of HES mediated repression genome-wide and across developmental
stages, using Caenorhabditis elegans as a model system. Undergraduates students
will use ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, RNA-interference, and co-immunoprecipitation to
define the cis- and trans-regulatory contexts of HES-mediated repression.
Masters students and a postdoctoral fellow will use ChIP-seq and ChiP-PCR to
determine if promoter or enhancer occupancy by HES proteins influences RNA
polymerase occupancy or chromatin status. These data will be used to build
models and to test predictions of HES-mediated repression during embryogenesis
using deep learning or neural network semi-supervised models. The broader
impacts objective of this project is to provide foundational research
experiences for undergraduate and Masters students while enhancing training and
mentoring experiences of students from underrepresented groups. A multi-faceted
approach that includes mentored research experiences, CUREs that reinforce
fundamental principles in biology and that introduce computational modeling, and
activities that intentionally promote professional and social interactions
between students and scientists of color, will examine perceived and actual
outcomes of student learning, self-identification and social
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.