* 2016756
* Regulation of flower development by ERECTA family receptors and EPFL ligands.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Elena Shpak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 857,340.00

A remarkable variety of plant shapes are observed in nature. Wasp-shaped orchid
flowers, gigantic stinking corpse lilies, towering sequoia trees, and massive
baobabs are just a few conspicuous examples. While there are a limited number of
building blocks that make up a plant (a root, an internode, a leaf, and a
flower), the shape and size of these organs vary greatly, giving rise to the
prolific variation in plant appearance. Driven by natural selection, the form of
an organ is directly related to its function. The shape of a flower promotes
effective pollination, and the size and shape of leaves allow for optimal
photosynthesis with minimal harm by heat and drought. An important driver of
organ shape is establishment of an active growth region and of boundary zones
where cells divide very slowly. This project investigates molecular mechanisms
controlling the shape of flower organs and formation of boundary zones during
various stages of flower development. It examines the initiation and spacing of
ovules, which will contribute to understanding how the number of seeds is
established within a fruit. To support education, a website will be created with
links to high-quality videos aimed at undergraduate level Plant Physiology
courses. The proposed research will also promote education through the training
of postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. A special
effort will be made to attract minorities to the research program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The shape of a plant depends on the timing of cell proliferation, the
extent of cell elongation, and the establishment of boundaries. These processes
rely on coordinated cell behavior and require cell-to-cell communications. One
of the key signaling pathways regulating plant morphogenesis is initiated by the
ERECTA family (ERf) of receptors and their extracellular ligands, EPFLs. This
pathway is important for morphogenesis of all aboveground organs; however, the
specific developmental processes that are targeted are not known. This project
will study ERf-EPFL signaling during morphogenesis of flowers, a complex
developmental program requiring numerous avenues of coordinated differentiation
and proliferation of cells. It will explore the function of ERf-EPFLs during
formation of a variety of flower structures including ovules, integuments, and
anthers with the goal of identifying processes similarly controlled in different
tissues. The role of ERf-EPFL signaling will be studied in specification of
boundaries between outgrowing structures and in modification of auxin transport
during outgrowth of protrusions. The experimental design includes genetic
studies, imaging, next-generation sequencing, and biochemical approaches. Taken
together, the proposed activities have the potential to uncover novel molecular
mechanisms controlling morphogenesis in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.