* 2016212
* A Strategic Plan Towards Developing a New Associate Degree Program in Radiation Health Physics at Navajo Technical University
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Abraham Meles, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 10/31/2022
* USD 49,858.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, allowing the institution's faculty and
administrators to design and develop a comprehensive plan for improving and
expanding STEM instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navajo Technical University
(NTU) serves the Navajo Nation. NTU has partnered with the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC), and Chattanooga State Community College (CSCC) for developing
its strategic plan towards developing a Radiation Health Physics Associate
Degree program. NRC has an ongoing relationship with NTU and will bring in
professionals in the field with rich experience and knowledge in training,
program designing, course standardization, certifications and current practices
in the radiation physics area. CSCC has successful experience in planning and
implementing the radiation protection program. NTU has assembled a team that not
only has immense experience in the field of radiation physics, but also has new
program building experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.