* 2016396
* Metagenomic-enabled rapid development of multiple biomarkers for trace organic contaminant biodegradation through Functional gene Amplicon Sequencing tests (FASt)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Julia Sharp, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Trace organic contaminants (TOrCs) are widespread in US water systems. Among the
most prevalent TOrCs are personal care products, antibiotics, flame-retardants,
pesticides, and herbicides. Toxicological studies suggest that chronic exposure
to many TOrCs may cause cancer and negatively affect human fetal development.
TOrCs are difficult to remove in conventional wastewater treatment plants,
resulting in widespread dispersal in receiving waters. Biological treatment,
which uses bacteria that degrade TOrCs, is a promising technology that could be
implemented within existing treatment plants to remove TOrCs and prevent their
release. However, no tools are currently available to monitor these specific
bacteria capable of degrading TOrCs. The goal of this project is to address the
critical need for next-generation monitoring tools to validate and optimize the
performance of biological wastewater treatment systems. To achieve this goal,
researchers will develop FASt (Functional gene Amplicon Sequencing tests), a
next-generation gene sequencing technology to identify specific “functional
genes” found only in TOrC degrading bacteria. Successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of new knowledge and tools
to monitor and optimize the removal efficiency of TOrCs in wastewater treatment
systems. Further benefits to society will be achieved through education,
research training, and outreach to teachers through a Research Experience for
Future Teachers program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all wastewater, storm
water, and surface water systems in the Nation have some levels of trace organic
contaminants (TOrCs) like personal care products, antibiotics, pesticides, and
herbicides. One promising solution for tackling TOrC pollution is through
modification of conventional municipal wastewater treatment facilities to employ
biological treatment systems to remove TOrCs. However, progress towards
employing this technology has been slow as current approaches often use a “black
box” approach to establish and manage TOrC treatment reactor microbiomes. This
is due to the bottleneck created by the lack of biomarkers that can directly
probe genetic potential and activity for TOrC biodegradation. The goal of this
project is to address this bottleneck by developing a suite of biomarkers for
aerobic TOrC biodegradation using a new approach based on Functional gene
Amplicon Sequencing tests (FASt). A key novel feature of this project is the
implementation of a functional gene amplicon generation method known as rhAmp
polymerase chain reaction (rhAmp PCR), which can amplify hundreds of potential
biomarker genes simultaneously. Specific research objectives to achieve this
goal are to 1) identify functional gene biomarkers for TOrC biodegradation using
FASt; 2) validate the new biomarkers using metabolomics; and 3) translate
project findings into field-deployable assays. Successful completion of this
project will transform our ability to rapidly monitor and optimize the
performance of TOrC-degrading microorganisms in wastewater treatment systems
through the development of new biomarker-based tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.