* 2016141
* NSF-BSF: Identifying genetic mechanisms underpinning eye loss in troglomorphic arachnids
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Prashant Sharma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,476,836.00

Cave habitats are remarkable environments for the study of biological
adaptations and morphological convergence. One compelling trait that has
repeatedly evolved in cave-dwelling organisms is loss of the eyes. Predatory
arthropods like arachnids (e.g., spiders and harvestmen) play an important role
in cave ecosystems and the group includes many examples of cave-adapted blind
species. However, remarkably little is known about how arachnid eyes develop,
much less how these eyes are lost in cave-specialized arachnids. This binational
project brings together a US-Israeli team to advance understanding the
evolutionary developmental biology of arachnid eyes. To examine how eyes are
lost in cave-adapted arachnids, embryonic development will be compared for a
sister-species pair in each of three arachnid orders (spiders, whip spiders, and
harvestmen) that will be collected through intensive fieldwork campaigns; in
each pair, a surface species bears eyes and its sister species is blind. To
determine the genomic basis for eye degeneration, high-quality reference genomes
will be established for these six species, together with profiling of gene
expression using parallelized short read sequencing. To validate predictions of
key genes putatively underlying cave adaptations that are inferred from genomic
datasets, gene silencing screens will be performed in two model arachnid
species, with the goal of establishing a direct link between patterns observed
in nature and functional datasets in the laboratory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By
comparison to better-studied vertebrate and pancrustacean (e.g., insects; isopod
crustaceans) models, eye development in Chelicerata remains poorly studied. With
respect to the developmental genetics of arachnid eyes, no datasets are
available beyond in situ hybridization assays; even the morphogenesis of
arachnid eyes remains underexplored from the perspective of modern imaging
toolkits, relative to vertebrate and pancrustacean counterparts. Yet, the
arachnid eye is of interest from the standpoint of comparative biology for two
reasons. First, in contrast to the main pair of compound (faceted) eyes of
pancrustaceans, arachnids bear multiple eye pairs broadly divided into two types
of ocelli, which are structurally and functionally distinct from each other. A
further complexity of arachnids is that a subset of orders that includes
lineages like scorpions and spiders has undergone a shared genome duplication,
resulting in numerous paralogs of retinal determinal gene network (RDGN)
homologs, which are involved in patterning eyes of many other bilaterian groups.
The proposed work will interrogate the development of arachnid eyes using a
comparative framework that samples three key arachnid orders, toward
establishing a comparative platform incorporating independently evolving
lineages for study of cave biology, as well as for understanding the evolution
of paralog function after genome duplication. Beyond establishing new model
systems for study of arthropod development, this research will establish new
genomic resources and toolkits for deciphering the evolution of developmental
processes inferred from naturally evolving cave
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research award from the Directorate of
Biological Sciences is funded by the Developmental Systems and EDGE Programs
within the Division of Integrative and Organismal Systems, and by the
Evolutionary Processes Program within the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.