* 2016393
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Quicksilver: A Write-oriented, Private, Outsourced Database Management System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kartik Ravidas Nayak, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,987.00

Businesses, non-profits, and other organizations are increasingly outsourcing
their database needs to third-party cloud providers. The cloud offers many
competitive advantages over on-premises deployments including lower costs, high
availability, unprecedented scalability, and ease of deployment and maintenance.
At the same time, the rise of a hybrid transaction and analytics processing
(HTAP) systems presents an additional promise to address the need for real-time
data-driven business intelligence by supporting both transactional as well as
analytical functions in a single platform. Privacy, legal, and political
constraints, however, require organizations to minimize and formally quantify
the information leaked outside their organizational boundaries. While there has
been much work on building query answering systems on untrusted hardware using
encrypted databases and multiparty computation, almost none of these efforts
handle database updates, support transactions with interleaving operations, or
offer recovery from failures while ensuring strong privacy guarantees. This work
will exploit synergies among four areas of research -- databases, oblivious
RAMs, secure multiparty computation, and differential privacy. Quicksilver will
make it possible to query sensitive data while outsourcing database operations
to untrusted cloud providers and this work will have immediate implications for
healthcare, federal statistical agencies such as the US Census Bureau, finance,
and education. The investigators will integrate this research into a
comprehensive education, dissemination and outreach plan that will result in (a)
new graduate and undergraduate and graduate courses with open-source materials,
(b) the mentoring of graduate students -- especially women and URMs -- on
techniques for thriving during their studies, (c) open-source lesson plans for
high school teachers on data science, and (d) courses for employees of federal
agencies on these topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators will design, implement, and evaluate principled techniques for
data processing on untrusted third-party platforms. The investigators will first
design and implement efficient protocols for updating databases using techniques
in cryptography, differential privacy, and systems. They will then create and
evaluate algorithms for privacy-preserving concurrency control so that
Quicksilverâ€™s transactions will offer interleaving transactions with atomicity,
consistency, isolation, and durability (ACID), the gold standard of database
systems. In addition, this work will result in protocols for transaction
recovery under secure computation when individual cloud nodes fail mid-
transaction. This research will reveal novel techniques in oblivious query
processing, secure multiparty computation, and differentially-private
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.