* 2016617
* Integrated Research and Education on Metal Alloys with On-Demand Optical Response
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Marina Leite, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 281,548.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the need for improved
computational speed, researchers are constantly searching for ways of surpassing
the limit of today's microelectronics industry. One alternative is to use light
instead of electrons. Thus, scientists and engineers have been developing
devices based on metals instead of semiconductors, which can squeeze light into
extremely small structures (less than one thousandth the thickness of a human
hair, i.e. at the nanoscale). The performance of these so-called plasmonic
devices heavily depends on the optical response of the metals, e.g., how much
light is transmitted, reflected and absorbed. To date, the metallic building
blocks are made of coin age metals, such as Au, Ag and Cu, with well defined
color and, thus, pre-determined optical properties. In order to overcome the
existing limitations of pure metals used in nanoscale plasmonics, the Leite
group at the University of Maryland will investigate the optical response of
mixed metals, or alloys. For that, they will design and fabricate alloyed thin
films and nanoscale structures by mixing Au, Ag, Cu and Al, and model/measure
their behavior upon illumination by using a set of characterization tools.
Controlling the optical properties of alloyed metals can tremendously benefit
the fields of nanoscale photonics, photovoltaics, and sensors. This project will
involve high school and undergraduate students from under-represented groups in
STEM to help them secure leading careers in science and technology by providing
them with the opportunity to perform research in materials science. The
scientific findings from this project will be widely disseminated through
visually appealing illustrations, to promote science and engineering to the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The future
development of nanophotonic devices critically depends on the dielectric
function of the metallic building blocks composing the structures. The research
objective of this proposal is to develop and implement a new class of metallic
thin films and nanostructures with tunable optical properties, i.e., dielectric
functions. For that, the Leite group will combine computational materials
science with experimental research to design and fabricate alloyed thin films
and nanostructures formed by Ag, Au, Cu and Al. The optical response of these
alloys will be characterized by ellipsometry and near-field optical microscopy.
Alloyed nanoparticles will be applied to solar cells to improve the device
performance by increasing light absorption within the semiconductor. This
research will advance fundamental materials science by combining two almost
orthogonal fields, metallurgy and plasmonics, enabling the design and
fabrication of metal-alloyed nanostructures with on-demand optical response not
found in nature. The development of these optical materials may have a
potentially transformative effect on future nanophotonic devices by enabling the
complete control of their dielectric function and, therefore, creating superior
optical performance. While multiple experiments have demonstrated how pure
metals can be used to trap light inside solar cells, there are neither numerical
nor experimental demonstrations using alloys.