* 2016614
* University of Minnesota/Blue Heron SSSE 2020
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Richard Ricketts, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 36,375.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) for the
R/V Blue Heron, an 86-foot Coastal research vessel owned by the University of
Minnesota and operated by the Large Lakes Observatory as part of the US Academic
Research Fleet (ARF). Built in 1985 for fishing on the Grand Banks, Blue Heron
was purchased by the University of Minnesota in 1997. She is outfitted with
state-of-the-art research equipment, has berthing for 11 crew and scientists,
and can operate 24 hours per day for up to 21 days in between port calls. The
Blue Heron is part of the University National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS), and is available for charter by research scientists on any of the Great
Lakes. In 2019, the vessel completed 81 funded days where 531 (66%) were for
NSF. In 2020, Blue Heron is currently scheduled for 99 days, 84 of these (85%)
will be for NSF. With this proposal, Minnesota provides technical descriptions
and rationale for the acquisition of the following
Equipment:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radar upgrade for the R/V Blue Heron
$21,605&lt;br/&gt;Forward looking sonar for the R/V Blue Heron
$14,770&lt;br/&gt; $36,375&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.