* 2016474
* GOALI: Dynamics of Ultrasound-Responsive Polymeric Systems: from Atoms to Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Safranski, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 620,804.00

Shape memory polymers are an emerging class of smart materials that have the
ability to return from a deformed temporary shape to their original permanent
shape when subjected to an external stimulus such as heat, light, and a magnetic
field. These polymers have recently gained substantial interest in many
applications including robotics, biomedical devices, and soft electronics. In
many of these applications, there is an immediate industrial need for replacing
conventional triggering methods for actuating the polymers with a more efficient
and flexible method. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) grant will investigate high-intensity focused ultrasound as a novel and
promising stimulus with unique capabilities to actuate the controlled shape
recovery of shape memory polymers. Focused ultrasound actuates the polymer
remotely and locally, is noninvasive, and is biocompatible. These properties
make the methodology a superior candidate, particularly for biomedical
applications. The research will be integrated into industrial practice by the
industrial partner, MedShape Inc., to provide practical approaches for the
fabrication of ultrasound-sensitive polymers for medical applications. MedShape
Inc. will fabricate industrial shape memory polymer actuators and provide
student internship opportunities. The outcomes of this research award will
increase the core competencies of U.S. medical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the experiments and
multiscale modeling of the dynamics of shape memory polymers under high-
intensity focused ultrasound fields. The research aims at filling a knowledge
gap in terms of considering time-variant and nonlinear effects associated with
high excitation levels in acoustic-responsive polymers. A multiphysics framework
will be established to bridge the dynamical deformation mechanisms at the
atomistic scale to the response of the polymer at the macroscale. This framework
will then be combined with experiments to efficiently design the chemical
composition and crystalline structure of ultrasound-responsive polymers, based
on extrinsic length scales and intrinsic material properties. The output of the
research effort will unravel the unknown mechanisms of acoustic-induced thermal
actuation, by which ultrasound waves heat polymers, and help in optimizing the
dynamic processes of shape fixation and recovery of shape memory polymer
structures in high-intensity focused ultrasound fields. The findings will also
uncover how the geometrical aspects of the additively manufactured shape memory
polymers will affect the dynamics of the polymer in various ultrasound fields.
In collaboration with the industrial partner, MedShape Inc., the approach
developed in the research supported by this award will be utilized to design and
fabricate novel ultrasound-responsive polymer-based devices with medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.