* 2016623
* Collaborative Research: Spatial and temporal patterns of secondary tropical forest succession
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Karen Holl, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2024
* USD 349,443.00

Around the world, there is growing interest in restoring forests, which improve
water quality, store carbon, conserve biodiversity, and ensure human wellbeing.
But there are few long-term studies to guide forest restoration, especially in
the tropics. This project builds on an existing long-term, experiment that
compares different ways of restoring tropical forest. The research will measure
how well forests are recovering after nearly two decades of different treatments
at many sites. The study will also answer questions about how important nearby
forest patches are to the recovery of the restored sites. Results will provide
critical guidance to land managers and policymakers on how and where to invest
limited resources to improve forest restoration efforts. The project will
develop online lessons about forest management and restoration for college-level
students and continue an inquiry-based learning program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 15 years ago, 12 experimental sites
were established over a 100 square-kilometer area in southern Costa Rica. Sites
are surrounded by a range of low to high forest cover. Each site has three
experimental treatments: (1) low intensity -- no tree planting and natural
recovery, (2) medium intensity -- planting tree islands of three sizes, and (3)
high intensity -- planting the entire plot with trees. New research activities
will include conducting an intensive survey of all tree recruits in restoration
and reference forest plots for the first time to thoroughly quantify rare,
later-successional recruits. A detailed map of forest cover and individual focal
tree species surrounding the sites will be created to assess the importance of
proximity to seed sources. To better understand factors limiting forest
recovery, investigators will measure seed dispersal and conduct seed-additional
experiments. Overall, the project will use field data and remote sensing
techniques to address a host of key debates in tropical community ecology about
the dynamics of later-successional tree recruitment. These debates include the
relative importance of seed dispersal, seedling establishment, and tree growth
in determining secondary forest community composition; the degree to which
manipulations of initial site conditions affect changes in species composition
over time; and the importance of landscape-scale processes on long-term forest
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.