* 2016529
* PFI-TT: A Mechanical Testing System to Characterize the Heterogeneous Deformation of Material at Microscopic Length Scales
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Ajit Achuthan, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2023
* USD 386,776.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a new market in the mechanical
testing industry sector. The proposed mechanical testing system is a
sophisticated, experimental capability that allows the strength of materials to
be tested. The testing system will facilitate the design and development of next
generation advanced metallic alloys. By enabling advanced research and
development in the fields of material science, engineering, and manufacturing,
the microstructures of materials may be better understood and controlled. The
project will train a graduate student in entrepreneurial leadership at the
partners’ sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will fill a critical
gap in the field of mechanical testing and characterization technology. The
proposed mechanical testing system, essentially a suite of software tools along
with supporting hardware, characterizes the local, heterogeneous deformation on
a microstructural length scale under a uniform tensile loading to determine the
influence of various microstructural features on the mechanical properties. The
system, based on an inverted microscope, primarily consists of a smart imaging
subsystem, a feature detection and tracking subsystem, and a material modeling
subsystem. The smart imaging subsystem will maintain the focus and field of view
during the tensile testing performed with a microtensile testing device. The
feature detection and tracking subsystem will capture the deformation of
microstructural features. The material modeling subsystem will characterize the
deformation and derive relationships between material properties and the
characteristics of the deformation. In the proposed project, the technical
feasibility of these subsystems will be demonstrated leading to the building of
a preliminary prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.