* 2016003
* A NOVEL THEORETICAL AND QUANTITATIVE FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND AND PREDICT SOIL CARBON STORAGE AND NITROGEN RECYCLING
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* yao zhang, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 741,144.00

Soils play an important role in the global carbon cycle. Carbon that enters the
soil as leaf litter or woody debris can lie dormant for hundreds to thousands of
years, or it can be released to the atmosphere almost immediately as a byproduct
of decomposition by microbes. The residence time of carbon in the soil, which
impacts the availability of nutrients essential to plants, is influenced by the
physical and chemical structure of the soil, and by moisture and temperature.
Through laboratory experiments using soils harvested from different habitats,
and a comparison with observational data collected from a range of biomes, this
project will infer which factors are most important in determining how carbon
moves into and out of soil, and how their relative importance changes across
environmental gradients. The researchers will use newly collected and analyzed
data to refine models of soil carbon dynamics, with the aim of advancing our
understanding of how interactions between environmental conditions, vegetation,
and soil characteristics drive carbon and nitrogen cycling across different
ecosystems. The project will engage undergraduates and K-12 teachers to develop
and sustain a Soil Inquiry project for the local School District, including a
recurring public event on World Soil Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will develop an open-access ecosystem model (MEMS 2.0) based a comprehensive
conceptual framework for soil organic matter dynamics. They will evaluate the
conceptual framework through a combination of controlled experiments, data
synthesis, statistical analyses, and process-based modeling. They will perform
experiments manipulating drivers of soil C and N cycling to evaluate the effects
of different edaphic characteristics on soil C storage and N loss. Leveraging
soil organic matter and elemental and isotopic analyses of soil samples from all
the National Ecological Observatory Network sites and other existing datasets,
they will develop a relational database and test their hypotheses using
traditional multivariate statistics and structural equation modeling. They will
then calibrate the MEMS 2.0 model using data form across the US. Finally, MEMS
2.0 will be used to forecast C and N dynamics under different temperature and
precipitation regimes. This project will help to bridge the historical gap
between modelers and experimentalists and train a new generation of scientists
to effectively span these domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.