* 2016530
* PFI-TT: Commercializing a Passive Orthopedic Implant that Distributes Movement Between Tendons
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ravi Balasubramanian, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 373,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation--
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is three-fold. First, in terms of
societal impact, the project will develop biomedical implants that enables
better surgical outcomes and quality of life for patients that undergo
reconstructive orthopedic surgeries. Importantly, these implants are passive---
that is, they do not use external power, signals, motors, or electronics. The
proposed technology is different from existing solutions such as prostheses,
orthoses, and exoskeletons as the implants enable the patient to make better use
of their own muscle after a debilitating trauma. Second, the project may pave
the way for a new market for orthopedic implants that, when mounted on tendons,
enable re-engineering the force and movement transmission within the body.
Third, this team will educate and train the next generation of engineering
students to become leaders in commercializing novel biomedical implants and will
conduct activities to increase the participation of women, under-represented
minorities, and persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will advance the development of an implantable passive device for use in
reconstructive orthopedic surgery. Specifically, there are many hand surgeries
where multiple tendons are rigidly sutured to one muscle. Such surgeries only
partially restore hand function. This project will develop an implant which,
when surgically inserted between biological flexor tendons, will significantly
improve hand grasping capability for patients even if all four fingers are
driven by only one muscle. The project’s intellectual merit is two-fold. First,
the work will develop the science for the design, fabrication, and validation of
pores that encourage long-term attachment between the implant and the tendon.
Second, the team will also design, fabricate, and validate a non-fouling coating
that reduces scar tissue formation and increases the implant’s slickness. The
project considers the needs to reduce scarring on the implant's exterior surface
while enabling tendon cells to migrate into the implant's pores for long-term
attachment. It is expected that the project may produce design and fabrication
techniques to enhance tendon-implant attachment and reduce adverse biological
response to implanted materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.