* 2016963
* Collaborative Research: Context Dependence across Categories: Bridging Developmental, Experimental, and Theoretical Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kristen Syrett, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 266,853.00

The ability to categorize entities in the world is a fundamental part of human
cognition. Language plays a central role in this process. Yet in many cases in
natural language, categorization is impossible without further information from
the context. Such is the case, for example, with gradable adjectives such as
'tall', where meaning shifts from context to context, and even with nouns. How
do children succeed at assembling their lexicon and determining reference when
faced with such shifting, context-dependent meanings? This project pursues this
question by examining the context-dependence that arises in one of the most
basic and earliest-acquired categories: count nouns. The study of such nouns and
corresponding concepts has stood at the center of research on infancy, the
count/mass and object/substance distinctions, and language typology. Thus, the
anticipated results from this research will have broad and interdisciplinary
impact. In particular, the findings will offer insights into the ways language
and cognition are intertwined in the course of development, and deepen our
understanding of how contextual information influences meaning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes as its starting point a well-
established finding that young children allow object fragments to be treated on
par with whole objects as referents for corresponding nouns like 'fork' or
'cup'. The key hypothesis of this research is that this apparent non-adult
behavior stems from children's difficulties in using contextual information to
enrich an inherently context-dependent nominal meaning. A series of behavioral
experiments with children and adults compares nominal gradability with gradable
adjectives, with the goal of using these behavioral responses to (a) identify a
developmental linguistic trajectory, (b) dissociate category/concept-specific
from more general aspects of gradability and context-dependence, and (c) tease
apart parts of meaning contributed by semantics and pragmatics. Significant
efforts will be directed towards mentoring, hands-on training, and education at
the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels, as well as community
outreach. The findings will advance scientific discovery by being incorporated
into classes and will be disseminated broadly in scholarly
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.