* 2016495
* PFI-TT: Development of Miniature Induction Heaters for Cancer Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Eduardo Juan, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 329,056.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of novel, miniature,
induction-heating devices for medical applications. More specifically, the
broader impact of the project lies in the availability of smaller, more focused
magnetic field applicators that can be used in patients with metallic implants
(i.e., hip replacement implants, stents, etc.) that would otherwise be
ineligible to receive magnetic nanoparticle-based cancer therapies. Magnetic
nanoparticle-based cancer treatments require the development of new medical
procedures requiring in situ, non-contact heating of electrically conductive
materials in hard to reach places within the human body. The project will also
provide education and leadership development in innovation and entrepreneurship
to the faculty, postdoctoral scholar, and students involved in the proposed
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project envisions the design,
development, characterization, and testing of a series of miniature, induction-
heating devices for medical applications. Such devices may be used in magnetic
fluid hyperthermia (MFH) prostate cancer treatment. The value proposition of the
technology lies in offering patients with metallic implants near the pelvis the
possibility of undergoing MFH prostate cancer therapy. The intellectual merit of
the proposed research encompasses the development of magnetic field generators
that do not currently exist and that may allow a more localized MFH prostate
cancer therapy due to the ability to heat electrically conductive materials in
hard-to-reach places within the human body. The team will determine the
capabilities of the proposed technology in heating magnetic nanoparticles to
kill cancer cells in vitro and determine the devices' capabilities in heating
magnetic nanoparticles to ablate porcine tissues and estimate the severity and
extent of tissue damage under different operating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.