* 2016540
* Structural Biology of Tetrahymena Telomerase Interactions at Telomeres
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Juli Feigon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 870,000.00

Telomerase is a special enzyme composed of proteins and RNA that maintains the
DNA at the very ends of our chromosomes, called telomeres. Telomerase is a
highly regulated determinant of stem cell renewal, aging, and tumorigenesis. In
this research project, the PI will investigate the structure and function of
proteins that interact with telomerase and telomeres. The project will use
telomerase and telomere binding proteins from the model organism Tetrahymena, a
ciliated protozoan, which has previously led to basic discoveries. This project
will provide essential training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
in structural biology and biophysics and help them become the next generation of
leaders in this multidisciplinary field. This project will also train women,
minority, and economically disadvantaged high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students to pursue careers in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomerase
is an RNA-protein complex (RNP) that extends the 3’ ends of linear chromosomes
by repetitively synthesizing the short telomere repeat sequence (TTGGGG in
ciliates) using an RNA template embedded in its telomerase RNA (TER) and its
specialized telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). Telomerase activity at
telomeres counteracts the loss of DNA that would otherwise occur during each
round of replication. Telomerase is recruited to telomeres and activated by
telomere end protection proteins, which otherwise serve to protect telomere ends
from being detected as double strand breaks by the DNA damage response. This
project will use NMR spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography, cryo electron
microscopy (cryoEM), and biochemical methods to investigate the structures and
interactions of Tetrahymena telomerase 741 and TEB with p50 and with telomere
end-protection proteins, to elucidate their roles in telomeric DNA synthesis,
regulation, and end protection. This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.