* 2016714
* CCRI: Planning: Collaborative Research: Low-Latency for Augmented Reality Interactive Systems (LLARIS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Francisco Ortega, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 132,200.00

Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (AR/VR) technologies can massively reshape
human interactions, industrial applications, urban planning, education, and many
other fields. An AR application typically captures data from a physical device,
sends them to a remote server (increasingly hosted through cloud platforms) for
processing, and the server then returns the results to the application. These
interactions need to happen quickly. The threshold network delay that an AR
application can tolerate is typically between 10 to 50 milliseconds. However,
when cloud-hosted servers are involved, the actual latency can be much more than
50 milliseconds. Since the speed of light limits network latency, merely
creating faster networks with more bandwidth will not solve this problem.
Instead, we must move the computation closer to the network's edge while
exploiting the computational capacity of the existing cloud platforms. This
planning proposal advances state of the art by (1) leveraging collaborative
planning (more ideas, perspectives) to develop higher quality, widely usable
infrastructure for human-computer interaction researchers; (2) engaging a large
group of human-computer interaction and networking researchers in the planning
phase, which encourages and increases infrastructure adoption; (3) providing
valuable, comprehensive findings applicable to multiple research areas, like
machine learning, that will offer researchers novel information to advance their
work; and (4) producing a proof-of-concept prototype for future AR
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand is rapidly growing for AR in
domains such as manufacturing industry, aviation, education, entertainment, and
defense. This project explores how to build the next-generation infrastructure
for next-generation AR systems that will become pervasive in people's everyday
life. This project not only contributes to the human-computer interaction and
networking community but also contributes to the Future of the Work at the
Human-Technology Frontier (one of National Science Foundation's 10 big ideas),
launches collaborative explorations between computer scientists and
cognitive/learning scientists on how to make learning AR applications easier,
and produces new interdisciplinary courses. The groundwork laid by this work
paves the path for the next-generation research infrastructure and
transformative computing and communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.