* 2016363
* Collaborative Research: Learning by Touch: Preparing Blind Students to Participate in the Data Science Revolution
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sile O'Modhrain, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 328,112.00

Over the past decade the data science revolution has transformed the way
scientists, engineers, and businesses work. A key enabler is the rise of
interactive data visualization tools, which allow users to filter, analyze, and
understand large data sets. Beyond static charts and graphs, interactive data
visualization allows users to view data in different ways and from different
perspectives, to build deeper understanding of trends, and to test hypotheses.
However, Blind and Visually Impaired People have not been able to fully
participate in this data revolution. Common tools for data analysis and data
exploration are based on interactive spatial graphics, displayed on 2D screens.
These spatial diagrams, charts, and other representations are not easily
conveyed through speech or text – the typical ways in which Blind and Visually
impaired people consume information through computers. This lack of access to
common tools has presented a barrier for Blind and Visually Impaired People to
enter STEM fields. History teaches us that, with the right tools, Blind and
Visually Impaired People can contribute fully to highly technical fields. For
example, many blind people are engaged as programmers and network administrators
across a range of industries. It is evident that, if Blind and Visually Impaired
People are provided with accessible tools that are functionally equivalent to
those used by others and are able to interact with and generate their own data,
they will take their place in the world of work, alongside their sighted peers.
To address these issues, this project will work to: (1) increase understanding
of data literacy amongst Blind and Visually Impaired People; (2) develop new
tools and techniques, using touch and audio, to help prepare Blind and Visually
Impaired People’s to understand and explore data. This is expected to begin to
increase access to STEM concepts and materials in the BVI community, where
access has previously been limited. Spatial information is ubiquitous in STEM;
finding effective ways to make it accessible to everyone is imperative.
Increasing access to Interactive Data Visualization tools will help prepare the
Blind and Visually Impaired to participate as data scientists, software
engineers, and informed citizens.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will work
to make fundamental contributions in the fields of information visualization,
assistive technology, and haptic perception, advancing our understanding of
techniques for effective encoding and exploration of spatial information in
alternate forms to graphical representation. It will also expand on guidelines
for multi-modal haptic interaction with spatial information and create new open
source software to enable these interactions. Finally, it will contribute to the
field of informal STEM learning, providing understanding about data literacy and
personal data exploration as a pathway to engage the Blind and Visually Impaired
community in data science and STEM activities. The research will use a mixed
methods approach, using co-design, qualitative and longitudinal field studies,
and quantitative lab studies. Through 4 synergistic research themes, this
project will expand knowledge of broadening access to interactive data
visualization for Blind and Visually Impaired People by investigating: (1)
current practices, gaps and needs in data literacy for Blind and Visually
Impaired People; (2) how task goals affect exploration strategies for tactile
perception of data for BVI people; (3) data exploration and manipulation
strategies through co-design using an interactive tactile display; and (4) the
efficacy of interactive tactile data exploration to expand data literacy for BVI
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.