* 2016397
* CCRI: Planning: RecommendNews: Community Research Infrastructure for Online Field Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Joseph Konstan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This planning grant will develop a shared vision and the partnerships required
for an innovative research infrastructure that includes not only a computer
system but also a community of users, for the development of new forms of
recommender system applied to online news. There are three key broader impacts
for this planning grant, and the subsequent infrastructure based on the plan.
First, news recommendation has clear societal importance. Organizing the
research community to support work on diversity, transparency, credibility, and
effective news recommendation is a benefit not only for research, but for
society. Second, the planned infrastructure has the potential to benefit not
only the core research communities targeted, but also other research communities
across the nation and around the world, including those in journalism and mass
communication. Third, the planning process will engage a diverse set of
researchers, including many from areas traditionally underserved, to extend the
impact of this work as far as possible.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The design,
construction, and governance of this infrastructure has significant research
challenges. In this case, the system is a news recommender application (plus the
back-end to support it) and the users will be people who read news through the
application. The infrastructure also includes experimental controls to allow
researchers to run experiments by varying the recommendation algorithms and
interfaces of the application and measuring results. Such infrastructure can
reinvigorate research in recommender systems by enabling new applications, study
designs, and success metrics. Central to this project is a series of outreach
activities and planning meetings for the community. These range from a broad
survey and a community forum for 100 researchers (held in conjunction with a
conference) to smaller meetings of intended users and partners in
implementation. These meetings will identify community needs and priorities,
design both the infrastructure itself and the governance models needed to
operate it, and develop models to ensure sustainability. This planning effort
will engage a diverse subset of the research community in deep and thoughtful
discussions about what research we are unable to carry out in academic settings
today, what research we value, and what infrastructure we need to advance
research in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.