* 2016571
* High-Fidelity Radiotherapy Treatment Planning via Dimension-Free Zeroth-Order Algorithms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hongcheng Liu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 325,487.00

This award will contribute to the Nation's health and welfare by improving
methods for radiation therapy (radiotherapy) in the treatment of cancer.
Radiotherapy has long been used as a prevalent mode of cancer treatment; its
effectiveness lies in using high-energy radiation to eradicate cancer cells
while sparing the surrounding normal tissue. Underlying the delivery of
radiotherapy are complex optimization algorithms that determine safe and
effective treatment plans. The creation of accurate treatment plans is difficult
due to the high-dimensionality of the problems as well as to uncertainties in
individual response to radiation dosage. This project develops methods to
improve algorithms that guide the delivery of precise amounts of radiation to
target cells. The research results will be integrated into a continuing medical
education program to facilitate collaborations between academics and medical
practitioners. To attract recent high school graduates, especially those from
under-represented communities, into STEM majors, the project team will
participate in the STEPUP outreach program at the University of Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create fundamentally new zeroth-order
algorithmic paradigms that are provably capable of mitigating the The research
plan will study variations of randomized gradient-free algorithms that exploit
computation-facilitating structures such as sparsity and its generalizations.
The project will also derive and analyze algorithms that combine optimization
and deep learning methods in solving problems without the knowledge of closed-
form formulations. In theory, the computational efficiency of these algorithms
is expected to be almost independent of problem dimensionality, up to a
logarithmic term. These algorithms will be integrated with the Monte Carlo
simulators deemed the gold standard in providing accurate modeling of
radiotherapy outcomes. The resulting new treatment planning engines are expected
to improve plan fidelity without increasing the computational cost. Extensive
experiments and comparisons of the methods will be conducted on realistic cancer
treatment data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.