* 2016183
* Impact: Redfining Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty (iREDEFINE ECE); March 2020, Orlando, FL
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Barry Sullivan, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 02/28/2023
* USD 98,648.00

Despite many efforts to increase diversity among electrical and computer
engineering (ECE) faculty, the number of women and underrepresented minorities
on ECE faculty remains alarmingly low. In ECE programs, women compose only 14.3%
and 19.6% of tenured and tenure-track faculty positions, respectively, which is
consistent with their low representation (17.4%) in all engineering
tenured/tenure-track positions in the U.S. The percentage of Black or African
American faculty in electrical and computer engineering is only 2.0% and 3.1%,
respectively. Similarly, only 2.5% of electrical engineering faculty and 2.9% of
computer engineering faculty are Hispanic. Research shows that an effective
strategy to retain underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) is to provide role models and mentors. Thus, the lack of
faculty role models is a major contributing factor to the low representation of
women and minority students in ECE programs, which further perpetuates the cycle
of underrepresentation. “Impact: Redefining Electrical and Computer Engineering
Faculty” (iREDEFINE ECE) is the expansion of an initiative designed to increase
the numbers of such role models for women and underrepresented minorities in ECE
programs through in-person workshops and year-round online mentoring activities.
Surveys of past iREDEFINE participants verify the efficacy of the workshop
approach and support the need for expansion to include year-round activities. In
addition to providing operational support for iREDEFINE activities, this grant
makes the in-person workshops accessible to students from institutions that may
not have the financial resources to support the travel of their PhD
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the iREDEFINE program is to motivate
and prepare PhD women and underrepresented minority students to pursue ECE
faculty positions in US universities. The initiative consists of: 1) a workshop
for women and underrepresented minority graduate ECE students at an annual
meeting of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association
(ECEDHA); 2) mini workshops at regional ECEDHA meetings; 3) a year-round online
mentoring program; and 4) a database of iREDEFINE participants managed by ECEDHA
and open to department heads and chairs to facilitate faculty recruitment from
underrepresented groups. Extending the workshop to two days, adding workshops at
regional conferences, implementing four structured virtual mentoring meetings,
and introducing online communities increases the range of opportunities for
iREDEFINE Scholars to interact and build a stronger rapport with ECE department
heads, industry leaders, and their peers, equipping them with a broad and
diverse professional network. By directly impacting 32 women and
underrepresented minority participants, this project will help to increase the
number of diverse students applying for academic positions in ECE departments
and prepare them for successful academic careers. Furthermore, by connecting the
students with role models who are academic leaders, participating in iREDEFINE
catalyzes an interest in academic administration among iREDEFINE Scholars who
will then become role models for the next generation of women and
underrepresented minority ECE students. Finally, in addition to supporting
participating students in their pursuit of academic careers, these activities
also advance the knowledge on successful strategies to broaden the participation
of women and underrepresented minorities in the ECE
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.