* 2016997
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Security and Preparedness in U.S. Public Schools
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Jocelyn Chua, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

Security is one of the biggest challenges American public schools face today.
Many schools work tirelessly to meet the challenging demand to cultivate spaces
that are not only positive learning environments but are also zones of safety
for all school community members. As schools differ in their security concerns,
they also differ in their conceptions of safety and how their community can best
prepare for future security threats. This project, which provides funding for
the training of a graduate student in anthropology in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, will investigate the role that lived
experience plays in shaping the future of school safety initiatives in American
public schools. Cultivating a more dynamic understanding of school safety
concerns, this project will provide greater understanding of the ways in which
security concerns impact the day-to-day work of school communities in a
localized context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research
project examines how past experiences shape cultural understandings of security
in public schools. Through the use of interviews, focus groups, observations,
and archival research this comparative project will explore how security
concerns are reflected in the implementation of school safety initiatives as
they operate in two public high schools located in the state of Florida. This
project will utilize a mixed methods approach (behavioral observation,
interviews, archival analysis, and focus groups), to ethnographically
investigate how school communities formulate local notions of preparedness in
the development of school safety initiatives. Data with be thematically coded
and analyzed to ascertain how perspectives on school safety initiatives, safety
discourse, and safety simulation exercises are developed and implemented in
varying cultural contexts. By investigating practices of school safety as they
have historically also become related to past experiences and lived realities,
this project moves studies of security beyond the study of state or national
school safety policy, to a more local context where school safety concerns are
lived and experienced. This project will make significant contributions to
theories of security, and anthropological debates around preparedness in the
school context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.