* 2016514
* PFI-TT: Prototyping a Hybrid System for Automated Activity Detection and Monitoring of Construction Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Armin Tajalli, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 02/29/2024
* USD 417,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) is in addressing the lack of cost-effective and
easy-to-use systems for recognizing and monitoring jobsite operations in the
construction industry. The proposed system is a novel solution expected to
assist jobsite managers and equipment owners to better assess the working status
of equipment, to evaluate safety conditions and take preventive/corrective
measures, when necessary. The ability of the system in automatically integrating
and processing data collected from multiple machines will be particularly
beneficial for medium and large size companies where fleets of construction
equipment are utilized to execute larger size projects. This technology
development project will advance the concept of “automated construction
performance monitoring” from simple “location tracking” tools into more
informative and comprehensive “action tracking and control” systems. Research
shows that heavy commercial vehicles used in construction and mining represent
approximately 6% ($42 million) of the total North America fleet management
system market size. The proposed research focuses on the automated tracking and
monitoring component of the fleet management system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project intends to create and empirically test the feasibility of a
hybrid system capable of recognizing, tracking, and recording activities
conducted by construction equipment at jobsites and then process and integrate
the captured data from individual machines to automatically generate and update
managerial information at project (and company) levels. The system consists of a
hardware unit and the data analysis. The hardware unit, specifically designed
and fabricated during this project, will be mounted on each piece of
construction equipment. This hardware unit is capable of capturing three major
sources of data (audio, kinematic, and location data) produced by machines while
performing different tasks. The hardware unit is also capable of wirelessly
communicating the collected data into a central processing unit located at any
physical or virtual location such as a project office. The collected data for
each piece of machinery will be processed and the different activities of the
machine will be recognized based on the sounds and kinematic patterns. The
chronological list of activities will be converted into semantic information
regarding productivity rates and quantities of completed work. The information
collected and computed for individual machines will be integrated and processed
at the project (and company) level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.