* 2016788
* Quantifying the Global Spatial and Temporal Behavior of Kinetic Alfven Waves in the Auroral Zone
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Andreas Keiling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 446,404.00

Alfven waves have been discovered in many astronomical plasmas, such as the Sun
and other planets of the solar system. These are magnetohydrodynamic waves that
carry energy inside the magnetosphere and energize particles. They are crucial
in understanding the boundary between the magnetosphere and ionosphere and in
producing the aurora. This project is a detailed study of this process which is
important for predicting and preparing for space weather effects. Graduate
students will also be supported in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies the role of kinetic Alfven waves (KAW) in magnetosphere-ionosphere
coupling. The work will focus on a statistical, observational study of multi-
year satellite data using superposed epoch analysis, substorm onset lists, and
geomagnetic indices for relating the observations to specific geomagnetic
conditions. The goals are to answer the following: (1) What is the global
spatial distribution and total power of KAW above the auroral acceleration
region (AAR) under various geomagnetic conditions (AE index, substorm, storm)?
(2) What is the temporal evolution of the global distribution and total power of
KAW during different phases of substorms and storms and as a function of time?
(3) What is the contribution of KAW to the Alfven wave budget (including MHD
regime)? (4) What is their significance in the M-I coupling above the AAR in
relation to Alfvenic observations below the AAR and from the generator
region?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.