* 2016849
* Automated Collaboration Assessment Using Behavioral Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Johannes Strobel, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,976.00

The Automated Collaboration Assessment Using Behavioral Analytics project
will&lt;br/&gt;measure and support collaboration as students engage in STEM
learning activities.&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration promotes clarifications of
misconceptions and deeper understanding of concepts&lt;br/&gt;in STEM which
prepares students for future employment in STEM and beyond. This
project&lt;br/&gt;aligns with the goal of the Cyberlearning for Work at the
Human-Technology Frontier program to&lt;br/&gt;fund exploratory research that
supports learners in working productively in technology-rich&lt;br/&gt;STEM
environments. Collaboration is an important learning skill in K-12 STEM
education, yet teachers have few&lt;br/&gt;consistent ways to measure and
support students’ development in this area. This project will&lt;br/&gt;result
in both an improved understanding of productive collaboration and a
prototype&lt;br/&gt;instructional tool that can help teachers identify nonverbal
behaviors and assess overall&lt;br/&gt;collaboration and engagement quality.
Using nonverbal behaviors to assess engagement will&lt;br/&gt;decrease
dependence on discourse and content-based dialogue and increase the
transferability&lt;br/&gt;of this work into different domains. This project is
particularly timely as the ability to collaborate&lt;br/&gt;and engage in group
work are growing requirements in professional and learning settings; at
the&lt;br/&gt;same time the very act of collaboration is being disrupted by the
Coronavirus pandemic and&lt;br/&gt;there is a high likelihood that much of this
“new normal” (social distancing; combining in-person&lt;br/&gt;and remote
collaboration) will be with us for some time. This project will meet the urgent
need&lt;br/&gt;currently felt by educators and educational institutions to
support the development of&lt;br/&gt;collaboration skills among students, even
as the very act of collaboration is shifting and nontraditional&lt;br/&gt;forms
of education are taking hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaboration between the Center for Education Research and&lt;br/&gt;Innovation
(CERI) and Center for Vision Technology (CVT) at SRI International (SRI) and
will&lt;br/&gt;capture multiple students’ actions as they work collaboratively
face-to-face, both in-person and&lt;br/&gt;through a virtual platform. This
project will use a collaboration conceptual&lt;br/&gt;model, multistage
predictive and explainable machine learning models, and video analytics
to&lt;br/&gt;assess and report on collaborative behaviors and interactions. The
behavior analytics system&lt;br/&gt;will use facial expressions, body movements,
and meta-information about the collaboration task&lt;br/&gt;to identify
interactions that show how students contribute to the collaboration,
individually and&lt;br/&gt;collectively. This 2-year project will use
reliability and model prediction testing and sequential,&lt;br/&gt;correlation,
and thematic analyses of video recordings, surveys, interviews, and student
artifacts&lt;br/&gt;to answer the following research questions: Can machine
learning models reliably assess&lt;br/&gt;collaboration when compared to human
assessments? How do individual behaviors during&lt;br/&gt;collaboration lead and
relate to group level interactions and collaboration quality? and Can
we&lt;br/&gt;validate and relate the assessed collaboration behaviors to student
outcomes as represented by&lt;br/&gt;group-generated artifacts? The intellectual
merits include contributions to the advancement of&lt;br/&gt;two fields: (1)
machine learning— by developing and exploring new algorithms that
generate&lt;br/&gt;explainable collaboration skill assessments and
teacher/student dashboards at different grain&lt;br/&gt;sizes of the
interactions, and (2) learning sciences—by contributing a collaboration
conceptual&lt;br/&gt;model that shows how specific skills, interactions, and
behaviors correspond to collaboration&lt;br/&gt;quality at group and individual
levels. Broader impacts of this work include increasing
the&lt;br/&gt;availability and types of feedback presented to instructors and
learners from diverse&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds. This will expand the settings and
number of individuals who can be evaluated and&lt;br/&gt;supported on
collaboration by making collaborative learning easier to monitor through tools
that&lt;br/&gt;can be used by a wide audience of educators and
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.