* 2016092
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 Conferences on  File and Storage Technologies (FAST) and Networked Design and Implementation (NSDI)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Camille Mulligan, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This grant requests funding for graduate students attending US Universities to
travel to the following research conferences:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-18th USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 2020), February 24-27, 2020,
Santa Clara, CA, USA.&lt;br/&gt;-17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 2020), February 25-27, 2020 in Santa Clara, CA,
USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USENIX Association organizes conferences on
computing innovation and research that build collaborations between researchers
and practitioners from industry, government, and academia. These events provide
educational, mentorship, and networking opportunities to graduate students in
the computer sciences who attend. The research and computing knowledge shared
and advanced at these conferences has practical and meaningful application to
many tools used in daily life, as well as to the ethical, cultural, and social
ramifications of computing technology. This grant allows the participation of
students who would otherwise be unable to attend the conference, and extends the
impact of the research presented to a broad audience of young researchers from
across the country. USENIX is an open access organization, and all research and
results presented and published at these events are freely available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support 20 students for the FAST
2020 meeting. FAST is a forum for research in storage systems, bringing together
top researchers and practitioners from both industry and academia to explore new
directions in the design, implementation, evaluation, and deployment of storage
systems. The conference will consist of two and a half days of technical
presentations, including refereed papers, Work-in-Progress reports, and two
poster sessions. There will also be training sessions offered on the days prior
to the technical sessions. FAST has been taking place annually since 2008, and
bi-annually prior to that. This grant will support 20 students for the NSDI 2020
meeting. NSDI focuses on the design principles and challenges in the
construction of large-scale networks and distributed systems. Particular areas
of interest include cloud services, wireless, internet routing, peer-to-peer
systems, sensor nets, scalable web services, data center networking, distributed
malware, and distributed network measurement. NSDI unites researchers from
across the networking and systems community—including computer networking,
distributed systems, and operating systems—to foster cross-disciplinary
approaches and to address shared research challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.