* 2016475
* PFI-TT: Development of a visual sensor to non-invasively monitor biodegradable magnesium alloy implants for biomedical applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Peng Zhang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 286,437.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to understand the biodegradation of
magnesium (Mg) alloys used in medical implants and to provide a needed
diagnostic sensor for post-surgery evaluation of patients. Mg alloys are
increasingly used in biodegradable implants for repairing broken bones and other
medical applications because they dissolve after the bone is healed, leaving
only the natural bone components. Almost 30% of metal implants such as stainless
steel must be removed later due to complications or the need to accommodate a
still-growing child. The beneficial aspect of using Mg alloys is that a second
surgery is not needed, significantly reducing costs of care, surgery risk, and
patient stress. Partnering with a technology commercialization expert, this PFI-
TT project will enable development, testing, and optimization of the proposed
sensor prototype to monitor the biodegradation of Mg-containing implants in both
a laboratory and animal setting, promote education in innovation and
entrepreneurship, and engage undergraduate and high school students into
educational and research programs. This sensor has commercial potential because
it fulfills the unmet need in this growing market for a simple diagnostic test
for biodegradation progress that is easily performed in a doctor’s
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a sensitive,
selective and fast-response hydrogen (H2) sensor in the form of a “Band-Aid”
type device for the non-invasive monitoring of biodegradable Mg-containing
implants. Commonly available X-ray technology works poorly for Mg alloys,
because the density of Mg is so close to that of bone that the Mg implants
cannot be easily distinguished from bone by X-ray. Thus, there is a critical
need for a method to monitor the biodegradation of Mg alloys. Measurement of the
low level of H2 gas from the slowly dissolving Mg permeating through skin for
the purpose of monitoring the biodegradation of Mg implants is completely
unique. The objective of this application is to optimize the H2 sensor
prototype. The central hypothesis is that the H2 sensor will non-invasively
cause a color change when exposed to H2 and provide a visual map of H2 levels
over an area above the Mg implant. This hypothesis is formulated based on the
supporting preliminary data. The underlying rationale is that the researchers
will obtain insight into the overall design of the sensor, which is an essential
step toward commercialization of the sensor for non-invasive monitoring of
biodegradation of Mg-containing implants in patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.