* 2016137
* Evolving Hemoproteins for New-to-Nature Ring-Forming Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Frances Arnold, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,201,350.00

Molecules with ring structures are found in everything from drugs to plastics,
where their special structures confer important functional properties. The
bottleneck for discovering and developing such molecules and materials is often
a limited ability to build complex rings from simple starting materials. This
project establishes powerful and generalizable enzymatic routes to diverse ring
structures, using chemistry not previously known in biological catalysis. The
new-to-nature ring-forming enzymes are entirely genetically encoded, use earth-
abundant iron, and function under mild conditions for sustainable production of
a variety of materials, pharmaceuticals and chemicals. This interdisciplinary
project trains highly talented graduate students and postdoctoral fellows for
academic and industrial research in sustainable chemistry, biotechnology, and
bioengineering. It is intended to inspire development of new catalyst
technologies and methods for enzyme discovery and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on the principal
investigator’s successful engineering of hemeproteins for new-to-nature carbene
and nitrene transfer reactions and extends it to discovery and optimization by
directed evolution of new enzyme catalysts. These catalysts are used for
preparing ring structures that are difficult to make using synthetic chemistry.
Intramolecular carbene and nitrene C–H insertion reactions are optimized to
access important ring-containing molecules such as lactams, lactones and cyclic
amines. In many cases there are no equivalent small-molecule catalysts for these
transformations, therefore they will be enabled catalytically for the first
time. The utility of the evolved biocatalysts is evaluated in synthesis and
late-stage modification of bioactive molecules and precursors to advanced
materials. This research also includes kinetic, spectroscopic, structural and
computational studies to elucidate the mechanisms of the enzymatic ring-forming
reactions and support further enzyme engineering or development of small-
molecule catalyst counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering program in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems and
the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.