* 2016026
* ACL 2020 Student Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2020
* Zhou Yu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2020
* USD 14,980.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing. This
is one of the primary application areas for researchers in machine learning and
artificial intelligence. The proceedings of the ACL's annual meeting provide the
foundation of the field; it is the most cited and most respected publication in
computational linguistics. Thus, it is also the most important gathering of
researchers in computational linguistics and natural language processing, and
represents one of the most important opportunities for young researchers to
understand the field, build professional connections, and gain exposure. ACL has
a twenty-one-year history of supporting these formative activities by holding a
student research workshop. The workshops have proven popular: attracting dozens
of submissions from highly qualified applicants.

The student research workshop will be a part of the 2020 Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), to be held in conjunction with
the main conference July 5th –July 10th, 2020. This year ACL will be held online
due to COVID-19 and the workshop will subsidize only conference registration for
students who are selected to participate. The workshop will solicit submissions
in two categories: (1) *thesis proposals* for advanced students who have decided
on a thesis topic and wish to receive feedback and (2) *research papers*
describing completed work or work in progress with significant preliminary
results. Each accepted paper will be assigned an established research mentor who
will meet with the student during the conference to provide individual feedback.
Both paper types will be presented in the poster session of the main conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.