* 2016561
* PFI-TT: A chip-scale laser sensing module for precision navigation and metrology
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Chih-Kong Yang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 336,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of a high-precision,
chip-scale, laser ranging module, as a key sensing modality in the perception
stack. This tool will enable new technological endeavors and sensing
capabilities in autonomous vehicles, robotic platforms and other applications
requiring high precision knowledge of the environment and surroundings. Light
detection and ranging (LiDAR) is a core element for distance ranging and
metrology by measuring the light time-of-flight. Recently there have been
substantial efforts to build modular LiDAR units. Most current state-of-the-art
LiDAR sensors are based on mechanical rotating laser arrays or bulk solid-state
laser units that are large, heavy, costly and consume large amounts of power.
Recently the UCLA team has demonstrated a chip-scale LiDAR architecture, based
on photonics and silicon electronic-photonic integration, in a compact module.
The chip-scale electronic-photonic system has state-of-the-art high data
acquisition rates and high resolution in sensing the external environment. The
team will further develop and implement their commercialization strategy,
working with a technology commercialization mentor and early-stage industry
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project examines a new chip-scale
LiDAR architecture of pulsed-coherent, segmented, time-of-flight measurement to
achieve the high-resolution and high sampling rate. The goal of the proposed
research is to achieve a 3D point cloud sensing of the external environment,
with scope focused on demonstrating the scalable core components, packaging, and
functional prototype. In terms of methodology, the proposed photonics source is
based on the unique chip-scale laser element, and readout based on a silicon
CMOS technology circuits. The team will co-optimize the photonic and electronic
component specifications to achieve a high resolution and high sampling rate
demonstration. Detector noise and laser stability will be examined and
demonstrated, supported with a technology assessment and risk mitigation
approach. This PFI project is aimed at translating the current laboratory
demonstration into a commercial sensing prototype, working with end-users and a
manufacturing partner foundry towards chip-scale precision navigation and
metrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.