* 2016019
* Biochemical, Biophysical and Structural Characterization of Phage Lambda Capsid Assembly and Maturation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Carlos Catalano, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,114,581.00

The herpesviruses and many bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria, share
similar developmental pathways. An essential step for all of them is the
assembly of a capsid shell that protects the viral genome in the environment.
The capsid self-assembles from multiple copies of a major capsid protein and a
scaffolding “chaperone” protein. The interactions required for assembly and
subsequent stability of the shell are of fundamental importance to virus
replication. This project studies and defines these interactions which will
advance our understanding of how the viruses replicate and maintain infectivity
in the environment. An understanding of these forces is also necessary for the
rational development of anti-viral therapeutics and to adapt the structures for
novel nanomaterials for scientific and potentially health-related applications.
The work performed in this project will be conducted by promising young
scientific investigators from undergraduate to graduate to post-doctoral fellows
and will serve to train the next generation of scientists in the American work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will define the structural
and thermodynamic interactions between the capsid proteins required for shell
assembly and stability. The studies will employ biochemical (mutagenesis),
biophysical (analytical ultracentrifugation), computational (molecular dynamics)
and structural (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, crystallography, cryo-Electron
Microscopy) approaches in a coordinated manner. Fundamental interactions between
the scaffolding and capsid proteins required for high-fidelity shell assembly
are also interrogated. The results of the studies will reveal molecular
interactions essential to shell assembly and stability in the large double-
stranded DNA viruses, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic. These data have
significant implications in anti-viral therapeutics, phage therapy and
nanotechnology applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.