* 2016662
* CCRI: ENS: Chipyard
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Yakun Sophia Shao, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 01/31/2025
* USD 2,029,972.00

Advanced computing systems lie at the heart of many innovative products, from
intelligent earbuds to autonomous vehicles, and these are increasingly built as
customized systems-on-a-chip (SoCs). Customized SoCs incorporate a complex mix
of general-purpose and customized processing logic, and both software and
hardware must be highly tuned to achieve the needed performance and energy
efficiency for the target application. Chipyard combines and extends existing
community infrastructure components to provide a rich unified framework for
research into SoC architecture and implementation, supporting activities ranging
from research into new software and new architecture simulation techniques all
the way down to test chip fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chipyard is an
integrated SoC design, simulation, and implementation environment to support
research and development of specialized computing systems required to meet new
application demands in the face of the slowdown in technology scaling. Chipyard
is based around the widely used Rocket Chip SoC generator, which includes RISC-V
processors, coherent caches, interconnect, and other IP blocks written in the
Chisel HDL. Due to the widespread adoption of RISC-V in both academia and
industry, there is extensive software support both in upstream open-source
software projects as well as increasingly from commercial software providers.
Chisel has a growing community, with a series of Chisel Community Conferences
and multiple commercial tapeouts of Chisel-based designs. Chipyard IP modules
can also be imported from legacy HDLs. RTL designs are converted into a common
intermediate representation, FIRRTL, which supports powerful circuit
transformations and experimentation with new hardware design tools. For fast,
accurate simulation, Chipyard generates FireSim cloud-FPGA-accelerated
simulators. FireSim can simulate entire datacenter racks at the RTL level with
only a 100X slowdown. FireSim includes performance monitoring, analysis, and
debugging tools to allow high observability of design behavior while running at
high simulation speed. Chipyard also includes FireMarshal, a software workload
management system that allows complete workloads to be easily packaged and
recompiled to match an SoC configuration and execution environment. Chipyard
integrates the Hammer modular physical design flow, which supports plugins for
different tool chains and process technologies, and automates many tapeout
steps. Chipyard will also integrate the Berkeley Analog Generator for mixed-
signal and analog blocks. Overall, Chipyard provides an integrated environment
where a single SoC description can be used to drive conventional open-source or
commercial software RTL simulators, or pushed all the way to GDSII layout using
industry-standard CAD tools and/or open-source ECAD tools once available. This
proposal will fund further development of Chipyard capabilities, managed
releases, and community engagement and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.