* 2016351
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: A holistic approach to understand drought adaptation in plants, their symbionts, and free-living microbiomes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Maggie Wagner, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2024
* USD 719,167.00

For decades, it has been clear that soil microbes strongly affect plant health.
For this reason, plant microbiomes—which mostly come from soil—have great
potential to help improve agricultural productivity and restore damaged
ecosystems. Because microbiomes are so complex, it is unclear how and why they
affect plants. Part of the answer may lie in the evolutionary histories of
plants and their microbiomes, which share a habitat and therefore must adapt to
the same environmental stresses, such as drought. The research funded by this
award will test the hypotheses that (1) drought-adapted soil microbiomes help
plants tolerate drought, and (2) drought-adapted plants help soil microbes
survive drought. DNA sequencing will be used to identify differences in drought-
adapted versus non-adapted soil microbiomes. Then, physiological and biochemical
techniques, such as CT-scanning of root structures, will reveal the effects of
those drought-adapted and non-adapted microbiomes on plant health. These
experiments will be done using both corn and Eastern Gamagrass, a native
species. This research has the potential to improve current methods for
predicting the effects of soil microbes on plant health, and thus impact
agriculture and conservation practices. This award will also grow the American
scientific workforce by supporting the training of one post-doctoral researcher,
one Ph.D. student researcher, and two undergraduate student researchers.
Finally, this award supports a portable museum exhibit that brings scientific
content to hundreds of people in rural communities across Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the lack of knowledge of how adaptation
to a shared environmental stressor affects plant-microbiome interactions.
Because root microbiomes are derived from soil, the constituent microbial
lineages encounter environmental stressors both with and without a host. Whether
the same microbial genes and traits contribute to stress tolerance and survival
in both situations, or whether there is a fitness tradeoff between host-
associated vs. free-living stages is not clear. Similarly, it is unknown whether
microbiome adaptation to a given environmental challenge impacts the ability of
a plant host to withstand the same challenge. To address these questions,
drought will be used as a model stressor. First, shotgun metagenome sequencing
of soils from across two natural precipitation gradients will characterize how
historical water limitation shapes community-wide gene content, after
controlling for variation in soil structure and chemical content measured using
3D X-ray CT and ICP-MS, respectively. Second, repeated metagenome and
metatranscriptome sequencing will test for changes in the frequency and
expression of microbial genes in natural soils after six months of
experimentally induced drought. This experiment will be replicated in mesocosms
both with and without plant hosts. Finally, the effects of drought-adapted and
non-adapted soil microbiomes on plant physiology and drought tolerance will be
measured using growth assays, RNA-seq, ionomics, and laser ablation tomography.
This research may disentangle the genetic, physiological, and ecological
interdependencies that shape the evolution of plant
microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.