* 2016356
* PFI-TT: Development of a Software-Reconfigurable, Ultrafast Spectroscopic Microscope
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Steven Cundiff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2023
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of a versatile tool
for optically characterizing and imaging a broad range of industrially relevant
materials including chemicals, biological systems, pigments and semiconductors.
The characterization will be achieved using a suite of ultrafast light-based
(spectroscopic) methods. Switching between spectroscopic methods will be
realized by reconfiguration of the software alone, no changes to the hardware
will be necessary. Optical methods have the advantage of being non-contact and
potentially can be implemented in a remote/stand-off configuration, depending on
the needs of the specific application. Broadening the range of target materials
will increase the societal impact of this methodology by increasing the scope of
industries to which the method and tool are applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is based on demonstrating a broader range of scientific
applications that a single-beam, optical, nonlinear spectrometer can access and
extending the modalities of the spectrometer as well as implementing imaging
capabilities. The spectrometer has been applied to several semiconductor samples
and devices. If the nonlinear spectrometer, which is uniquely capable of being
integrated with a microscope, is demonstrated for use with chemical and
biological systems, the technology may have impact on those scientific
communities as well as related industries. Because the nonlinear interaction of
light with chemical and biological systems is much weaker than in
semiconductors, this demonstration is high risk and high
reward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.