* 2017977
* MRI: Acquisition of Nano-resolution Zeiss Xradia 620 Versa X-ray Computed Tomography with Phase Contrast and Lab Diffraction Contrast Tomography
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Luisa Dempere, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,202,836.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
acquisition of a Zeiss Xradia 620 Versa Computed Tomography (Versa nanoCT)
system at the University of Florida, where it will be accessible to students,
researchers, industrial partners, and museum personnel. The Versa nanoCT is a
non-destructive characterization tool that provides nano-scale 3D imaging of
internal and external features of organic and inorganic specimens. The
equipmentâ€™s versatility allows it to impact a variety of scientific fields,
including materials science, vertebrate zoology, and biomedical engineering. The
acquired data will be shared through open source networks and field-specific
databases to reach researchers around the world and enable broad-scale data
research initiatives. Additionally, the data collected will be implemented in
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school education, 3D machine learning
development, and public engagement activities via virtual museum
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a Zeiss Xradia 620 Versa
Computed Tomography (Versa nanoCT) system introduces new research opportunities
by providing nondestructive, 3D imaging that is essential for identifying
critical microstructural or morphological features to fundamental material or
biological processes, respectively. Additionally, the unique features of the
Versa nanoCT, including the high X-ray source flux, 40X magnification optics,
diffraction contrast tomography (LabDCT) and phase contrast, provide essential
information that are typically unavailable outside of synchrotron facilities.
The Versa nanoCT enables and supports research in three critical areas: (1)
elucidating fundamental microstructure-property relationships to control the
strength of structural metals and ceramics, (2) archiving morphological
diversity to better understand the processes that drive the diversification of
living and extinct organisms, and (3) monitoring cell-material interactions to
guide tissue generation. The instrument also supports educational initiatives at
the graduate, undergraduate, and high-school level, support data support for 3D
machine learning initiatives, and engage the public through outreach at the
Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) Education and Exhibition
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.