* 2017018
* I-Corps:  Intelligent visual framework for analyzing chemical measurement data
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Tommy Dang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
substantive enhancements for the end-users of field-portable sensors. This
project proposes an intelligent visual framework for analyzing chemical
measurement data. The proposed solution also recommends personalized
visualizations through the userâ€™s preferences and interactions. This system can
be used for applications in the biological domain and high-performance computing
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores translation of a
system that provides and recommends a full range of visualizations from one-
dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), three-dimensional (3D), to higher-
dimensional (nD) data. Application domains that generate multivariate data can
also use our technology. For example, in the biological domain, the framework
can help detect and present the dependency network of genes based on their
experimental mutation data. Other applications include automatically detection
of the links between various health metrics in supercomputing centers (such as
CPU temperature, memory usage, and power consumption), which are growing in
terms of size and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.