* 2017885
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Protection Resilience Efficiency and Prevention for Workers in Industrial Agriculture in a Changing Climate
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Heath Prince, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2023
* USD 329,173.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to understand the effects of extreme
heat on chronic kidney disease, which currently affects millions of workers in
Latin America and Asia. Strenuous work in extreme heat is considered a main
driver and workers in the sugarcane sector of industrial agriculture industry
are the most affected. Future projections of climate in many areas of Latin
America and Asia show increasing temperatures and aridity, with many projections
indicating that extreme heat events and droughts will occur in these regions.
Treatment for chronic kidney disease is expensive, resulting in early death for
many of those affected. Without prevention, this epidemic is likely to
accelerate due increasing temperatures and extreme heat. This project will
develop a response and prevention strategy for an industrial sugary cane mill in
Nicaragua. The project will seek to assess the immediate and long-term impact
the strategy has on workforce health and productivity, the economic and social
impacts on those affected by the disease, as well as community resilience and
the economic burden on health systems. The project will benefit a broad range of
local and national-level stakeholders, including local communities, government,
health service agencies, and local and national decision-
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.