* 2017044
* Understanding Organizational Inequality in Immigrant-serving Nonprofits
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Irene Bloemraad, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 349,786.00

Social and human services in the United States are increasingly provided by
nonprofit organizations. Access to these services is crucial to ensure the
health and welfare of individuals and their families. However, nonprofit
services are not universally or broadly available to everyone because where one
lives matters, and access to nonprofit organizations is more limited in suburban
and rural communities. Focusing on immigrants in particular, the United States
is home to over 43 million immigrants; over half lack U.S. citizenship. Relative
to other disadvantaged groups, immigrants often face additional obstacles to
accessing social and human services due to language barriers or service
restrictions based on citizenship. This project studies the extent of
inequalities in nonprofit immigrant services in health care, legal assistance,
and refugee resettlement. The project investigates the reasons behind nonprofit
service inequalities across place, type of immigrant community, and type of
service, comparing the influence of demand, supply, and political factors.
Beyond advancing knowledge about the contours of the nonprofit sector, the
project will produce a publicly accessible database and web-based map of non-
profit organizations and demographic data in 80 counties in the U.S. Southwest.
These data will help philanthropists, political leaders, and public officials
efficiently and equitably direct funding and programs to fill service gaps,
connecting those who need services to nonprofit organizations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Immigrants are often in need of social and human services, but may
lack ready access to non-profit organizations that provide such assistance. This
project will study services at the organizational level, mapping service
provision in: (1) health care by using the federally funded health clinics
dataset on the Health Resources and Services Administration Data Warehouse from
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; (2) immigration legal
assistance using the Immigration Advocates Network National Immigration Legal
Services Directory, the Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc. (CLINIC), and
the United States Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration Review,
and (3) refugee resettlement services drawing from the Office of Refugee
Resettlementâ€™s State Programs Directory. The project will cover 80 counties in
the U.S. Southwest, including all of Arizona and Nevada and 49 counties in north
and central California and will identify specific types of services, language
provision, fee structures, etc. Underlying demographic data to test demand
theories of nonprofit service provision will come from the American Community
Survey (ACS 2014-18) to capture recent immigration, citizenship, foreign-born
population, foreign-born without health insurance, individuals with limited
English proficiency per language group, and immigrants living under the poverty
line. To test supply theories, the project will draw on ACS data, information on
county budgets, and proximity to law schools. Political variables will include
data on partisanship, voting patterns, the party affiliation of elected
officials, and past histories of immigrant rights mobilization. The analysis
will build upon the two-step floating catchment area method to develop a service
mismatch index that balances supply and demand. Findings from the project will
inform sociological theories of organizations, immigration, race and the role of
politics in service provision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.