* 2017805
* Developing a Computational Model to Predict Clot Transport
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Keefe Manning, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 540,497.00

The research supported by this award will develop a new tool to better
understand potentially dangerous complications that can occur with biomedical
implants. Blood-contacting devices such as a heart valves, stents, catheters,
and blood pumps are successfully implanted into thousands of patients every year
in the United States. While huge strides have been made in improving their
safety and effectiveness, the formation of blood clots in these devices remains
a leading problem. When a clot forms in a device, it can prevent it from working
properly, or break away from the device and result in complications such as
stroke. This work will develop a computational tool to simulate how blood flow
and biochemistry in these devices interact to result in clotting. This tool will
take advantage of state-of-the-art supercomputing resources made available by
the National Science Foundation. Thanks to recent efforts to promote the use of
such computer simulations in approval of new biomedical devices, there is
potential for this work to impact human health. Specifically, the model
developed here may be used to offer additional evidence of safety and
effectiveness of new devices, reduce development costs, and shorten time to
market. This research combines several disciplines, including biochemistry,
physics, and high-performance computing, and will help broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various blood-contacting
cardiovascular devices have been shown to improve outcomes in patients with
cardiovascular disease, but thromboembolism remains as a leading risk factor.
The nature of these devices makes in-vitro investigation of thromboembolism
complicated and costly, leaving gaps in the understanding of the complex
interactions between the device and the body. The goal of this research is to
develop an in-silico method to model thromboembolism, incorporating biochemical
surface interactions between blood and synthetic materials, the kinetics of the
coagulation cascade, and the viscoelastic properties of blood clots into a
fluid-dynamics solver. Important model processes will be experimentally
validated, including concentration curves of pro-coagulant plasma proteins, clot
mechanical properties, and fluid-dynamic conditions where embolization occurs.
To address the large uncertainties and phenomenology in many of the simulated
processes, Monte-Carlo experiments will be used to evaluate the credibility of
the modelsâ€™ predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.