* 2017591
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governing the Uncommons: The Impact of Technological Change on International Law
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jack Snyder, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 32,400.00

The idea that law struggles to keep pace with technological change has in recent
years become a trope. New technologies convey social benefits but also
unexpected potential harm. This is particularly troubling in the context of
international law, where military technological breakthroughs can disrupt
multilateral consensus about who owes whom what. Puzzlingly, old laws are often
robust to disruptive technological change, even when there are strong incentives
for powerful parties to push for overhaul. When new technologies emerge, why do
only some international legal rules require reinvention? The US must
increasingly contend with other countries like China and Russia whose
partnership is required to address issues of a global nature but whose vision
for and interpretation of international law may differ in important ways.
Understanding the factors that dampen technological controversy and make
international cooperation more likely will be critical for the maintenance of a
peaceful and forward-looking world order in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand how new
technology upsets international legal equilibria, and how legal rules can be
adapted or replaced to account for these changes. The project entails two parts.
First, it highlights historical cases in which states were able to predict
problematic horizon military technologies and measures the conditions under
which “anticipatory” agreements are possible to achieve. Second, in cases where
technological breakthroughs “surprise” the international community, when can
extant law be informally adapted without the need for costly and complete
institutional overhaul? In essence, this latter aspect is a study of legal
obsolescence. The project leverages novel experimental, quantitative, game
theoretic, and archival methods to provide empirical traction on these
questions. Findings could serve as a roadmap for policymakers in designing
durable international agreements, arms control frameworks, and other
institutions in environments of increasing technological uncertainty. They can
help inform ongoing debate over emerging technologies in domains of military
interest, cyber, outer space, artificial intelligence, and others, where
international “rules of the road” are still in
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.