* 2017816
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integrating Numerical and Linguistic Knowledge in the Exact Interpretation of Numerals
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* John Grinstead, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2022
* USD 18,720.00

Words that convey quantity information are everywhere in natural language.
Consequently, there must be a way for the part of our mind dedicated to number
and the part of our mind dedicated to language to communicate with each other.
It has been argued that language and the part of our mind that manages spatial
information must also communicate in this way. However, no research has taken
tests of children’s number knowledge to see if they are predictive of the
quantity-sensitive parts of the language knowledge. The goal of this project is
to investigate the number-language connection in children’s exact
interpretations of numbers. Though numbers are usually thought of as exact, they
can also have, for example, “at least” interpretations (e.g. to eat 6 donuts is
to also have eaten 5 donuts). What else matters for children’s abilities to know
when a number is exact and when it isn’t? The investigators will test children’s
vocabularies to see if they predict exact interpretations. The researchers will
also test a part of children’s cognition called executive function, namely, the
parts of our minds dedicated to working memory, attention and inhibition, to see
whether they are predictive. In this way, the research project will lead to a
better understanding of how the different components of our mind work together
to allow us to draw a very important type of interpretation of numbers, which
are valuable for later quantitative and mathematical thinking in children. This
project will study this development in monolingual Spanish-speakers because
there is some evidence that numerical thinking can vary across
languages.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study includes a video-recorded Truth-Value
Judgment Task (TVJT) to measure children’s exactness interpretations as the
dependent variable. This procedure will improve the researchers' ability to
measure discriminability by using numbers higher than those used in previous
research. Children’s numerical knowledge will be measured using conventional
tasks from cognitive development to measure numerical estimation: the
approximate number system (ANS), using Panamath; counting, using Give-A-Number;
number sense and partitioning using Number Sets; and the Number-Line Tasks.
These measures should provide evidence of properties of numerical cognition in
the exact interpretation of natural language quantifiers and enable the
investigators to model how language and number interact, mediated by executive
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.