* 2017079
* EFRI CEE: Chromatin and epigenetic engineering with synthetic genome regulators
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/09/2019,08/31/2024
* Aseem Ansari, St Jude Children's Research Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,179.00

In each human cell, the genome is tightly packaged into a complex called
chromatin by wrapping the DNA around spool-like protein cylinders to fit inside
the nucleus. Both the DNA and protein components of chromatin can be modified in
the nucleus to produce "chemical bookmarks." Cells can use these bookmarks,
together with the information in the sequence of bases in the DNA, as
instructions for switching genes on and off at the right time and in the right
place. How chemical bookmarks work is still unclear, but some studies have shown
that misplaced bookmarks can contribute to the onset of different diseases. The
goal of this project is to understand how chemical bookmarks function. The
strategy will be to use synthetic biology to reprogram the bookmarks at desired
regions of the DNA to change their switching behavior. This will help reveal how
DNA bookmarking controls the fate and function of different cells. The work will
have educational impact by integrating students and scientists from engineering,
computer sciences, chemistry and biology to uncover the principles by which
information stored in chromatin is used to make different cell types and govern
their function. The outcomes could have broader societal impact by contributing
to development of methods for correcting disease-associated bookmarking errors,
or by using synthetic switches to protect against organisms with DNA-based
genomes - such as engineered viruses, bacteria and other pathogens - that may
pose biological threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this
transformative and transdisciplinary project is to create nanoscale so-called
"epigenetic switches" that can sculpt the chromatin nano-environment at targeted
genomic loci. This class of 2nm-scale switches can be programmed to rewire
epigenetic states at specified loci and evoke informative and meaningful
phenotypic outcomes. These epigenetic switches are composed of synthetic DNA
binding polyamide molecules that can be programmed to target genomic sites
embedded in diverse chromatin states. Moreover, using modular design, these
synthetic genome readers can be conjugated to different small molecule ligands
that mimic epigenetic signals or engage distinct cellular machines to rewire
overlaid chromatin or epigenetic states. The foundational technology to be
developed has wide-ranging broader impacts on: (i) elucidating "Rules of Life"
that govern genome architecture, stability, and the regulated access to genomic
information, (ii) revealing new principles of epigenome or chromatin
organization, (iii) epigenetic engineering of living systems, and (iv)
innovative genome-targeted therapeutics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was
jointly funded by the Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation Program in
the Division of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Engineering Directorate, by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate, and
by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.