* 2017862
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Immigrant Students' Pathways from Kindergarten to College and into the STEM Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Amy Hsin, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 39,064.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying ways to broaden
participation in STEM education and careers, particularly for youth of color. To
do so, it will complete a research study focused on immigrant youth of color in
New York City, which has large immigrant communities and the largest public-
school system in the nation. The project is designed to examine how immigrant
youth of color form their STEM identities and navigate pathways from
kindergarten into the labor force. The project includes three studies. The first
study will use a large dataset that follows students from NYC public schools
into the City University of New York two-year and four-year colleges. The goal
of this study is to identify points at which many immigrant students move away
from a STEM pathway. The second study will be based on interviews with students
and their families to understand how they use information and resources to make
decisions about their persistence on STEM pathways. The final study is designed
to use the results from the first two studies to provide policy and practice
recommendations for key educational stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using a
mixed methods approach, the project team will address three research questions
that correspond to the three studies described above: (1) What key educational
stages are critical points along the STEM pathway? (2) How are decisions made
and knowledge gathered by students and families at these key points? (3) How can
insights from these analyses inform programmatic and policy interventions to
increase STEM inclusion among immigrant youth of color? To address research
question one, the project team will use techniques such as growth curve and
hierarchical regression modeling to identify educational stages where immigrant
youth of color leave STEM pathways, explore potential determinants that might
explain departures, and identify potential disparities in the economic returns
of STEM credentials. To address the second research question, the project team
will use initial findings to identify points of greatest divergence along STEM
pathways. The researchers will then collect and analyze qualitative data from 30
immigrant families with children who have STEM interests. Prompts will relate to
the ways in which families navigated access to information, resources, decision-
making, and goal setting associated with the pursuit of STEM fields. Finally,
the project team will identify real-world implications of the findings and
disseminate them to local, state, and federal stakeholders. By addressing these
three research questions, the project is designed to promote access among
immigrant youth of color to STEM education and career preparation, which can
ultimately result in a more diverse and productive STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.