* 2017917
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster for Next-Generation Computational Science in Southern Colorado
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Qing Yi, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 435,228.00

This project will enable the acquisition, deployment, and maintenance of a high
performance computing (HPC) cluster (to be called INCLINE). This instrument will
provide much-needed computational resources to the UCCS campus and the Southern
Colorado scientific and academic communities. The size and power of the
instrument will bridge the growing gap between workstation-level machines and
Top 500 supercomputers, allowing researchers to test and leverage code
scalability on an HPC platform, to expedite result processing, and to gain
expertise on a local HPC environment. The work to be performed will yield
insight into biomedical applications, such as microbubble drug delivery and bone
fracture, military applications, such as additively manufactured energetics, and
civil applications, including improved structural materials. In addition to
research applications, INCLINE will be used as an educational platform for
teaching the fundamentals of an HPC to undergraduate and graduate students and
allow students to investigate classroom problems more deeply with the
computational power provided by an HPC. It will also be used to supplement
existing outreach programs to spark enthusiasm and interest in HPC in the
Southern Colorado community, which is diverse in both population and the range
of applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentâ€™s state-of-the-art
hardware is designed to support a broad range of high-performance scientific
applications, ranging from compiler design to computational fluid dynamics. The
instrument will contain both CPU compute (including standard and high memory),
and GPU nodes. The compute nodes will enable standard massively parallel
computations such as computational solid mechanics and fluid dynamics. The GPU
nodes will allow acceleration on computational physics and machine learning
projects and will be used in conjunction with CPU nodes to test optimal load
balancing on heterogeneous architectures. All nodes will be connected using
InfiniBand high speed interconnects to minimize latency for communication-
intense applications, including CFD and computational solid mechanics. A high
speed SCRATCH storage file system will minimize I/O latency for applications
with large output file sizes and I/O requirements. The estimated peak
performance of the instrument is approximately 90 TFLOPS. The Slurm queueing
system will be used to manage accounts and allocations across the diverse user
base. The robust design of this instrument will allow it to fill the growing
need for a local HPC research facility at UCCS and in Southern Colorado and will
facilitate the training of the next generation of computational
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.