* 2017651
* Numeric self-efficacy, objective numeracy, and overconfidence
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Ellen Peters, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 10/31/2023
* USD 634,975.00

Numbers are often used in decisions (e.g., choosing mortgages and health
insurance plans). Previous research has shown that more objectively numerate
people (they’re better at solving numeric problems) also make logically better
decisions when numbers are involved. Having confidence in one’s numeric
abilities also appears to support people persisting more with numbers, but
little research exists on this point. In the present project, the research team
will develop an improved objective numeracy measure and test hypotheses about
how numeric confidence differs from intelligence (e.g., objective numeracy,
nonnumeric intelligence) and overconfidence. Further, the team investigates how
and when numeric confidence helps versus hurts people’s abilities to make good
decisions. The studies are expected to promote the progress of science in
judgment and decision making such that this improved scientific understanding
will lead to better interventions to improve decision making about health and
wealth. The investigators will use developed knowledge to work with public-
facing groups about how to design messages to facilitate better decision making.
This new knowledge will be integrated into the University of Oregon’s Center for
Science Communication Research. Findings will be disseminated in academic and
policy presentations and publications and to the public through The
Conversation, radio, and newspapers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research
builds on recent theory and findings to understand the separable psychological
mechanisms of objective numeracy and numeric self-efficacy (i.e., confidence in
one’s abilities). In nine experiments, the research team develop a more useable
objective numeracy measure and test hypotheses about how numeric self-efficacy
differs from objective numeracy, nonnumeric intelligence, and cognitive
reflection and how it can help or hurt decision performance. In particular, the
principal investigators seek to understand when and why numeric self-efficacy
and objective numeracy interact in decision making vs act as main effects. The
research will examine how decision performance can improve or decline through
self-efficacy support, and the research team will test how numeric self-efficacy
and overconfidence relate and develop and test ways to improve calibration. The
team will examine implications for dual-process theories of decision making. It
is expected that the proposed research will add substantially to understanding
the psychological mechanisms underlying decisions involving numeric information
and their impact on wellbeing. This understanding will lead to novel
interventions to improve decision making. Policy makers and others generally
assume that, if provided appropriate numbers, people will understand and use
them appropriately. However, numbers can be misunderstood if they are not
presented appropriately, and/or they may cause decision makers to
disengage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.