* 2017891
* MRI: Acquisition of an Operando 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Charles Fry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 489,013.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Wisconsin Madison is
acquiring a 500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with
a flow tube accessory and dedicated software that enable online monitoring of
chemical reactions in real-time under actual experimental conditions. The
instrumentation supports Professor Charles Fry and colleagues at the Wisconsin
High-Pressure Reactor (WiHP-NNMR). This spectrometer allows research in a
variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of
significant economic importance, as well as permitting study of biologically
relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this
institution and nearby colleges such as Madison College, University of Wisconsin
La Crosse, University of Wisconsin Rock County, University of Wisconsin
Whitewater, Lawrence University, Maranatha Baptist University, Indiana State
University and Valparaiso University. The Magnetic Resonance Facility plays an
important role in strengthening the relationship between the University and
Wisconsin citizens by working closely with departmental programs advocating the
importance of science, research, and education to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts discovery
of metal-metal bonded catalysts and carbon-hydrogen functionalization reactions.
The instrumentation is also for exploring photoredox catalysis, polymer
mechanochemistry and three-dimensional (3D) printing. In addition, it provides
information on operando investigations of transition metal catalyzed reactions.
An operando method involves spectroscopic characterization of materials
undergoing reaction which is coupled simultaneously with measurement of
catalytic activity and selectivity. The spectrometer is also used to develop
catalysts for aerobic oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.