* 2017597
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: Interdisciplinary Training of Data-Centric Security and Resilience of Cyber-Physical Energy Infrastructures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Xingquan Zhu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 160,000.00

In this project, students and researchers are provided with mentored, hands-on
training combining expertise across electrical engineering, communication,
science and technology studies, and data science. This establishes a novel model
for energy cyberinfrastructure resilience education. The curriculum and
instructional materials that are developed integrate advanced skills from
multiple areas under the umbrella of cyber-physical energy systems. Participants
develop and refine the multi-disciplinary skillsets needed for the data-centric
energy industry using unique, remotely connected smart grid cyberinfrastructure.
Participants extend their academic research portfolios, strengthening their
career competitiveness as future cyberinfrastructure professionals and users.
The two-week workshop immerses undergraduate/graduate students and research
scientists in a unique training opportunity through laboratory demonstrations
and mini projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three main technical challenges are
tackled in the project: (i) Establishment of a new remotely connected
cyberinfrastructure platform among the collaborating universities. An existing
hardware-in-the-loop power testbed using a real-time digital simulator is
connected with a virtual network laboratory to characterize cyber-physical
energy systems. The combined infrastructure is equipped with state-of-the-art
hardware and software modules, where humans, machines, and power girds can
interact and cooperate in a near-to-real learning environment. (ii)
Implementation of a cybersecurity module in the virtual lab to simulate cyber
threats, such as denial-of-service attacks and man-in-the-middle attacks.
Participants create attack scenarios that are played out, where the attacking
process and consequence can be visualized on the physical system. (iii)
Development of data analytics techniques based on machine learning as a set of
cyber defense mechanisms, such as data-driven adversarial event detection.
Participants execute their cyber defense algorithms alongside the attack, and
the effectiveness of these defenses is validated and visualized using the
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.