* 2017843
* MSA: Integrating biodiversity observations with airborne and satellite data to predict shifts in assemblage diversity and composition under global change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jesús Pinto Ledezma, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,375.00

Biodiversity—the living fabric of our planet—is rapidly changing due to
alterations in the climate and human activities. These rapid changes are
negatively impacting the capacity of ecosystems to provide goods and services to
humanity. The development of new ways to characterize and monitor biodiversity
that take advantage of advancing remote sensing technologies is critical for
developing effective management strategies and conservation actions to address
global change. The project will evaluate the capacity of airborne and satellite
remote sensing data to produce reliable predictions of plant and bird
diversities across the conterminous United States. The broader impacts of this
project include several components. First, the project will provide scientific
and professional development of an early-stage scientist from an
underrepresented group. Second, the project will contribute to the training the
next generation of STEM researchers to investigate biodiversity in the
Anthropocene. Third, the project scientists will engage the public in
biodiversity education through the integration of project results into an
undergraduate and graduate course in Biodiversity Science at the University of
Minnesota. Fourth, the project will contribute to advancing international
efforts to assess and monitor biodiversity globally. Finally, researchers will
distribute open-source software to the world-wide research community through
online repositories, fostering reproducibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
combines theory and novel methods from different disciplines—including
macroecology, community ecology and imaging spectroscopy—to understand the
potential of remote sensing data in predicting and monitoring biodiversity.
Specifically, researchers will test the hypothesis that diversity measures
derived from remote sensing can be used as surrogates of other measures of
biodiversity and hence for monitoring biodiversity at large spatial extents. The
project addresses important gaps in our ability to predict species distributions
and assemblage composition. New insights will be gained for understanding the
potential of measures derived from remote sensing—such as spectral alpha and
beta diversity—for the prediction of species distributions and assemblage
composition. In doing so, the project will contribute to the development of
novel approaches for biodiversity monitoring across time and space. Overall, the
project provides a flexible framework that allows the integration of multiple
means of predicting and detecting species and advances efforts to monitor
changes in biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.