* 2017525
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The mental representation and acquisition of the universal quantifiers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 14,994.00

A word like “cat” calls to mind different associations for different individuals
(e.g., allergic reactions versus comforting companion). But at the same time,
whatever meaning English speakers have paired with the word “cat” must be at
least similar enough to enable successful communication. This suggests some
level of invariance in meaning, but leaves open the level of detail at which our
understanding of the word is shared. If speakers do share fine-grained details
about a word’s meaning, the question of how they acquired those details arises.
No two children have the exact same experience in the course of language
learning, so how would they come to have a common understanding of a word? This
project explores both questions – what aspect of word meaning is shared across
speakers and how is this meaning acquired? – for the quantificational words
“each” and “every”. Gaining a better understanding of how speakers represent and
acquire these words will improve our understanding of the logical primitives of
thought and the ways in which children make use of their input when learning a
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research brings together approaches from
various fields. Vision science experiments test participants’ memory for set and
individual properties to determine whether the meanings of “each” and “every”
implicate representations of sets. A linguistic corpus analysis identifies the
data present in speech to children. Techniques from developmental psychology are
used to test whether children in fact use these cues in learning the relevant
difference between “each” and “every”. The project pursues the hypothesis that
while a sentence like “every circle is green” implicates representations of sets
(the set of circles), the minimally different “each circle is green” implicates
only representations of individuals and their properties. The project also
involves conducting outreach about related issues (e.g., the relationship
between language and thought more generally) to local families and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.