* 2017046
* Modeling Evaluation Methods for Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yueran Yang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2024
* USD 294,768.00

Eyewitness identification plays an important role in administering justice in
the criminal justice system. Yet, eyewitnesses make mistakes that can lead to
grave legal consequences, with innocent suspects who are wrongfully convicted
and guilty suspects who escape punishment and continue to harm society. Because
of the complexity of eyewitness responses and associated legal consequences, it
is critical to develop effective methods for evaluating eyewitness performance.
This project will incorporate a modeling approach to develop effective
evaluation methods for eyewitness identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing
a mathematical modeling approach, this project will advance and apply an
expected cost model to integrate police investigation practices before, during,
and after conducting an eyewitness identification. By incorporating meta-
analytical data and mathematical modeling, the project’s expected cost model
will provide an integrative framework for rigorously analyzing eyewitness
performance and for making useful predictions under a broad range of
circumstances. This research will analyze the implications of the evaluation
methods commonly used in eyewitness research in order to build toward scientific
consensus for analyzing eyewitness data and assessing identification procedures.
This project will also develop computational and visualization tools to enhance
proper use of the expected cost model and other evaluation methods. Findings
will improve understanding of eyewitness performance, produce scientific
evidence for optimal legal practices, and promote the scientific use of
mathematical modeling approaches in eyewitness research. All of these outcomes
are crucial in developing scientific understanding of eyewitness identification
and improving identification practices to advance
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Law and
Science Program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic
Sciences (SBE) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.