* 2017573
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the Impacts of Labor and Land Allocation Strategies on Small-Scale Farming
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Colin West, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 25,200.00

Smallholders is a term used in agrarian studies to characterize rural
householders engaged in small-scale, permanent agriculture. Smallholder farming
is widely recognized as a model for sustainability in agriculture, though this
niche frequently finds itself challenged by larger economies of scale. As the
demand for certain major cash crops increases, questions arise about how farming
households adapt and manage economic demands. One documented strategy that
smallholders use to remain competitive is a strategy of collaborative land use.
Another involves refinements in labor strategies across multiple scales. This
project explores the intersection of these two strategies in a major cash crop
market that has been successfully managed at the smallholder level.
Understanding how smallholders adapt to these dual forces can provide insights
for policies aimed at rural economic development to support farming households.
This project will provide essential support to broaden the participation of
groups underrepresented in through STEM education training. It will also
encourage an empirical, inter-disciplinary approach to model social and
agricultural change. Results will be disseminated to help inform policies and
planning at the household, community, and state level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study examines the expansion of a major agricultural market on cooperative labor
strategies at individual, household, and community levels. It will be done at a
site that has been a major producer of important cash crops since the 1950s and
has recently become a leading exporter. Production at this site is primarily
organized on the household scale. However, little is known about the impact
export cash crop expansion has on the social institutions in which farming is
embedded. Comparing three communities from low to high involvement in cash crop
farming, investigators will rely on satellite imagery, ethnographic research,
and household surveys to assess the impacts of production on cooperative labor
strategies. Investigators hypothesize less cash crop production involves more
intra-household cooperation (work among household members) but less inter-
household cooperation. Greater cash crop farming, however, entails less intra-
household cooperation but more inter-household cooperation. Results from this
research will provide a generalizable model to understand how farming households
adapt to agricultural changes, which can be applied to other contexts
experiencing similar transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.