* 2017293
* ADVANCE Adaptation: SF State TRANSFORMS - Advancing Equity in Faculty Workload and Professional Development
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Laura Mamo, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,991.00

San Francisco State University (SF State) will reduce disparities in the
advancement of women faculty in STEM by adapting initiatives to transform SF
State campus policies and practices. The project builds on a conceptual
framework that asserts that intersectional dimensions of racial and gender
inequity and injustice create a system of power with advantages and
disadvantages that underlie the structure of academic institutions and
negatively impacts the advancement of women, specifically those who are
underrepresented because of race, ethnicity and other social categories. SF
State is a teaching intensive, primarily undergraduate public university
classified as a Hispanic-Serving Institution and eligible to participate in
federal Asian American, Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institution
programs. This ADVANCE Adaptation project builds on prior work done by SF State
through an ADVANCE IT-Catalyst project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed to mitigate the systemic factors at SF State that create inequities, by
targeting three interrelated institutional problem areas: 1) inequitable service
workload that taxes gender and racial/ethnic underrepresented (UR) faculty
disproportionately, 2) lack of institutional structures to support professional
scholarship practices that empower collectives; and 3) lack of advocacy and
structure to mitigate the role of implicit bias and the associated
intersectional gender and race assumptions in university structures. The project
will implement three initiatives adapted from proven efforts in higher education
to address similar problem areas: 1) SF State VALUES will focus on mitigating
practices in academic departments that result in the inequitable allocation of
service through the development of workload dashboards; 2) SF State EXPANDS will
take on the related challenge of enhancing faculty scholarship and professional
development by fostering mechanisms for collaboration and interdisciplinary
faculty networks designed to support, seed and sustain scholarship; and 3) SF
State RESTORES will address the underlying need for increased advocacy and
commitment to reducing gender and racial/ethnic inequity by establishing a
Faculty Equity Fellows Program, and developing processes to address biases that
affect all faculty by creating a structure to address complaints that do not
rise to the level of Title IX reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.