* 2017456
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Beyond the Law: Responding to Sexual Violence with Restorative Justice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Akiko Takeyama, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 17,479.00

Restorative justice programs in the United States have seen success in cases
involving juveniles and minor crimes. However, using restorative justice in the
area of sexual violence remains contentious. Proponents highlight the problems
survivors face in the criminal justice system, and claim that restorative
justice is “survivor-friendly.” On the other hand, opponents raise concerns
about further harm restorative justice causes to survivors due to the intimate
nature of the crime. It is still largely unclear how alternative justice meets
survivors’ needs and still enacts offender accountability. This research project
will examine the lived experience of restorative justice to better understand to
what extent restorative justice reproduces systematic harm in cases of sexual
violence while challenging the existing criminal justice system. Critical
analysis of what “survivor-friendly” justice means to different social actors
such as survivors, offenders, restorative justice practitioners, and the society
at large,is indispensable to the development of resources and policies that
address survivors’ needs and best practices for restorative justice programs and
the traditional criminal legal system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
be conducted at community-based restorative justice programs in the Pacific
Region where several programs are operated in the United States. Restorative
justice programs for sexual violence are mainly implemented at the community
level, outside of the criminal legal system. This project asks: Do these
restorative justice programs offer a more survivor-centered justice, or do they
continue to mirror problems found within the criminal legal system? What does
justice mean to the survivors of sexual violence? To examines these questions,
this research employs qualitative methods including participant observation of
individual restorative justice cases, and interviews and focus groups with
survivors, offenders, and facilitators of restorative justice programs. Research
findings will attend to the specificities of how survivors navigate their own
experiences and frameworks of justice against societally held understandings of
sexual violence and internal power dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.