* 2017889
* MRA: Macroscale Resilience: Assessing the recovery of western U.S. forests following compound disturbance by linking observations from trees to ecoregions
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Carol Wessman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,683,141.00

There are an estimated 6.3 billion dead trees currently across western U.S.
forests, a legacy from increasing frequency or severity of beetle infestations,
wildfires, and droughts against a backdrop of regional warming. A critical
question remains: have forests recovered from these disturbances over the last
36 years? Leveraging three core forest sites in the Southern Rockies, Northern
Rockies, and Pacific Northwest that are part of the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON), this work will explore: 1) What combinations and
sizes of disturbances create abrupt and persistent forest changes?, and 2) How
does forest resilience vary as a function of forest type, drought, and regional
warming? This effort will explore these questions by integrating data from
individual trees to entire ecoregions to advance understanding of western forest
recovery. A novel, core scientific community, the NEON Resilience Network, will
be enabled for data-intensive exploration of resilience using an open-source
NEON toolkit that contains data, code, methods, and three software packages. In
addition, sustained touchpoints will be made with regional and federal land
managers developing best-practices for how to resist, adapt, or facilitate
ecological transformation. This connection offers a critical co-production
pathway, directly connecting NEON-enabled scientific discovery and public lands
management decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance theoretical
understanding of how resilience varies as a function of compound, large
disturbances, within and among ecoregions, and with decadal-scale regional
warming. These are essential macrosystems ecological questions to address for
western U.S. forests. This research will apply deep-learning techniques to
identify individual plant species from NEONâ€™s airborne data collections of
hyperspectral, LiDAR (light detection and ranging), and red-green-blue imagery,
helping to advance a research frontier. Coupled with extended sampling via
unmanned aerial systems (UAS), the research will develop vegetation class
spectral signatures to derive annually-resolved plant functional type maps
(coniferous forest, deciduous forest, woody shrub, grass/herb, and bare ground)
from the Landsat satellite record (1984-present), providing an unprecedented
temporal reconstruction of western U.S. forest dynamics. The NEON Resilience
Network will also scale core resilience questions across the continental U.S.,
asking: are there predictable combinations, sequences, or sizes of disturbances
that lead to more persistent state changes across vegetation types? This
research will help unlock the power of the Landsat record to explore forest
resilience in the western U.S., setting an important historical baseline as NEON
embarks on monitoring continental-scale forest ecology over the next 30
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.