* 2017249
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Lives of HIV Prevention Drugs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* A. Cymene Howe, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,191.00

Since its arrival to the market, Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) has transformed
the field of HIV prevention. A once a day pill composed of conventional
antiretrovirals repurposed for preventative use, research has proven PrEP to be
highly effective in reducing individual risk of HIV infection. While studies
have demonstrated PrEP’s therapeutic efficacy, the social effects of this
therapeutic revolution across different groups and populations remains
understudied. The research supported by this award uses ethnographic methods to
investigate how different populations and individuals use PrEP, asking how the
use of this drug effects individual practices, as well as perceptions of risk.
In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, the project will enhance scientific understandings of the social
effects of HIV prevention strategies and therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will take place over 16 months in a context where PrEP has been made
widely available through the production and distribution of a state manufactured
generic. The researcher will work across four different community settings: a
HIV policy institute, a private clinic, a community organization, and a
selection of commercial and event venues that are significant to the local
economy. Data will be collected through participant observation; interviews with
health policy makers, doctors, community organizers, PrEP users, and other
stakeholders; and focus groups and life histories of PrEP users from different
population groups. Findings from this research will produce multi-perspective
data needed by policy makers, public health practitioners, and social scientists
to understand the factors that condition both access to and the broader
experiences of these novel forms of therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.