* 2017210
* ADVANCE Adaptation: THRIVE at East Carolina University (ECU): Towards Hiring, Resources, Inclusion, Value and Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ann Sperry, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,074.00

The NSF ADVANCE Adaptation Program-Towards Hiring, Resources, Inclusion, Value
and Excellence (THRIVE) at East Carolina University (ECU) will foster gender
equity by addressing biases entrenched in faculty recruitment, hiring, and
advancement policies and practices, as well as provide support for the full
inclusion and advancement of a diverse faculty. ECU is a research-intensive
public university located in rural eastern North Carolina. To surmount ECUâ€™s
organizational barriers to gender equity, THRIVE will: 1) implement evidenced-
based multicultural competence professional development for faculty and leaders;
2) provide resources and a network of support to ensure that women, particularly
those marginalized by race, LGBTQ+ and other minoritized statuses, are
recognized and rewarded for their contributions and afforded opportunities for
leadership; and 3) establish a set of accountability practices and incentives
for faculty, department chairs, and deans, as well as modify policies and
procedures in the Faculty Manual and Unit Codes (ECU's bylaws), to more
equitably govern hiring, promotion, and tenure processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of THRIVE are to: 1) change culture by building a
culture of inclusion; 2) create support systems for women in all STEM units; and
3) implement structural change. To meet these goals, we will adapt the Advocates
and Allies (A&amp;A) program, initiated at North Dakota State University.
A&amp;A takes an intersectional approach to disrupting entrenched hierarchies.
Through A&amp;A we will recruit, train, and deploy members of historically
privileged groups to interrupt and correct interpersonal and procedural biases.
A&amp;A is both adaptable and scalable to universities of different sizes,
missions, and regions of influence. It has been successfully contextualized and
implemented at several universities including Clarkson, Ohio State University,
Rochester Institute of Technology, and University of Wyoming. Using this proven
strategy, this ADVANCE Adaptation grant will catalyze sustained, structural
change at ECU. In so doing, THRIVE will alter the institutional climate to meet
the empirically identified needs of the most marginalized faculty and support
all STEM women to advance, lead, and thrive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.