* 2017485
* EAGER: Hybridization and metabolic dysfunction in milkweeds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Carrie Olson-Manning, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 231,538.00

This research aims to understand how biochemical processes and pathways in the
cell are disrupted when mating occurs across species. Two milkweed species, the
common milkweed and the showy milkweed, form hybrids across a wide region of the
central United States. The research will determine the extent of natural
hybridization between these species and identify the cellular pathways that
differ between species. This information will allow identification of cellular
pathways that are disrupted when hybridization occurs. This work will shed light
on both the organization of biochemical pathways and the mechanisms that keep
species reproductively isolated. Understanding the effects of hybridization will
become increasingly important as climate change and human disturbance cause
species ranges to shift and bring previously isolated species into contact. The
results of the project will be integrated into undergraduate courses to
strengthen bioinformatics and introductory biology courses with a focus on
quantitative reasoning, modeling, and simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses a fundamental gap in our understanding of metabolic pathways
and how the metabolome changes during speciation. When species evolve in
isolation and come back into contact, the hybrids they form often display
variation outside of the parental means (transgressive segregation). By studying
natural and hand-pollinated hybrids along with the parental species, the
researchers will uncover the changes to the genetic architecture that occur as
species diverge. The researchers will use (1) genotype-by-sequencing to
reconstruct the history of hybridization across the region of sympatry and (2) a
comprehensive global metabolomics study to identify how pathways are disrupted
following hybridization. These data will identify where pathway changes are
likely to accumulate and identify new metabolites of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Evolutionary
Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.