* 2017614
* Tracking Horizontal Inequalities Across Dimensions to Forecast and Understand Instability (TrIAD)
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Panos Chrysanthis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 408,045.00

Inequality within and across societies is at the forefront of academic and
policy discussions related to global-scale challenges from the rise of violent
extremism, the escalation and spread of civil conflict, and potential solutions
to environmental shocks. New conceptual research suggests that group-based
grievances about access to rights and resources, known as horizonal inequalities
(HIs), as compared to individual-to-individual vertical inequalities, are
crucial mechanisms that explain ethnic conflict and instability. However, the
complexity of measuring horizontal inequalities across different and overlapping
groups, rights and resources, and societal contexts, has impeded scientific
understanding and policy-makersâ€™ ability to intervene and mitigate the
potentially destabilizing consequences of HIs. TrIAD (Tracking Horizontal
Inequalities Across Dimensions to Forecast and Understand Instability) overcomes
previous hurdles by linking scholars from the social, information, and computer
sciences, as well as drawing on expertise related to political, security, and
historical dimensions. Furthermore, the project provides a fertile environment
for students with diverse backgrounds to gain high-quality research experience
and develop highly sought-after skills in data science, in general, and
computational social science in particular. The knowledge and technologies
created from this project lay the foundation for the sustained development of
skills for the emerging data-driven society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TrIAD
(Tracking Horizontal Inequalities Across Dimensions to Forecast and Understand
Instability) uniquely connects work on human rights measurement to the concept
of horizonal inequalities (HIs). TrIAD particularly harnesses the sparse and
streaming large-scale data on human rights, using advances in information-
science methods, Bayesian models, and high-performance computing, to understand
how and where horizonal inequalities lead to escalating instability and discover
new means of counteracting this violence. Using PULSAR, a human rights text
parser, TrIAD is able to extract structured information from the streams of raw
textual information authored and published by hundreds of human rights non-
governmental organization in press releases and formal reports daily. From these
human rights documents, TrIAD accurately identifies the perpetuators and
specific victims, as well as codes the human right/resource that is being
violated. TrIAD also includes a modeling and analysis framework that infers the
latent structure of grievances and how they project into violence across
different contexts. The completed TrIAD provides researchers and policy-makers
with highly disaggregated data on systematically unequal access to over 100
resources and rights, across different societal groupings, including salient
racial, linguistic, religious, regional, clan, and ideological partitions that
vary over time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.