* 2017554
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Insectivore Response to Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Kyle Horton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2023
* USD 534,135.00

The lower atmosphere (i.e., aerosphere) is home to literally billions of
organisms, including microbes, insects and birds. Species in the aerosphere
often use other airborne organisms for food and are interdependent on one
another. In recent decades, populations of many aerosphere organisms, such as
birds and butterflies, have been rapidly declining in abundance. This project
will examine the ecology of two bird and one bat species, all three of which
feed on insects, and how their populations are responding in complicated ways to
environmental change. These three species can also all be tracked when they
emerge from their roosts by using state-of-the-art computer vision techniques
with NEXRAD, the United States weather surveillance radar network. Project
researchers will use the vast and ever-growing repository of data from the
NEXRAD network to quantify the causes and consequences of ecological change in
the aerial feeding and group habits of the two bird species (Purple Martins and
Tree Swallows) and Mexican free-tailed Bats. The project will leverage
environmental data from the NSF National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)
together with the radar data to identify the drivers of changes in abundance,
feeding, reproduction and other seasonal patterns. The massive data sets will be
integrated with one another to develop predictions of how these three aerosphere
species are changing at regional to continental scale, and in response to
environmental changes. These studies will also incorporate training
opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher and several graduate students and
will include hosting an annual workshop on radar aeroecology for students and
researchers (including members of underrepresented groups in science). Project
investigators will work with a media team to produce a series of five video
presentations on studying the ecology of birds, bats and insects in the
aerosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two objectives: (1) understand
how global environmental change has impacted seasonal timing and population
abundance of aerial insectivores over the past twenty-five years and (2)
determine drivers of recent within and between seasonal variation in timing and
abundance. Aerial insectivore populations have shown precipitous declines in the
last half century — often at much steeper rates than other aerial taxa.
Understanding mechanisms driving these changes would have broad implications for
hundreds of species of birds, bats, and insects, and also serve as an indicator
of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem health. However, the data sets needed to
understand these mechanisms are currently lacking and urgently needed. While
macroscale remote-sensing platforms for animals are rare, NEXRAD has emerged as
a comprehensive source of information about flying animals, with large-scale and
long-term (&gt;two decades) coverage. The investigators will employ an
interdisciplinary approach integrating radar remote sensing, data from NEON, and
computer modelling to fill this vital gap and to test questions about population
change, phenology, and trophic interactions in response to anthropogenic drivers
of macroscale environmental change. The PIs will focus their project on the
widespread roosting behaviors of three aerial insectivore species as bellwethers
for environmental change and ecosystem health: Purple Martin, Tree Swallow, and
Mexican free-tailed Bat. This collaborative and interdisciplinary approach will
yield large-scale, quantitative, and predictive insights into changing
environments. They will also generate new workflows, methodologies, and insights
for the use of NEON data for the study of global change. Through this proposal
the investigators will generate the tools and web interface to automatically
identify, locate, and disseminate information regarding U.S.-wide roosting
phenomena. The status of aerial insectivores is a representation of the seasonal
pulse of ecosystem health — the questions, infrastructural development, and
outreach proposed will serve as for monitoring the status of aerial insectivores
at the continental scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.