* 2017185
* Development of a glacial abrasion rule for landscape-evolution models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lucas Zoet, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 209,442.00

Glacial landscapes are sculpted by the ice that slides above them. The constant
flow of ice wears away at the underlying bedrock, eroding it through time. The
rates and patterns of this wear stem in part from a process called abrasion,
which results from sediment entrained in basal ice being pressed into the
underlying rock and drug along by the glacier. A number of theories have been
proposed to estimate abrasion rates, which depend on a multitude of parameters.
In order to accurately model the evolution of glacial landscapes, a mathematical
“abrasion law” is needed that accurately captures the physics relevant to
abrasion. The form of the abrasion law is difficult to determine beneath real
glaciers because their beds are often inaccessible and the controlling factors
are difficult to measure in the field. Further compounding these difficulties is
the fact that abrasion rates are miniscule and therefore require decades or
centuries to pass before the eroded volume is measurable. The goal of this
project is to develop a mathematical relationship that describes the physics of
glacial abrasion using a novel set of laboratory instruments, so that it can be
implemented in numerical landscape evolution models. In the laboratory,
conditions can be controlled and measured with the precision needed to
accurately determine the abrasion law. The project will support a graduate and
an undergraduate student from UW-Madison and provide training for
underrepresented students from the College of Menominee
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large-diameter ring shear device and a direct
shear device at UW-Madison will be used to slide debris-laden ice at the
pressure melting point over rock beds that vary in shape and composition. The
striations produced by abrasion will be analyzed using a white light
interferometer capable of measuring the volume of eroded material down to 10-18
cubic meters. With the ability to measure these miniscule volumes, the sliding
experiments can be conducted in relatively short timeframes (less than one month
each) and still generate sufficient abraded volume to determine the abrasion
law. Using these instruments, an abrasion law will be developed that relates the
rate of erosion to independent variables, such as sliding speed, basal melting,
bed shape, debris hardness, and debris concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.