* 2017986
* MRI: Development of an Energy Loss Optical Scintillation System (ELOSS), for Heavy-Ion Particle Identification (PID) to Advance Nuclear Physics Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Alexandra Gade, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 588,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will support development and
deployment of a novel instrument that will precisely identify heavy-ion
particles to advance nuclear science studies with rare-isotope beams. The Energy
Loss Optical Scintillation System (ELOSS) will advance the research
infrastructure for radiation-detection physics and technology, which will lead
to breakthroughs in nuclear physics and nuclear astrophysics. ELOSS will also
help realize the unprecedented discovery potential of the Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams (FRIB), currently under construction on the campus of Michigan
State University. FRIB will be the world’s premier rare-isotope beam facility
producing a majority (~80%) of the isotopes that are created in the cosmos,
which then decay into the elements found on Earth. Studying these short-lived
rare atomic nuclei will help scientists understand the origins of the elements.
The same isotopes are needed to develop a predictive model of atomic nuclei and
how they interact, and advance knowledge in materials science, nuclear medicine,
and homeland security. ELOSS will allow significant advances in multi-messenger
nuclear astrophysics studies, the physics of neutron stars, and the exploration
of the forces that bind nucleons into nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-
art experimental equipment like ELOSS will tap FRIB’s unprecedented discovery
potential by studying isotopes at a high beam rate and high performance. The
ELOSS device will broadly impact radiation-detection physics and technology. It
will generate new insights into the physics processes, technological aspects,
and operational parameters of the modern gas-based detector combined with
advanced solid-state photo-sensors, under harsh heavy-ion beam conditions. Its
operational principle is based on the detection of pure noble-gas scintillation
for particle identification in nuclear physics experiments with heavy ions and
is highly innovative. The expected benefit for identifying nuclear reaction
products will be a superior energy resolution — three times better than present
technology. This will lead to an unprecedented element-identification
capability, a uniform response over large detection areas, and a high counting
rate capability (above 100 kHz). As a result, ELOSS is expected to provide new
opportunities for experiments with rare-isotope beams at
FRIB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.