* 2017863
* FMitF: Track II: Scaling Formal Hardware Security Verification with CheckMate from Research to Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Caroline Trippel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Computers are ubiquitous and performing increasingly sophisticated tasks, from
locking and unlocking smart doors to driving cars and diagnosing disease.
Spectre attacks are a type of hardware security vulnerability that have been
used to leak arbitrary sensitive data processed on modern computers and affect
billions of shipped microprocessors. Given the widespread deployment of complex
microprocessors, devising mechanisms for verifying their secure execution has
become a deeply important problem. The project’s novelties are advances in
hardware-security verification underpinned by the goal of extending the
CheckMate methodology and tool (a formal hardware-security-verification research
prototype) to support the analysis of industry-scale processor designs. The
project’s impacts are an industrial-scale hardware-security verification
technique and tool and consequently secure design and deployment for billions of
future commercial microprocessors. This translates to improved security for the
many important tasks to which we entrust computers
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several thrusts that support the
goal of delivering an improved CheckMate, capable of automatically analyzing
industrial-scale processor designs, and which is suitable for use by hardware
engineers. The first thrust of the project develops an abstraction/refinement
methodology that will extract microarchitectural models for security analysis
directly from the Register Transfer Level description of a microprocessor. At
present, CheckMate requires as input a manually constructed axiomatic
microarchitectural specification, which captures all relevant processor features
for a security analysis while abstracting away the irrelevant ones. The second
project thrust modularizes the CheckMate tool, introducing a dedicated "front
end" that parses a defined Domain Specific Language, handing off the result to a
"back end" solver that can be easily swapped out. This facilitates
experimentation with, and evaluation of, different approaches to solving the
verification problems that CheckMate produces. The third thrust modularizes the
CheckMate verification algorithm itself, allowing CheckMate to search for
potential exploits across hardware module boundaries. The project features a
collaboration with Arm Research to help ensure that CheckMate extensions are
suitable for commercial processor verification. Furthermore, the research
features an application of CheckMate to a microarchitectural description of the
Arm Cortex-R8 microprocessor to evaluate the tool’s ability to detect
susceptibility to Spectre attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.