* 2017913
* Student Support for the 2020 International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Alan Fern, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 04/30/2024
* USD 14,739.00

This grant supports travel for select students participating in the Doctoral
Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the International Conference on Automated Planning
and Scheduling (ICAPS) that will be held in October 2020 in Nancy, France and
the associated summer school held in conjunction with the conference. ICAPS is
the premier international conference for researchers in artificial intelligence
research across a fully international research community. Artificial
intelligence promises broad positive societal impacts in areas ranging from
sustainability, smart grids, health care, user-specific education, scientific
discovery, and robotics, to name a few. Automated planning and scheduling
research is central to improving decision making in dynamic environments. The
DMC creates the opportunity to engage students who might not have attended an AI
conference due to lack of resources. This will draw more talent into AI
research, improve research ideas in their formative stage, and engender
collaborations across the breadth of disciplines. This event provides students
with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a critical
time in their research and enables them to explore their career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This consortium is oriented on research and
career development for students who have identified their PhD topics and are
just embarking on that independent research. The central activities for the DMC
include opportunities for students to present and discuss their work with their
peers; interaction with an identified group of senior researchers for advice on
Ph.D. research; a career panel to discuss career choices in industry and
academia; small group activities led by assigned mentors; and opportunity for
interactions with the international research community in AI, which might lead
to future collaborative activity. In addition, the DMC affords access to
tutorial, workshops, and demonstrations that will provide detailed overviews of
specific subfields by leading researchers in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.