* 2017744
* ADVANCE Adaptation: University of Arkansas Empowering Networked Groups for Arkansas Gender Equity (ENGAGE)
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Shauna Morimoto, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The goals of the University of Arkansasâ€™s NSF ADVANCE Adaptation program
(ENGAGE) are to diversify STEM faculty and assure all faculty can thrive in our
environment. ENGAGE will address the marginalization and isolation of women of
color and white women on campus as a source of inequality by re-imagining how
service work is valued and allotted. Thus, we seek to shift to a culture of
inclusivity and recognition through 1) empowering white women and women of color
through the redistribution of service workloads to both support research and
make service obligations transparent; 2) connecting isolated white women and
women of color to active research teams; and 3) attracting and supporting white
women and women of color to campus. In this way, our equity initiatives seek to
restructure gendered and racialized logics as equitable while addressing the
experience of isolation by providing mentoring and integration into research
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arkansas is positioned to apply
lessons learned from organizations theory and ADVANCE scholarship to change the
university. The cultural shift expected from this project will result in valuing
the contributions of all faculty and will coincide with a university-wide
emphasis on interdisciplinary research, innovation, and collaboration. In
addition, the University of Arkansas Adaptation ENGAGE project will compliment a
recently launched Institute for Inclusion and
Diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.