* 2017932
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO:  Real-time Nanosensing of Membrane Protein Assembly in a TXTL Synthetic Cell System
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Vincent Noireaux, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2024
* USD 666,820.00

The bottom-up construction of synthetic cells that emulate specific biological
functions has the potential to address certain societal problems related to
human health and the environment. A serious limitation in the current state-of-
the-art production of synthetic cells is the lack of basic knowledge of how
particular membrane-associated functions can be engineered into the cells.
Indeed, integrating membrane functions into synthetic cells requires a
quantitative understanding of basic aspects of membrane-protein interactions and
dynamics. The goal of this collaborative project is to advance our fundamental
understanding of membrane protein functions in genetically programmed synthetic
cells using a cutting-edge sensor technology. This project, which is a
collaboration between the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities (US) and the
University of Exeter (UK), also aims to provide early career scientists with
opportunities to do interdisciplinary research and to introduce cutting-edge
biotechnology into the classroom of undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will provide novel
quantitative information on various dynamic features of membrane proteins and
their self-assembly by applying highly-sensitive whispering gallery mode single-
molecule sensors to a set of three biological membrane functions recapitulated
in a synthetic cell system: membrane channels, cytoskeleton and two-component
signal transduction systems. The single molecule experiments will be paralleled
by a quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation approach to provide
complementary information on large scales and collective effects of membrane
proteins at the lipid bilayer. The research effort is divided into three
objectives, to be carried out during the three-year project. First, the
synthetic cell, consisting of a liposome loaded with a cell-free expression
reaction to express the membrane proteins, will be set up on the single molecule
sensor to monitor the insertion of native membrane protein channels and to
characterize their activity. Second, we will use the whispering gallery mode
sensors and the microbalance to monitor previously inaccessible adsorption
kinetics of cytoskeletal proteins that mediate cell shape and division at the
membrane of synthetic cell, as a function of lipid membrane properties. Third,
the single molecule experiments will be performed by several independent sensing
channels to characterize in real time biomolecular structural changes during
signaling of a two-component system. Nanoseconds to hourâ€™s detection timescales
of sensor channels will provide information to analyze the hierarchy of protein
motions in two component systems signaling, with respect to physical and
chemical stimuli. The microbalance will provide information on the relationship
between the membrane biophysical and biochemical properties of the membrane and
the interaction between the proteins of the two-component system. This project
will support the interdisciplinary training of undergraduates and post-doctoral
researchers and aspects of the project will be integrated into curriculum of an
undergraduate student course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.