* 2017927
* FMitF: Track I: Retargetable, Verifiable, Optimizable Computer-Aided Manufacturing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Daniel Grossman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 757,913.00

This project applies and extends ideas from computer science formal methods to
the design and fabrication of manufactured items. Computer-aided manufacturing
promises to have transformative impacts on society for many reasons, including
unprecedented ability for customization and low-volume manufacturing as well as
more efficient and flexible fabrication plans (e.g., as material availability
changes). But designers and engineers need more flexible tools that can optimize
across both the design stage and the fabrication-planning stages, and be robust
to changing constraints. This proposal’s novelties are foundations and
prototypes that enable such tools, in particular by designing interfaces that
are essentially programming languages in the computer science sense and amenable
to automated program analysis for correctness and optimization. This proposal’s
impacts include new languages and tools for computer-aided manufacturing as well
as demonstrations that fabrication can be automatically retargeted to use
different materials and/or processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances
the state-of-the-art in both formal methods and computational fabrication,
centered around the critical use of embedded systems. For computational
fabrication, the project is organized around a central vision: manufacturing is
a form of compilation that translates abstract geometric designs to equivalent
concrete physical fabrication plans. By decomposing manufacturing software into
compiler-like layers of abstraction, the research enables the construction of
automated, reusable,cross-domain analyses, optimizations, and synthesis for
fabrication. For formal methods, manufacturing introduces new challenges. It
requires mixing computational and geometric reasoning, including constraints
like materials that can be neither duplicated nor created from nothing, and that
physical objects obey gravity and cannot occupy the same space as another
object. Additional challenges include concurrency (multiple moving parts during
fabrication) and numerical approximations as objects are moved in continuous
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.