* 2017590
* Collaborative Research:CyberTraining:Implementation:Medium: Broadening Adoption of Parallel and Distributed Computing in Undergraduate Computer Science and Engineering Curricula
* CSE,OAC
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Anshul Gupta, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 701,772.00

This collaborative project represents a multi-faceted effort to shift computer
science and engineering education toward ensuring that students can use 21st
century platforms that pervasively incorporate parallel and distributed
computing (PDC). Twentieth century computers were mostly designed around a
single processor, executing a sequence of operations. But this century is
characterized by widespread deployment of multi-core, graphics, and AI tensor
processors, as well as a shift to cloud servers, and the internet of things, all
of which depend on the much different PDC approach to problem solving and
programming. Financial, technical, scientific, engineering and medical
companies, government labs, the department of defense, the intelligence
community, and many other sectors are desperately seeking employees who can
exploit PDC systems, because the existing workforce was heavily steeped in the
old model. Yet most students continue to learn the old approach due to
significant inertia in academia. To turn the tide toward infusing PDC into the
early stages of computer science and engineering education, this project will
guide curricula and accreditation standards, prepare teachers, and foster a
strong PDC education community. It will thus strategically serve the national
interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; and to secure the national
defense. It will be a significant step toward modernizing the emerging workforce
to have the computing skills needed for the United States to maintain leadership
in all of these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Parallel and
Distributed Computing Curriculum Development and Educational Resources (CDER) is
preparing the 2020 update of their 2013 curriculum guidelines for introducing
parallel and distributed computing (PDC) into early undergraduate courses. This
project will engage in four areas of activity to foster adoption of the
curriculum, and extend it, with the goal of modernizing computer science and
engineering workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;One major thrust is running summer
training workshops for teachers, to learn both PDC concepts and experimental
course evaluation methodology. The discipline is still in a phase of discovery
with respect to PDC education approaches, and must encourage a diverse set of
well-designed experiments to test and evaluate a broad range of pedagogical
hypotheses. The workshop participants will be drawn from a diverse pool of
educators, and given curriculum development grants in support of experimental
course offerings and evaluation, leading to conference or journal publications,
as well as contributions of exemplars to the CDER online course materials
repository. &lt;br/&gt;A second effort is to help ABET/CSAB to formulate core
PDC requirements and to inform/train ABET/CSAB evaluators (CSAB is the lead
society within ABET for accreditation of degree programs in computer science).
&lt;br/&gt;A third effort is expanding the curriculum guidelines to explicitly
address adding PDC to computer engineering programs, which present novel
curricular opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;Lastly, it will continue CDER's successes
in organizing PDC education workshops in conjunction with major conferences,
publishing PDC education books and journal special issues, maintaining and
curating an online repository of PDC education resources, and providing free
access to a publicly available PDC education cluster
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.