* 2017107
* SBP: An Alternative to Strict Control? Culture and Authority in Progressive Urban Public High Schools
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Maia Cucchiara, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 337,910.00

Low-income youth of color often experience exclusionary discipline and zero
tolerance policies in urban schools, which can result in a school-to-prison
pipeline. We know such policies can be deleterious, suggesting an urgent need
for alternative models and institutions that can change the dynamics related to
the criminalization of youth. “Progressive” approaches, which emphasize student-
centered instruction and social and emotional as well as academic goals, may
represent a promising strategy. Yet these approaches have largely been reserved
for independent schools and their relatively affluent (and white)
constituencies. Recently, however, the number of progressive schools serving
low-income students has grown, as schools and districts across the country have
shown new interest in this model. This study provides an in-depth analysis of
urban public schools offering a progressive program for low-income youth of
color. Results from this study will have important implications for educators,
law enforcement officials, community organization professionals, and others
committed to working more effectively with such populations, thus potentially
changing educational practices so as to interrupt the school-to-prison pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban schools that use exclusionary discipline and zero
tolerance policies often facilitate a school-to-prison pipeline that is
deleterious to low-income youths’ social and developmental trajectories. This
qualitative study will develop an ethnographically-driven conception of school
culture and update and refine current understandings of authority in schools.
The design includes three components. The first, and largest, component is
ethnographic case studies of two progressive high schools serving low-income
students of color, which will occur over two years and involve nearly 2,000
hours of participant-observation and 98 interviews. The second is site visits to
10 progressive schools and observations at various progressive education
meetings and events, including130 hours of observation and 30 interviews. Third,
these data are further contextualized by 10 additional interviews with local
school district administrators and educators. Findings from the study will
inform sociological theories regarding authority in schools, adolescent
development trajectories, particularly for low-income youth, and arguments
regarding connections between lower socioeconomic status and life chances in our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.