* 2017019
* Breaking Risk Habituation to Occupational Hazards using Virtual Reality Interventions with Aversive Sensory Feedback
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Lewis, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Workers in high-risk industries such as construction encounter numerous safety
hazards during their daily tasks, and such repeated exposures to a hazard
without an adverse event may desensitize the worker to risks. This behavioral
tendency, often called risk habituation, is one of the central causal factors in
workplace accidents, and it is widely thought to reflect a consequence of
learning on cognitive and perceptual processes. Overcoming risk habituation
requires overriding the mental lapses that can occur when workers default to
well-learned and automatic behaviors. To this end, this project will construct a
virtual reality (VR) training system that detects a trainee's risk habituation
and provides direct, negative sensory feedback during simulated accidents. This
system will sense the development of risk habituation based on behavioral and
physiological responses (e.g., body movement, eye tracking, electrodermal
activity) and generate interventions by demonstrating the potential consequences
of habituated behaviors via negative sensory feedback (i.e., visual, auditory,
and touch). Outcomes resulting from this project are expected to transform
safety training practices so that managers can deliver more direct and effective
behavioral interventions to habituated workers, rather than rely on conventional
training methods (e.g., classroom instruction) for safety-knowledge
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be organized in two phases.
First, the project will create fully adaptive experiential learning environments
wherein subjects experience VR-simulated accidents,complete with aversive
sensory feedback, in response to the onset of risk habituation. This first phase
will include: (1) designing and building an adaptive VR environment that
provokes trainees' habituated behaviors; (2) identifying physiological signals
that mark the onset/stage of risk habituation; and (3) creating a VR
intervention with aversive sensory feedback to effectively reduce habituations.
In collaboration with Texas A&amp;M's Engineering Extension Service's
Infrastructure Training &amp; Safety Institute, during the second phase, this
project will examine the effect of the proposed training on habituated workers
in high-risk occupations. This second phase will: (1) examine the impact of the
proposed training on risk habituation across road construction workers with
varying levels of sensory habituation; and (2) explore the extent to which the
impact of the proposed training translates to risk perception and to the safety
attitudes of trainees. By pairing rigorous psychophysical assessments of sensory
habituation with translational measures acquired in a VR environment, the
successful completion of this project will provide a strong empirical basis for
addressing sensory habituation to improve worksite safety. More importantly,
this project will translate research on aversive conditioning and
attention/learning to scientifically-based approaches for shaping the real-world
safety behavior of people, thereby providing a foundation for creating VR
safety-training modules for stimulating behavior change. Additionally, this
study will produce a curriculum on the cognitive and behavioral aspects of
safety management, and it will deliver such topical lessons to diverse
learners,including undergraduate/graduate students and safety managers, and
cultivate broader awareness about risk habituation in the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.