* 2017935
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Building the San Francisco Bay Network for Student Opportunities in Avian Research to enhance STEM education and assess urban impacts on avian ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Anthony Barnosky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2022
* USD 74,157.00

The project will bring together a group of faculty, students, and volunteers to
design an experiential learning and research program focused on the study of
birds and their habitats. The program will introduce undergraduate students,
especially those from underserved communities, to STEM activities in both the
field and laboratory. It will be valuable in shedding light on the dynamics of
bird populations in the South San Francisco Bay, which is an important portion
of a north-south “highway in the sky” for birds that annually migrate between
the northern and southern hemispheres. The project will advance biology
education by providing opportunities for hands-on field research and follow-up
lab activities for students who do not presently have access to such
experiential learning in outdoor settings. It will advance fundamental knowledge
by revealing how humans are influencing natural ecological systems, and whether
those influences are beneficial or detrimental.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create the foundation for a new Research Coordination Network: the
San Francisco Bay Research Coordination Network for Student Opportunities in
Avian Research. The new network will be composed of investigators from three
universities (Stanford University, San Jose State University, and Santa Clara
University), a community college (West Valley Community College), and a non-
governmental organization (San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory). The intended
products are planning workshops, prototypes of outdoor learning modules, and a
detailed roadmap for growing and sustaining the program. Prototypes of outdoor
learning modules will bring students and faculty into the field to
collaboratively learn how to monitor and analyze data pertinent to understanding
avian population dynamics in two field areas, Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve
and the San Francisco Bay Bird Observatory Coyote Creek Field Station. Follow-up
studies in the laboratories of the network participants will include analyses of
data the students collect augmented by three decades of bird-census data
available from both field sites. Students will also learn to apply cutting-edge
analytical techniques such as genome sequencing and GIS tools. The network will
bring together resources from the participating institutions to better serve the
multicultural and economically disparate constituents of the region. It will
demonstrate the need, value, and opportunities for career paths in environmental
sciences. Exposure of students to these career paths will diversify their job
prospects and train them to be effective stewards of the national and global
resources upon which nations ultimately depend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.