* 2017324
* Consequences of interspecific and intraspecific variation in floral scent for pollinator attraction, plant reproduction, and plant-pollinator interaction rewiring
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Pati Vitt, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Floral scent varies among flowers of different species. Even different
individuals of the same species often have subtly different combinations of
chemicals that combine to make up their scent profiles. In this work we will
address two questions. First, how do subtle variations in floral scent affect
pollinator attraction and subsequent plant reproductive success? Second, are
some scent combinations especially attractive to wild bees, thereby giving some
flowers better pollination services and a reproductive edge? Answering these
questions will shed light on the important ecosystem service provided by
pollinators. Specifically, results will provide a better understanding of the
role of floral scent in pollinator attraction and the consequences of variation
in floral scent for plant success. Further, this research will inform management
decisions intended to maintain and restore plant and pollinator communities,
especially in the context of environmental change. The results of this work will
be broadly disseminated to the public, land managers, and the scientific
community. The public will be engaged through National Public Lands Day events
and National Pollinator Week events focused on healthy pollinators and
pollinator habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address these
questions in a montane wildflower meadow in Montana, USA. Specifically, the
research will investigate the consequences of among-species and among-individual
variation in floral scent for pollination services and plant reproduction using
naturally-growing plants. Second, the researchers will pilot the use of 3-D
printed model flowers for use in experiments that manipulate floral scent.
Floral scents from naturally-growing flowers will be applied to 3-D printed
model flowers and pollinator attraction to these models will be compared to real
flowers with the same floral scents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.