* 2017415
* Conference: Georgetown University Round Table 2021 on Dialect Contact
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Jennifer Nycz, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2023
* USD 22,842.00

This project consists of a roundtable on language and linguistics on the theme
of "Dialect Contact". Dialect contact occurs whenever speakers of mutually
intelligible language varieties interact, and the outcomes of such contact are
important for many topics in linguistics and other areas of language sciences.
Scholars who examine the behavior of individual speakers find that people change
their speech to become more similar to those they interact with, both in
laboratory contexts and as a result of long-term mobility, and that these
adjustments are mediated by various linguistic and social-attitudinal factors.
Scholars who focus on community-level dialect change show how contact alters the
structure of dialects and how factors like language complexity influence which
features persist and which do not. Dialect contact can thus be approached as an
individual-level or a community-level phenomenon; a cognitive process or a
social one. But these two levels of analysis are inseparable: any individual’s
language system is shaped by their social context, and community dialects are,
ultimately, spoken by individual speakers. To fully understand the mechanisms
and outcomes of dialect contact, scholars with different orientations need to
come together and share methodologies, empirical findings, theoretical
approaches, and avenues for future research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will provide a unique opportunity for the wide range of scholars
working on some aspect of dialect contact to come together and share
methodologies, empirical findings, theoretical approaches, and avenues for
future research and collaborations. The aim is to bring together researchers
from across a broad range of subdisciplines - phoneticians, laboratory
phonologists, psycholinguists, sociolinguists, and theoretical linguists - as
well as those who examine dialect contact using agent-based modelling or
neurolinguistic methodologies. This interaction will help to provide fruitful
cross-pollinations across disciplinary approaches and potentially foster new
collaborations. The conference will include plenary speakers, individual
presentations, and panel proposals from a range of perspectives. In order to
support a long-term impact on the field, graduate student and early-career
scholar participation will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.