* 2017171
* Collaborative Research: Biochemical, genetic and structural studies of bilin lyases
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Wendy Schluchter, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2024
* USD 521,578.00

Marine phytoplankton at the base of the food web take carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere during photosynthesis and turn it into a form that all life in the
ocean can use. This project aims to study how a group of widespread
phytoplankton called Synechococcus succeed in photosynthesis by matching their
pigment composition to the light environment. This phenomenon, known as
chromatic acclimation, involves a few genes that allow these microbes to
incorporate different pigments depending on the available color of light
filtering through the ocean. The team will characterize the structures and
functions of the proteins encoded by these genes. Findings of this research will
help predict how marine Synechococcus and the food chain are affected by changes
in the ocean. These studies promise to expand the repertoire of fluorescent bio-
imaging probes for biotechnology. This research will train 4 graduate students,
6-8 undergraduate students, 6 high school teachers, and 3-6 high school students
in genetics, biochemistry and structural biology. Outreach activities include
camps which will increase the persistence and diversity of STEM majors, high
school teacher training modules, and promotion of the public’s awareness of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine Synechococcus achieve extensive pigment
diversity via post-translational modifications of phycobiliproteins that
constitute the photosynthetic antennae called phycobilisomes. Phycobiliprotein
biogenesis involves attachment of chemically distinct bilin pigments to these
proteins via enzymatic reactions catalyzed by bilin lyases. Bilin lyase-
isomerases attach a green-absorbing bilin and isomerize it to a blue-absorbing
bilin. These enzymes play a key role in Type IV Chromatic Acclimation (CA4), in
which the cells change color as a result of massive restructuring of their
phycobilisomes under blue or green light. The ability to perform CA4 is
conferred by a small genomic island composed of 4-5 genes, including a bilin
lyase. However, the mechanism by which Synechococcus utilizes different bilin
lyases and lyase-isomerases to achieve their pigment diversity remains elusive.
This research integrates biochemistry, molecular genetics and structural biology
to study a group of uncharacterized bilin lyases involved in CA4. The project
aims are: (1) to identify and characterize novel lyases and lyase-isomerases
responsible for key changes in bilin content that occur during CA4; (2) to
determine the functional role of Unk10, a novel protein encoded in the CA4
genomic island, which is hypothesized to influence chromophorylation at those
bilin sites involved in CA4; (3) to combine crystallography and mutagenesis to
establish the reaction mechanism and structural basis that distinguishes between
lyase and lyase-isomerase functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.