* 2017687
* Mechanistic analysis of microtubule nucleation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Luke Rice, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 677,614.00

This project seeks to define the molecular rules that determine how a new
microtubule forms from its building blocks - the αβ-tubulin protein subunits.
Microtubules are dynamic polymeric assemblies that organize the insides of
cells, mediate faithful segregation of the genetic material during cell
division, and provide tracks for motor-based transport. The research will focus
on microtubule nucleation, the poorly understood process by which αβ-tubulin
units self-assemble to initiate a new microtubule. The project will reveal and
quantify how structural and biochemical properties of the individual αβ-tubulin
building blocks determine the rate of microtubule nucleation and the sequence of
oligomeric intermediates that precede formation of a new microtubule, and how
these vary in αβ-tubulins from different species. The project also emphasizes an
educational impact. Graduate students working on the project will receive
interdisciplinary training that includes quantitative biochemistry and
computational modeling. Outreach partnerships with local elementary and middle
schools will bring the excitement of doing science to underrepresented and
economically disadvantaged students, while providing teachers and their pupils
access to high-tech, but relatively inexpensive, digital microscopes to
facilitate curiosity-based learning and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific research objective of this proposal is to create a molecular
understanding of microtubule nucleation. Dynamic properties of microtubules
derive from the biochemical properties of individual αβ-tubulin subunits and
their interactions within the polymeric assembly. MT nucleation – the formation
of a new polymer from unpolymerized subunits – is a poorly understood behavior
that is critical for building MT networks and it is highly regulated by cellular
factors. The research will use computational and experimental approaches to
address three specific goals: (i) to develop a mechanistic understanding of
microtubule nucleation in a simplified setting where αβ-tubulin GTPase activity
has been suppressed, (ii) to use Monte Carlo simulations to create a more exact
and generalizable description of the biochemical mechanisms that control MT
nucleation in a way that can account for the effects of GTPase activity, (iii)
to use protein engineering to assemble and trap defined oligomers of αβ-tubulin
that would otherwise be too unstable to work with, and to use these oligomers
for new kinds of structural, biochemical, and mechanistic studies. All work will
be carried out using two different model systems, recombinant yeast and human
αβ-tubulin, providing insight into whether and how microtubule nucleation and
αβ-tubulin biochemistry vary across species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This works is
jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function
Clusters of MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.