* 2017683
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Retirement Practices, Resource Management, and Financial Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Susan Gal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 19,769.00

This doctoral dissertation research project scientifically explores how resource
and financial planning strategies are managed among aging populations. Focusing
on an age-restricted retirement community, the researcher examines what
experiences influence retirement behavior in older age, as well as how economic
and ecological resources are understood and utilized among retirees. This work
will shed light on the ways American retirement is shaping the future of the
U.S. Southwest; what obstacles are inhibiting the possibility of retirement
among future generations; and what influence the current demographic of retirees
has in shaping these changes. A key impact of this project will be to expand
academic and public discussions on aging by linking choices about and
experiences of retirement with financial planning and life histories. Further,
it will focus on the way population growth impacts resource planning and will
increase public knowledge about the environmental resources in this region. In
addition to training a graduate student in methods of scientific data collection
and analysis, it will also provide valuable material for governmental and
nongovernmental professionals working in the fields of aging policy, retirement
planning, and urban development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will
shadow retirees, conduct media and archival research, and conduct in-depth
interviews and life histories in order to understand how retirement is
understood or experienced by older Americans, estate planners, municipal water
officials, and relatives of retirees. The researcher has several specific goals.
She intends to answer the following questions: What can retirement practices
today illuminate about the American Dream, both how it is understood and the way
it plays out locally in the West? How do retirement practices reveal internal
differentiation among social groups? And how does the expansion of retirement
communities in the American West shape present and future economic and
ecological conditions and infrastructures? By answering these questions, the
researcher will contribute to a greater understanding of resource management, as
well as to the way heterogeneous groups build new forms of sociality. She
proposes to combine ethnographic approaches with a robust historical framework
in order to provide multi-dimensional insights into eldercare, finance, and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.