* 2017797
* Functions and Regulation of Nuclear Actin
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Tina Tootle, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 900,000.00

While actin localizes to the nucleus from yeast to humans, the functions of
nuclear actin remain poorly understood. Most studies on actin have focused on
its roles in the cytoskeleton, where it forms networks of filaments that give
cells their shape and allow them to move. However, actin also localizes to the
nucleus. One nuclear site of actin is the nucleolus. The nucleolus is an
essential nuclear organelle and mediates the formation of ribosomes which are
required for all protein synthesis in the cell; thus, nucleolar function is
required for life. The nucleolus also senses and responds to cellular stress,
including high temperatures and starvation. Under stress conditions, the
nucleolus stops non-essential processes to allow the cell to weather the stress,
and when necessary, drives cell death. The objectives of this project are to
define the nucleolar functions of actin and to show how these functions are
controlled to maintain cell and tissue function, not only under normal
conditions but in response to cellular stress. The Broader Impacts of this
project include efforts to increase the diversity of students pursuing degrees
and careers in biological sciences. One barrier to pursuing a scientific career
is a lack of understanding about how scientific research is carried out. To help
overcome this barrier, the project will develop a 6-week Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) targeting ~80 underrepresented students
in their first two years of undergraduate education, including those from
communities of socioeconomic and educational disadvantage. Thus, this project
will increase both the students’ and society’s understanding of nuclear actin
and how it is important for life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To uncover the roles of
nuclear actin in the nucleolus during tissue development, homeostasis, and
response to cellular stress, this project uses the robust genetic system of
Drosophila oogenesis. In this system, nuclear actin is critical for female
fertility and is dynamically regulated during follicle development.
Specifically, nuclear actin is enriched in the nucleolus. The nucleolus mediates
many nuclear activities, including rDNA transcription, ribosome biogenesis, and
chromatin organization. Inhibition of nucleolar functions disrupts its
structure. Aberrant nucleolar morphology is seen when nuclear actin levels are
altered, suggesting nuclear actin regulates nucleolar functions. Altering
nuclear actin levels also perturbs chromatin organization, another function of
the nucleolus. Additionally, both the nucleolus and nuclear actin respond to the
same cellular stresses. Stress results in disruption of nucleolar activity and
structure; it also increases nuclear actin levels driving nuclear actin rod
formation. Further, during Drosophila oogenesis, nuclear actin rod formation
results in one nuclear actin pool relocating from the nucleolus to the rods.
Together these data lead to the project’s novel central hypothesis that: Nuclear
actin dynamics regulate nucleolar structure and function to both maintain
cellular homeostasis and respond to cellular stress, processes that are
essential for follicle development. To test this hypothesis, the proposed study
will use a combination of sophisticated genetics, advanced biochemistry, state-
of-the-art microscopy, quantitative image analyses and unbiased approaches,
including proteomics and a genetic screen. Together these investigations will 1.
Define the form-specific roles of nuclear actin in regulating nucleolar
structure and functions, including rDNA transcription, ribosome biogenesis, and
chromatin organization; 2. Determine how nuclear actin contributes to the
nucleolar stress response; and 3. Identify new regulators of nuclear actin. As
the nucleolus has emerged as a key regulator of tissue homeostasis, uncovering
the connections between the nucleolus and nuclear actin is critical for
understanding both normal cell and tissue function, and how mis-regulation of
nuclear actin contributes to cellular stress pathways and tissue
dysfunction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Project is cofunded by the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and
EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.