* 2017280
* SBP:Using Gesture to Augment web-based Mathematics Instruction for Children and Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2024
* Susan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 723,113.00

This research focuses on the role that gesture can play in hearing and deaf
children’s math learning in an online/remote instructional context, and asks
whether gesture plays the same role in hearing and deaf adults as it plays in
children. The Covid-19 pandemic has amplified the need to make computer online
instruction a viable alternative method for dispensing education. Yet,
schools—especially those in low-income areas—have struggled to adapt to remote
and online instruction, compromising educational goals and deeply affecting
marginalized and low-income children and college students. This challenge points
to the lack of systematic evidence on what works in online education, who online
education works for, and how to improve this vehicle for education. This
research explores: (1) how instruction that includes gesture enhances math
learning in children in an online context; (2) whether gesture can be used as a
tool for math learning in adults; (3) whether the mechanisms underlying
gesture’s impact on learning are the same for child and adult learners. The
project focuses on two foundational STEM concepts––mathematical equivalence, an
essential building block for later complex math and science concepts in
children; standard deviation, an essential concept for statistical understanding
and complex quantitative reasoning in adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to harness the science of gesture to improve the design
of online mathematics lessons for children and adults. Online learning materials
are proliferating rapidly, but often lack properties of human interactions such
as gesture (the hand movements people make while speaking or signing that add
visual/spatial imagery to the message). The research has 3 specific aims: (1) To
determine whether gestures in math instruction can be employed in an
online/remote venue for hearing and deaf individuals. (2) To determine why
gesture works to promote learning. Does gesture play a role in learning because
it is produced by the body? Does it have an impact on learning because it is
produced simultaneously with speech? Does it do more than direct a learner’s
attention? (3) To determine whether the mechanisms responsible for gesture’s
impact on learning are the same in children and adults. The protocol for both
children and adults contains an assessment of the participant’s understanding of
the concept; instruction in the concept; and a second assessment comparable to
the first. Children are taught mathematical equivalence in an online context;
gesture is systematically varied in “just-in-time” feedback during a mathematics
lesson. Adults are taught standard deviation in an in-person context in which
gesture is systematically varied.This project is co-funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to enhance preK-12 teaching and
learning of science, technology, engineering and mathematics through the
research and development of new innovations and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.