* 2017957
* The Impact of Big Data on Dynamic Personalized Pricing: Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Patrick Kehoe, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies that exist today allow firms to
identify and track individual customers online. The possibility for firms to
engage in personalized pricing have dramatically expanded with the advent of
large datasets (Big Data) on consumers' individual characteristics, purchasing,
and web-browsing behavior together with improved artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques and the increasing role of customer feedback through social media.
One concern about these developments is that firms in online markets with access
to granular sensitive information about individual consumers may exploit this
advantage through advanced algorithms to discriminate across consumers, by
charging higher prices to those who are identified to have a higher demand for
their products. This project investigates the impact of Big Data and AI on
firms' incentives to acquire and disseminate information about market demand,
the circumstances under which Big Data and AI intensify or hinder firm
competition, and how the intensity of competition affects pricing and consumers'
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project first develops a dynamic model of
competitive price discrimination in the presence of rich information that
enables firms to implement sophisticated pricing strategies. The research
demonstrates that unlike in a monopoly setting with first-degree price
discrimination, in the setting considered in this research, novel forms of
inefficiencies can arise. Hence, new types of policy interventions to restore
efficiency may be appropriate. The project shows that as long as multiple firms
have access to a given consumer's data for the same product, competition between
firms can make consumers better off than if no firm had access to such data. The
project then applies the developed model to the online sales of smartphones and
tablets to quantify the effects of personalized pricing in this market. This
exercise is a pilot study of a large and important market for which the pricing
strategies considered are natural. The project then applies developed model to
new data from a large retail marketplace in order to characterize the policy
implications of the new environment for many more industries and
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.