* 2017673
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Linear Algebra Preparation for Emergent Neural Network Architectures (LAPENNA)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kwai Wong, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 310,465.00

In this project, the Linear Algebra Preparation for Emergent Neural Network
Architectures (LAPENNA) program is organized to provide essential knowledge to
advance literacy in AI to sustain the growth and development of the workforce in
the cyberinfrastructure (CI) ecosystem of data-driven science. This program
provides integrated expertise to faculty, students, and researchers the
knowledge in numerical mathematics, linear algebra software, data-driven
methods, and machine learning tools to tackle day to day problems in data
science applications. This program aims to prepare college researchers to
enable, design, and direct their own in-house data-driven science programs and
incorporate perspectives from their research into their course curricula. The
knowledge and experiences gathered under the direction of LAPENNA will be
beneficial to CI practitioners as well as to general interested parties leading
to fostering new collaborative partners and potential research initiatives and
workforce training programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LAPENNA focuses on delivering
algorithmic and computational techniques, numerical and programming procedures,
and AI software implementation on emergent CPU cloud systems and GPU platforms.
It runs two training sessions every year. Ten webinars/lectures are delivered
with supporting online tutorials available for general public use. In each
session, eight teams of faculty/researchers and students are selected to
participate in the LEPENNA program. Each team consists of two members from an
institution. The training for each cohort lasts for six months and concludes
with an on-site one-week workshop. Follow-up Q &amp; A sessions connect the
college teams and PIs during and after the training events and continue to
provide hardware and software support to them. LAPENNA delivers online materials
that are useful and available to general CI
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.