* 2017635
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Family Membership, Marital Status, and Citizenship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Doris Brossard, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,199.00

Marital status and membership in a traditional family have been central in
defining a sense of belonging in the nation. Since the early years of the
American Republic, the ideal citizen has been imagined as married and part of a
family. This project will examine how the state created laws and policies
designed to regulate the lives of single people, and how status as a single
person shaped individualâ€™s relationship to the state and their claim to
citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on five groups of
single people in the U.S. during the first half of the 20th century: World War I
veterans, single immigrants, young single women, transients, and young
unemployed single men during the Depression. Based on theories of citizenship,
gender, and mobility, this project will employ a qualitative analysis of
archival collections and documents to analyze the various legal responses of the
state to the perceived threat of singleness. By analyzing the legal history of
single people and the state, this research will provide insight into laws and
policies aimed at nontraditional families and singleness. Ultimately, this study
will assess how family membership and marital status, and the lack thereof, have
shaped an understanding of citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.