* 2017048
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Scale, Space, and Time: A Unifying Approach to Aquatic Invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Julian Olden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2024
* USD 75,903.00

Invasive species pose a serious threat to biodiversity and economic security,
with acute effects in river ecosystems. Yet despite decades of research, ecology
still faces a glaring paradox: many invasion theories are at odds with one
another, but each is supported by strong evidence. The paradox exists because
most studies are conducted in only one of three key ecological dimensions:
scale, space, and time. This project will take a cross-scale approach from small
stream segments to whole watersheds across the landscape at numerous time steps.
In doing so, this work will use a macrosystems framework to link invasion
theories with empirical evidence across all three dimensions to further our
understanding of how species invasions happen and how to prevent or manage them.
This research will focus on riverine fishes—one of the most diverse yet
imperiled groups of organisms in North America. In the process, this project
will generate a large-extent, fine-resolution dataset of fish occurrences that
can be used for numerous purposes beyond the lifetime of the project. This
dataset can be linked to the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and
other federally-supported data to infer broad mechanistic patterns and
processes. Results from this work will be used to develop an interactive spatial
planning tool for predicting future fish invasions across the Mississippi River
basin—the largest connected river network in North America. This tool will be
shared via numerous communication outlets including webinars, websites, and
social media. A diverse group of over 20 graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in the course of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to understand how natural and human-created dispersal networks
(e.g. rivers and roads) interact with invasion drivers (e.g. habitat and species
traits) to determine cross-scale invasion patterns. This work will be conducted
in the Mississippi River Basin; rivers provide a unique opportunity for studying
scale-dependent invasion processes because watersheds create discrete boundaries
of fish species distribution. Accordingly, many of the most prolific invaders
arrive not from distant continents, but from nearby watersheds. Native status
for riverine fishes is thus scale-dependent, which affects how invasions are
conceptualized and modeled. Using rich datasets of historical and contemporary
fish distribution, this project takes a three-pronged approach: 1) using
Bayesian tools to quantify invasion drivers across spatial scales; 2) linking
concepts from metacommunity and invasion ecology to investigate invasion network
dynamics across space; and 3) predicting trajectories of species invasions
through time. The project will integrate information from these three research
objectives to forecast future riverine invasions across the
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.