* 2017311
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Personality Traits of U.S. Courts of Appeals Judges
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Ryan Black, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2022
* USD 31,300.00

A personality is a unique feature of individuals that defines and dictates
everyday actions in their lives, including judges on the U.S Courts of Appeals.
This project will develop individual personality profiles of these judges by
mapping them onto the popular Big Five traits of openness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. This project then will incorporate
the influence of those personality traits on judicial decision making and
behavior at the U.S. Courts of Appeals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
gather pre-confirmation writings and speeches for all available judges on the
U.S. Courts of Appeals from 1947-2020, encompassing approximately 700 judges.
Using cutting edge developments in textual analysis, estimates of the Big Five
personality traits will be generated. With these estimates in hand, this project
will examine how personality traits influence judicial behavior and,
consequently, federal law. This project will generate personality trait
estimates for federal court judges, as well as the underlying corpus of text
documents used to generate them. Project data will be widely disseminated to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.