* 2017071
* A study of the dynamics of drop impact: Impact forces, pressure and shear stress distributions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 301,478.00

From raindrops battering on a windshield to coffee splashing on a table, drop
impact is ubiquitous in our daily life and relevant to many important natural
and industrial processes. Although the phenomenon has been studied for many
decades, the understanding of drop impact is still far from complete due to the
complexity associated with typical fast impact processes. Significant progress
has been made on drop impact in recent years using high-speed photographic
techniques. Relying on direct imaging, most experiments focused on the
kinematics of drop impact, i.e., the shape of impacting drops. Few studies have
probed the dynamic properties of drop impact such as its impact force, pressure
and shear stress. These dynamic quantities lead to the most important outcome of
an impact event and affect a wide range of phenomena, including soil erosion,
impact-induced wear/damage and the survival of living organisms exposed to the
elements. The goal of this research is to conduct a systematic study on mapping
the dynamic aspects of drop impact under different conditions. The research will
develop a new experimental technique, 3D high-speed stress microscopy, to
measure the impact force, pressure, and shear stress of drop impact with high
spatial and temporal resolutions. The project will provide a fundamental
understanding of the dynamics of drop impact in unexplored regimes and a
practical guideline to control impact forces and mitigate impact-induced damage
on solid substrates. The project will also provide a unique opportunity to
introduce frontier research in undergraduate curriculum and forge collaborations
with coating companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining traction force
microscopy with high-speed photography, the research will construct a 3D high-
speed stress microscope to measure the temporal variation of pressure and shear
stress distributions beneath an impacting drop during a fast impact process.
With the new technique, the project will verify previous theoretical
predictions, including the singular dynamics of off-center pressures, the
scaling relation of drag forces, and the propagation of boundary layers in
spreading drops. As such, the study will reveal the dynamics of drop impact in
spatiotemporal regimes, inaccessible to conventional kinematic measurements.
Moreover, the research will examine the influence of different surface
properties such as stiffness, wettability, and micro-textures on the stress
distributions. The study aims to seek optimal surface designs, which can
substantially reduce impact-induced wear and damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.