* 2017315
* Modeling and Analyzing the Conditions under which Firms Strategically Allocate Resources
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* In Song Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 432,731.00

This study advances scientific knowledge on how interest groups make investments
to affect targeted outcomes. The project develops a theoretical framework that
explains how groups strategically allocate their resources. The project produces
a database relevant to that links more than 75 million public reports and
contribution filings of elected office holders and firms. This project also
provides interactive online learning tools so that students and teachers with
different educational backgrounds can learn more about representation across
various policy issues such as international trade, healthcare, education, and
national security. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project develops a theoretical
model that provides a micro-foundation for analyzing the conditions under which
firms strategically allocate important resources. The model features the
standard multi-sector component with heterogeneous firms, selection into
production and firm entry, and endogenous activities pertinent to government.
This study will also develop open-source software to facilitate access and
analysis of the projectâ€™s PostgreSeQL relational database, which allows
researchers to readily explore/export large scale data for computational social
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.