* 2017624
* CyberTraining: Pilot: EBCS-TMPS: An Evidence Based Cybersecurity Training and Mentorship Program for Students
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Robert Harrison, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 298,189.00

The Evidence Based Cybersecurity Training and Mentorship Program for Students
(EBCS-TMPS) leverages an existing cyberinfrastructure to prepare students to
become effective cybersecurity and law enforcement researchers. Through this
program, students are exposed to theoretical knowledge, practical skills, and
hands-on experience that are most sought by governmental, industrial and law
enforcement organizations. This is accomplished using a standalone
cyberinfrastructure created and maintained by researchers and practitioners in
the Evidence Based Cybersecurity Research group in Georgia State University that
enables the production of evidence-based cybersecurity research and supports the
training of cybercrime researchers. Among ultimate benefits are improved
cybersecurity and a more secure and crime-free online
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EBCS-TMPS engages academics and practicing
cybersecurity professionals as co-creators of research outcomes. During a two-
months-long summer workshop, existing and strong academic-industry-law-
enforcement partnerships are leveraged to train 30 undergraduate and graduate
students in the deployment of better scientific efforts aimed at advancing CI-
enabled and reliable research. The training program implements a wide range of
activities to deliver key methodological and technical skills that are necessary
for developing a cost effective cybersecurity posture for organizations (for
industry track students), as well as for enforcing policies and laws aimed at
disrupting online criminal activities in an effective manner (for both industry
and law enforcement tracks). The interdisciplinary team of educators (composed
of Criminology, Computer Science and Computer Information System scholars)
supports studentsâ€™ development of knowledge in cybersecurity areas such as
gathering and preserving evidence, implementing effective security policies, and
technical aspects of security. The industry and law enforcement mentors support
both the development of an industry-relevant curriculum for the EBCS-TMPS, and
guided internships with their teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.