* 2017817
* MSA: Macro-Demography of North America's Migratory Avifauna
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Frank LaSorte, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,836.00

Reversing the global loss of biodiversity is a primary challenge of our time,
however the reasons for species declines are often poorly understood. Birds
exemplify this crisis, with the North American continent supporting 3 billion
fewer birds today than in 1970. Migratory birds are particularly hard hit. These
birds travel vast distances between their wintering and breeding grounds, making
it difficult to pinpoint where threats exist and where conservation efforts
should be focused. To understand current bird declines, researchers require
accurate estimates of the birth and death rates of birds across the vast
geographic areas they visit. However, such information is currently only
available for a few select locations during short periods of the year. This
research will address these challenges by developing novel tools to measure the
birth and death rates of birds across an entire continent and throughout the
whole year. The insights generated by these efforts will help researchers to
understand which factors have been causing population declines. In particular,
researchers will investigate how extreme climatic events such as heat waves and
cold spells have affected birth and death rates. Explaining such year-to-year
changes in bird populations sizes will be a critical step towards understanding
long-term bird declines. By gaining insight into how to halt ongoing bird
losses, this work aims to sustain the vital ecological, economic, and social
services that birds provide to humans and the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create their new analyses, researchers will rely on
three novel ‘big data’ resources to track bird populations throughout the year.
First, the US weather radar network (NEXRAD) will be used to study the flow of
migrants into and out of North America during fall and spring migration.
Comparing these numbers between adjacent seasons will enable researchers to
estimate the birth and death rates of all migratory birds combined. Second,
observations from hundreds of thousands of volunteer citizen scientists (eBird
data) and dynamic species distribution models will be used to track seasonal
variation in the numbers of birds recorded. This resource will capture species-
specific patterns that are not available from the radar data. Third, remote
sensing data and the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) will be used
to understand temperature and phenological extremes, which will be explored as a
mechanism driving population changes. Overall, this research aims to develop the
tools to understand current population declines and point towards a road map for
the recovery and conservation of the mass migration of
birds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.