* 2017072
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: The Informatics Skunkworks Program for Undergraduate Research at the Interface of Data Science and Materials Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dane Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 844,570.00

The project will develop a sustainable and scalable approach to train a
workforce skilled in research and application of machine learning (ML) in
materials informatics. ML in materials informatics is rapidly transforming
materials science and engineering (MS&amp;E) by an unprecedented ability to
extend materials databases, improve materials simulation, mine texts, automate
materials research and development, and accelerate materials design. As pointed
out by multiple recent studies, including from the National Academies and the
Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials Society (TMS), it is essential to train a next
generation workforce in ML for materials informatics to realize its enormous
potential for improving the human condition through advanced materials.
Unfortunately, ML in materials informatics is almost completely absent from
today's materials curricula at the undergraduate level. However, the power of
informatics tools combined with their rapid evolution and relative novelty in
MS&amp;E creates an opportunity for engaging undergraduates (UGs) with active
learning through impactful research. With this motivation, the project will
create new infrastructure and an ecosystem for the engagement and training of
UGs across the U.S. in research using applied ML in materials informatics,
called the Informatics Skunkworks. The Skunkworks consists of mentor/UG teams
performing research in materials informatics. The project provides the teams
with new resources, consisting of curricula, software, and research problems,
and with a community of practice to support research and to work effectively and
collaboratively. The low cost and accessibility of ML and materials informatics
creates an opportunity for Skunkworks to engage mentors and students with
limited research resources, particularly at institutions serving
underrepresented groups. The Skunkworks is a sustainable and scalable approach
that can fulfill this unmet need by training a diverse workforce skilled in
research and application of ML for materials informatics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide freely available (a) curriculum to train UGs
in relevant ML, materials informatics and research professional development, (b)
software tools that augment existing ML packages to be UG accessible, and (c)
authentic and appropriate-level research problems. The proposed work will also
develop a community of practice to enable a network of productive mentor/UG
research teams to effectively and collaboratively use the curricular, software
and other resources developed by the project to support transforming the future
workforce. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is to (a) develop
scalable resources to increase UG experience and learning in research at the
boundary of data science and materials science and engineering, (b) grow a
community of mentors and UG researchers engaged in materials informatics
research, and (c) increase the utilization of data science tools for solving
critical problems in MS&amp;E and related fields through workforce development
and materials informatics training. The broader impact of the proposed work is
to (a) freely disseminate enabling curricula and tools for materials
informatics, (b) train staff, mentors and UGs in broadly applicable research and
professional skills, and (c) develop a diverse community of practice for
materials informatics researchers. The project will enable the development of a
new workforce capable of advanced materials informatics, especially for
underrepresented groups, by supporting primarily UG institutions and community
colleges that often have limited research resources. This project is funded by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering, with the Division of Materials Research in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences also contributing
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.