* 2017831
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Quantifying phenological coherence and seasonal predictability across NEON and USA-NPN monitoring sites
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mark Schwartz, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 523,202.00

The seasonal timing, or phenology, of many North American plant species is in
flux with accelerating environmental change. The influence of factors such as
temperature and precipitation on plant growth, as weather patterns change from
spring to summer, vary from place-to-place, month-to-month, and for different
plant species. An improved understanding of these relationships revealed by this
research will support development of more accurate and diverse models of spring
plant growth stages. These models may then be able to predict which trees and
shrubs will be favored in different regions with future environmental change, to
the benefit of many types of societal planning. Further, the project will
implement national-scale, long-lead forecasts for new measures representing the
spring season, which will also be relevant for annual agricultural,
horticultural, and forestry management planning. Additional broader impacts of
this research include: (1) developing junior high school materials and
programming for students to engage with phenological observations and real-time
weather data; and (2) enlisting tens of thousands of non-scientist volunteer
observers to broaden participation in citizen science spring phenology data
collection campaigns through the USA-National Phenology Network (NPN) Nature’s
Notebook program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is guided by three
fundamental questions that span spatial and temporal scales: (1) Which species
exhibit variation in phenological response across latitude, elevation, or other
gradients? (2) Does the influence of variables that drive phenological events
(such as accumulated warmth and light intensity) increase or decrease as the
season progresses, and does this vary geographically, with the onset of spring’s
progression poleward and upslope? (3) At what lead times (days, weeks, months,
or seasons) can climate forecasts reliably predict phenological behavior at
monitoring sites? By combining recently developed state-of-the-art weather and
climate forecasts and robust statistical post-processing techniques with rich
ground-based phenological data resources from the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) and other large-scale networks, this project will:
(1) develop and refine models of spring plant phenological activity for dozens
of species; (2) evaluate the influence of changes in climate driver variables
over the course of the spring season—resulting from changes in the structure of
large-scale circulation patterns—on predicting phenological events; (3)
determine which species exhibit varying phenological response across spatial
gradients, and therefore should be accounted for in predictive models; and (4)
assess the potential predictability of those models on seasonal to decadal time
horizons to operationalize long-term forecasting by the USA-NPN. Finally,
research knowledge gained from this project will provide valuable insights
toward enhanced understanding of the much more challenging plant-climate
interactions in autumn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.