* 2017106
* Does Sediment Storage Set the Pace of the Terrestrial Organic Carbon Cycle?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mark Torres, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 413,794.00

The amount of carbon present in soils is larger than the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere. This means changes in soil carbon storage can affect
the climate. Soil carbon also affects the fertility of agricultural soil, and
can influence local water quality. Given such significant implications on human
and environmental wellbeing, this proposal seeks to enhance understanding of
soil carbon storage. Research will focus on the role of rivers, which control
the amount of time soil remains on landscapes before being eroded and which,
through flooding, influence where new soil is formed. Rivers can also influence
the chemical conditions in soil that affect soil carbon. Work will take place in
a watershed containing only volcanic rocks to avoid the “fossil” carbon present
in other rock types. Key outcomes include a new predictive model for soil
carbon, the training of a graduate student and two elementary school teachers in
biogeochemistry, and the development of bilingual educational materials for
elementary school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biogeochemical mechanisms
thought to stabilize terrestrial organic carbon (OC) all evolve over similar
(millennial) timescales to the duration over which soil and sediment are stored
on landscapes. Consequently, a holistic view of the terrestrial OC cycle that
leverages knowledge of the storage processes has the potential improve
predictions and reveal novel dynamics, but requires new data and quantitative
models for validation and application. This work aims to address these specific
knowledge gaps by testing 3 hypotheses related to the coupling between soil,
sediment, and OC storage: (1) the age distribution of OC inherits its shape from
the fluvial processes that regulate storage times, (2) storage processes
influence the loci and biogeochemical mechanisms(s) of OC preservation via
fluvial controls on grain size sorting and hydrology, and (3) post-glacial
landscape evolution increases the size of the terrestrial OC reservoir via an
increase in landscape soil and sediment storage. These hypotheses will be
evaluated using estimates of sediment storage from remote-sensing and surveying,
radionuclide-based determinations of sediment and OC storage times, as well as
elemental, molecular, and isotopic constraints on the biogeochemical mechanisms
of OC preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.