* 2017536
* ADVANCE Adaptation: ADVANCE Appalachian
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Bellemer, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 995,509.00

Appalachian State University (Appalachian) proposes to build on an existing
Inclusive Excellence initiative at Appalachian that has produced significant
gains in the recruitment and success of underrepresented minority students, but
which has not yet successfully increased the recruitment and success of women
and underrepresented racial and ethnic minority STEM faculty. The ADVANCE
Adaptation project called ADVANCE APPALACHIAN will support efforts to: 1)
incorporate ongoing institutional climate change into STEM departments by
training of chairs and faculty using a framework of Inclusive Excellence; 2)
support STEM faculty by developing new professional development and mentoring
with attention to issues impacting equity for women and underrepresented racial
and ethnic minority faculty; and 3) create new and improve existing work-life
integration resources and advocacy across campus. Appalachian is a rural,
masters level institution in North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the project are based on analysis of institutional demographic and survey data
and adapt strategies that have been demonstrated to be successful at other
ADVANCE institutions. The data highlighted deficiencies in recruitment and
retention of women and underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities into STEM
faculty positions, as well as structural disconnects between senior university
leadership and faculty that may limit the effectiveness of ongoing equity
efforts. Analysis of successful ADVANCE projects submitted by other institutions
showed that this barrier is not unique. Therefore, ADVANCE APPALACHIAN will
implement activities such as training department and college leadership,
providing professional development opportunities for all STEM faculty, and
implementing work-life initiatives designed to target deficiencies in support
for women in STEM at Appalachian and have the potential to produce sustained
change that would reshape the environment for women in STEM at Appalachian. In
addition, the ADVANCE APPALACHIAN project will form a partnership with the North
Carolina American Council on Education (ACE) Womenâ€™s Network to expand the
network of mentors and professional development opportunities for women STEM
faculty at Appalachian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed
to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.