* 2017247
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Subsistence Adaptation in a High Altitude Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Xinyi Liu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 28,316.00

Zhengwei Zhang and Dr. Xinyi Liu, of the Washington University in St. Louis,
along with colleagues will conduct research to explore the animal-based
subsistence strategies in a high altitude extreme environment. Understanding of
the development of high-altitude adaptations in has been enriched by recent
anthropological investigations. Such studies have revealed specific challenges
regarding strategies for securing a reliable food supply in different seasons.
The goal of this research is to increase understanding of how to achieve long-
term resilience in the context of concerns regarding food security and more
frequent extreme climate events. Archaeology is well placed to provide
meaningful insights on resilience because it provides information on people’s
behaviors over a long time span. This research will promote understanding of the
past, as well as the present by documenting invaluable animal resources and
resilient strategies in harsh areas, where biodiversity is threatened.
Educational and outreach activities will deepen broad scale academic
cooperation, as well as facilitate the development of open academic
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on animal resources that people
used at high altitudes, this research explores the ways that societies were able
to be more resilient to periodic stresses and to survive despite the
inhospitable and unpredictable environment. The researchers will conduct
comprehensive study of prehistoric animal remains from one of the world’s most
inhospitable areas. The questions of how farming and hunting settlers managed to
live year-round in this high altitude region remain largely unanswered and have
been obscured by the scarcity of zooarchaeological studies conducted to date.
The researchers will combine systematic zooarchaeological and stable isotopes
analyses, and regional ethnographical surveys. This research will reveal animal-
based subsistence strategies of pastoral groups and investigate at high
resolution how they managed livestock and utilized local natural landscapes.
This research has the potential to shed light on human communities’ resilience
in extreme environments worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.