* 2017788
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph, Quadrupole, Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Education in the Chemical and Biochemical Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Paul Edmiston, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 232,158.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The College of Wooster is acquiring a liquid
chromatograph, quadrupole, time-of-flight mass spectrometer (LC-Q-TOF-MS) to
support Professor Paul Edmiston and colleague, Jennifer Faust. In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex samples. In a
typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are
ionized and the ions' masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique
allows the structure of molecules in complex mixtures to be studied. An
instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before
they reach the mass spectrometer. In the time-of-flight (TOF) method of mass
spectrometry, the mass-to-charge ratio of an ion is determined by the way in
which ions are accelerated by an electric field of known strength. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and
regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving diverse groups
of students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. It also provides training opportunities to many undergraduate
students at this institution and serves as a resource for K-12 hands-on research
engagement as well as course-embedded research projects designed to broaden
diversity as guided by the STEM Success Initiative at the college. The
instrument is also utilized by researchers at nearby institutions such a St
Cloud State University, Oberlin College, Kenyon College, Ashland University, and
Denison University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass spectrometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The instrument
acquisition impacts identification of pharmaceutical transformation products in
human-impacted surface waters. The LC-Q-TOF-MS is used for investigations of
anthropogenic compounds in Hawaiian estuaries by a researcher from St Cloud
State University. In addition, the mass spectrometer provides information for
studying the fate and transport of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the
environment and exploring multiphase reactions of organic components in
rainwater. The mass spectrometer is also used to analyze protein cross-linkers
to identify redox partners of protein disulfide isomerases and for studying the
factors influencing differential allocation of seminal fluid proteins in the
fruit fly, D. melanogaster. Finally, the instrument is utilized to study the
metabolic role of arginine kinases in bacteria and the use of unnatural amino
acids to generate chromophores for fluorescence
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.