* 2017022
* I-Corps:  Polymeric passive samplers for monitoring hydrophobic organic compounds in the environment
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2020
* Danny Reible, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
needs for measuring pollutants in soils and sediments through the development of
passive sampling technology as a routine monitoring tool. Passive samplers
provide accurate information about exposures and risks for human and ecological
health at contaminated sediment sites. Convenient and cost-effective passive
sampling methods can improve the output of commercial laboratories and support
better consistency, efficiency, and frequency of monitoring programs at
contaminated sites. Routine application of passive sampling via standardized
exposure methods will reduce the time and costs of sediment management by
implementing remediation approaches addressing true risks to aquatic ecosystems.
Passive samplers can be used for assessing the progress of cleanup projects by
helping to detect emerging environmental issues, resulting in overall
improvement in the quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of polymeric passive samplers as monitoring tools that
provide information about dissolved concentrations of contaminants in the water
and sediment at polluted sites. The passive sampling technique provides accurate
measurements of contaminants at ultra-low levels undetectable using traditional
analytical methods. Passive samplers mimic pollutant accumulation in aquatic
organisms, resulting in a much better representation of ecological and human
health risks compared to traditional methods. Polymeric passive samplers are
relatively simple to use and can be inserted into contaminated media in the
field or in the laboratory. During sampler deployment, pollutants accumulate in
the polymer, providing a measurable dissolved concentration without the need for
water or sediment sample collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.