* 2017510
* Video-Recordings of Eyewitness Identification in Actual Cases: The Postdictive Value of Eyewitness Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gary Wells, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 388,877.00

Over 70% of DNA exonerations have been cases of mistaken eyewitness
identification. Based on recommendations from eyewitness scientists, a large
number of jurisdictions across the country have reformed their identification
procedures to address this problem. Nevertheless, even the best lineup
procedures fail to weed out all mistaken identifications. Hence, police and
prosecutors still must attempt to sort between reliable identifications and
unreliable identifications even when the best lineup procedures are followed. It
is important to determine what variables can help police and prosecutors with
this task. Postdiction variables are a particularly promising class of
variables. Postdiction variables are variables that are influenced by the
presence or absence of the guilty suspect in the lineup. These include
eyewitness behaviors such as expressed level of confidence, the amount of time
it takes the witness to make an identification decision, visible evidence of
effort, verbal utterances, among others. The purpose of the present work is to
examine how well postdiction variables extracted from video recordings of real-
world witnesses making identification decisions can sort between reliable and
unreliable identification decisions. To the extent that postdiction variables
prove useful for sorting between reliable identifications and unreliable
identifications, these findings would also encourage jurisdictions that are not
yet video recording identification procedures to begin doing so. Indeed, only by
video recording the entirety of the identification procedure can these
jurisdictions ensure a complete and accurate record of these variables that can
be used to sort between reliable and unreliable
identifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to determine
what combination of postdictors best sort between reliable eyewitness
identifications and unreliable eyewitness identifications in real-world lineups.
The findings will then be leveraged to develop an algorithm that police and
prosecutors can use to assess the reliability of eyewitness identifications in
future investigations. The District Attorneyâ€™s Office of Santa Clara County, CA
and the San Jose Police Department will provide video-recordings of witnesses
completing actual police lineups. Santa Clara County is unique as an early
adopter of best-practice eyewitness identification procedures (a requirement for
valid assessment of postdiction variables) and more recently implementing a
policy of video-recording all lineups. As these videos become available, blind
scorers (blind as to whether the identified person is the suspect or a filler)
will assess a host of known postdiction variables. These postdiction scores will
then be regressed on the outcome variable of whether the witness identified the
suspect or a known-innocent filler. A critical mass of suspect identifications
are likely to be culprit identifications whereas all identifications of fillers
are definitive instances of mistaken identifications. Accordingly, postdiction
variables that are useful for separating accurate from mistaken identifications
should distinguish between suspect identifications and filler identifications.
In addition to examining the predictive validity of known postdiction variables
(e.g., confidence, decision time, verbal utterances), we will use an extensive
coding scheme to code for numerous other eyewitness behaviors and we will
examine whether these additional eyewitness behaviors can improve classification
performance over and above the performance achieved with know postdiction
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.