* 2017229
* The developmental origins of social interaction processing in the human brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Tobias Grossmann, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 574,827.00

Humans are intensely social beings who live in complex groups. One major
challenge for the human brain is to enable us to effectively navigate and
benefit from this complex social environment. This project will examine the
early development of the brain systems that enable us to process and learn from
third-person social interactions. The researchers will investigate brain,
cognitive and behavioral development during infancy with a specific focus on
observing social interactions. By revealing how brain processes underpinning
early infant social and cognitive development unfold, this research will fill an
important gap in our knowledge and has broad implications for understanding
healthy and atypical development. The project is multidisciplinary in nature as
it uses a cutting-edge approach combining neuroscience, behavioral and
experience-sampling methods. The findings will be broadly applicable to multiple
disciplines and will inform the brain, cognitive and social sciences. The
planned experiments will provide valuable research opportunities and unique
training for students. The project has implications for early education,
intervention and may help guide public policy decisions concerning infant and
child development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project tests the hypothesis
that brain systems in prefrontal and temporal cortex begin to specialize in
third-person social interaction processing during infancy. To this end, this
project will (i) examine developmental changes in the neural processing of
social interactions during infancy using a multi-method neuroimaging approach,
(ii) assess the characteristics and functions of this brain system, (iii)
investigate variability and the role of experience in the emergence of this
brain system in a longitudinal study. Uncovering the neurodevelopmental roots of
social interaction processing in infancy will have a wide-ranging impact as it
informs our understanding of human nature and cognition in profound ways and has
the potential to inspire further research into social intelligence in man and
machines. Through this project and its findings it will be possible to foster a
better understanding among the public of how important early social development
occurs and what role brain development and experience
plays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.