* 2017845
* MRI: Acquisition of an ultrasmall-, small- and wide-angle x-ray scattering instrument for multidisciplinary advanced materials and soft matter research and education
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Samuel Sprunt, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2023
* USD 611,260.00

The grand challenge in the field of materials science, and soft materials
research in particular, is to generate, customize, and control structure at the
various length scales, ranging from nanometers to micrometers. The problem
requires sophisticated characterization techniques that can interrogate the
internal structure of these materials. X-ray scattering is a fundamental
technique for analyzing the small features and periodicities in soft matter,
such as polymers, liquid crystals, colloids and biomaterials. This Major
Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a laboratory beamline
instrument for measuring ultrasmall-, small- and wide-angle x-ray scattering.
This instrument supports the research of more than 24 research teams at Kent
State University, the University of Akron, Miami University, and several other
universities and research centers in Northeast Ohio and beyond. Research topics
includes materials for tissue engineering and understanding processes of
multiple sclerosis, sensors that will save the lives of first responders or
detect disease as well as materials that help understand cancer processes. Other
investigations utilize the instrument to produce groundbreaking insights into
plastic recycling and biorenewable plastics that will help save the planet and
generate results that will advance our understanding of biogeochemical processes
involved in groundwater contamination. The educational component of this project
provides benefits to new users, particularly graduate students, and lowers
barriers to entry for researchers at interdisciplinary boundaries or small
undergraduate institutions who are not traditional users but would benefit from
access to a front-line x-ray scattering facility. Outreach activities provide
novel STEM activities for K-12 teachers and undergraduate research students and
expose them to exciting, cutting-edge materials and the techniques that help
analyze them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the structure of and structural
evolution in soft and active matter, composites or mixtures, nanomaterials,
minerals, and biogeochemical processes, this project supports the acquisition of
a laboratory beamline instrument for measuring ultrasmall-, small- and wide-
angle x-ray scattering. At the center of these research thrusts is the recently
expanded Advanced Materials and Liquid Crystal Institute (AMLCI) with active
research programs in materials chemistry, physics and engineering, active
matter, liquid crystals, and polymers. This fully automated and expandable
instrument is used to measure features with size scales ranging from about 0.15
nm (i.e. distances between atoms) to 5 microns (about the width of a red blood
cell). Investigations include the analysis of structure evolution in polymers,
DNA, colloids, swarming bacteria, and organic transistors. Furthermore, this
facility enables active and future collaborations at the interface between soft
matter and nanoscience. The instrument configuration – featuring an x-ray
source, a large sample compartment, and versatile sample manipulation options
(heating, cooling, stress, strain, grazing incidence, controlled humidity,
polarized microscopy) – is optimized for a wide variety of challenging samples
and characterization tasks. The instrument also incorporates two unique features
– simultaneous polarized optical microscopy as well as an expansion space
between the x-ray source and the sample chamber to permit more challenging
sample environments in the future. Finally, these frontier sample manipulation
options, co-developed in cooperation with beamline scientists at Brookhaven
National Labs and the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley Lab) make this a future-
oriented and highly versatile x-ray characterization
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.