* 2017113
* Stratospheric Aerosol Climate Intervention Designed to Minimize Negative Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alan Robock, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 714,708.00

Increasing greenhouse gases (GHGs) can strongly affect the climate system and
potentially our future survival. The obvious, but difficult, solution lies in
drastically curbing GHG emissions. Failing that, a way to offset the expected
global warming induced by GHGs may be geoengineering. A strategy in
geoengineering involves the "injection" of sulphate aerosols into the
stratosphere to reflect sunlight. Mimicking what naturally occurs during
volcanic eruptions, this strategy can mitigate global warming. However, it may
also produce unintended consequences like reduced globally averaged
precipitation and enhanced ultraviolet (UV) radiation and ozone concentration
near the surface. These consequences can impact agriculture, altering food
production. This project aims to understand the uncertainties of sulphate
aerosol injection and evaluate its impacts on agriculture. Understanding these
impacts is essential if geoengineering is indeed needed.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators (PIs) of this project will conduct
numerical experiments of injecting aerosols into the stratosphere using the
Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model of the NCAR Community Earth System
Model (CESM2). The PIs will then explore ways to introduce the injection to
reduce global warming while minimizing impacts on agriculture that result from
stratospheric ozone depletion due to sulfate aerosols. CESM2 includes complete
treatment of diffuse radiation, aerosols, and atmospheric chemistry, as well as
built in simulations of crop production. The PIs will update the crop model to
include sensitivity to UV and to better represent ozone damage, which will allow
more accurate representation of crop impacts. The work will support the
Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project (GeoMIP) as part of the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project 6 (CMIP6).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.