* 2017527
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Drivers and consequences of intermarriage on social networks and risk-buffering
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Michael Gurven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

Boundaries between groups break down when couples marry across different
cultural, ethnic and/or religious affiliations. This has consequences on
couples, their families, and inter-community relationships. Intermarriage may
provide access to new resources and social networks, but may also involve costs
such as social stigma and loss of support in the natal community. This doctoral
dissertation project explores the drivers of and impediments to intermarriage at
the individual, household, and community levels in order to deepen our
understanding of how contemporary heterogeneous societies take shape, as well as
the effects of community heterogeneity on social networks and resilience to
resource shortfalls. The project will train a graduate student and other field
researchers in anthropological and sociological data collection and analysis;
results will be disseminated widely to participant communities, academics, and
the broader public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers will carry out the
study in two neighboring multi-ethnic communities whose economies rely
extensively on small-scale commercial horticulture. Using data on community
membersâ€™ social ties, economic diversification, and cultural beliefs about
neighboring ethnic groups, the researchers will analyze what factors predict
intermarriage and test the extent to which intermarriage bridges social divides
between community members. This study will help inform longstanding debates in
anthropology surrounding how kinship structures form, and the effects of
intergroup cooperation on resilience in the face of resource shortfalls. This
research will also serve as a case study for social scientists studying the
impacts of migration and cultural pluralism on cultural identities and ethnic
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.