* 2017666
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Translating Indigenous Rights: A Multi-Level Study of Prior Consultation Law
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Laura German, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

Prior consultation policies,which mandate that indigenous communities affected
by a proposed law or project are consulted before the activity begins, have
proliferated in recent years across many sectors and locations but can be traced
back to international indigenous rights law. This research examines how
international indigenous rights laws get strategically transformed or
“translated” from the international legal sphere to differing local political
contexts. This approach goes beyond considering policy in terms of legal
interpretations, implementation barriers, or compliance failures, to examine the
continuous processes of transformation it undergoes as a result of the
strategies of particular actors. A deeper understanding of what makes policy
effective (and what “effective" means to different groups of people) is prudent
in an era when the international legal sphere is frequently looked to for
solving intractable problems like climate change, poverty, and biodiversity
loss, but which relies on national and sub- national implementation into diverse
social and ecological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on anthropological
and legal studies of indigenous rights, this research applies a “policy
translation” framework to indigenous rights law, bringing a new theoretical and
methodological approach to examine this body of law. Policy analyses, archival
research, and ethnographic methods will be used to trace how Peru’s prior
consultation law (and the international law from which it was derived) has been
translated in writing and in practice, from the international, to the national,
to the subnational levels during one year of fieldwork, split between Lima and
four field sites in the Peruvian Andes where prior consultation has been
implemented in the mining sector. By conducting interviews with a wide array of
actors involved in and impacted by this law, analyzing archival records of
media, financial, and legal data to elicit the wider context surrounding the
creation and implementation of the law, and conducting mapping exercises to
spatialize the outcomes of the law in each of the four sites in the Andes, the
researchers will examine the strategies and spaces used by various actors
(indigenous groups, businesses, NGOs, and government agencies) to shape policy
meaning, practice, and outcomes according to their interests. Ultimately, this
research will shed light on the ways that different actors leverage their power
over the legal apparatus, an issue that has broad relevance to other legal
contexts. The proliferation of prior consultation policies in diverse political
and ecological contexts across the world and the growing relevance of
international laws makes this research timely and
compelling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.