* 2017789
* Equity and Sustainability: A framework for Equitable Energy Transition Analyses
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Destenie Nock, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 431,915.00

Decisions regarding transitions from traditional energy sources such as fossil
fuels to more sustainable, renewable energy systems impact multiple
constituencies, including the most vulnerable members of society. This research
addresses two questions: (1) What are transition pathways from non-renewable
energy sources (such as fossil fuels) to renewable energy sources (such as wind
and solar) for the US electricity sector that can best balance the (sometimes
conflicting) objectives of the transition, while accounting for social equity
and sustainability? (2) How can transition to a low-carbon electricity system be
done in a way that minimizes adverse impacts on the most vulnerable members of
society? This research targets creating a new way to account for social equity
in the sustainability analysis of transitions to new energy systems, which may
help guide decision-makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many decision makers
and constituencies in energy system planning, each of which may make decisions
or influence decisions according to their own versions of the desired goals.
This research builds and expands upon previous research in three key ways that
permit a more robust sustainability assessment of future electricity systems,
and incorporates social equity into the energy transition discussion. First, an
electricity system expansion model is coupled with a system sustainability model
and then examined to ask how increasing carbon constraints are likely to impact
power system development, and how important regional cooperation is likely to be
in achieving a fully decarbonized US electricity system. Second, social equity
will be an integral part of the sustainability analysis framework, thus
displaying how other facets of sustainability impede or support an equitable
energy transition. Third, to illuminate the social equity trade-offs, how
regional cooperation may impact job and price equity around the country will be
investigated. This research will be a system sustainability analysis for the
entire US that incorporates multiple metrics for social equity, while capturing
impacts of integrating intermittent renewables in the grid. The PI will develop
an open-source data analysis tool for electricity sustainability analysis,
enriching the discussion and uncovering the interactions among sustainability
criterion at a national scale. The social equity focused framework is targeted
to facilitate national discussions about how energy transition will impact
communities in the US. This framework may also help support planning for job
recovery of those most affected by the retirement of fossil fuel
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.