* 2017663
* Promoting Equity in the Social Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Vina Tran, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 963,414.00

The Social Science Research Council (SSRC) in partnership with the American
Anthropological Association (AAA), the American Economic Association (AEA), the
American Historical Association (AHA), the American Political Science
Association (APSA), and the American Sociological Association (ASA), plan to
implement an ADVANCE project to address norms and practices that have been shown
to inhibit career advancement of women and intersectional scholars. The project
will educate society staff and members as well as adapt promising practices from
ADVANCE projects into the organizational operations of the SSRC and the
collaborating societies. The goal is to implement structural changes that will
positively impact the culture and climate of the social sciences and ensure
practices and processes within these organizations are equitable and inclusive,
especially those related to publishing and professional recognition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with six disciplinary societies of the
social sciences, the SSRC will build awareness and disseminate information on
strategies to address bias in the academic decision-making processes tailored to
the social science discipline areas. This project will build upon and adapt
successful ADVANCE institutional transformation strategies that were developed
for changes within institutions of higher education to increase the
representation and advancement of women and intersectional scholars in the
social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support to
collaborations among STEM professional societies and academic and non-academic
non-profit organizations designed to broaden the implementation of evidence-
based equity strategies and have a national or regional
reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.