* 2017706
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating theories of the over-production of subject pronouns in bilinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 16,986.00

A fundamental skill that children must acquire is the ability to use language to
refer to people and objects around them. Pronominal subjects like ‘he’ and ‘she’
are universal linguistic devices used to refer to a person mentioned or implied
in previous discourse. Pronouns allow speakers to avoid redundancy or
repetition, thus making languages more economical. At the same time, the ability
to track referents in discourse develops over time. How children learn to
interpret and appropriately use these referential devices is a central question
in language acquisition research, particularly because mastering pronominal
subjects takes up to adolescence. Studying this ability in the bilingual
development of children who speak typologically different but syntactically
similar languages in the way pronouns are expressed is critical to understand
the complementing roles of linguistic and cognitive development in children and
adolescents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the acquisition and
development of pronominal subject expression in school-age monolingual and
bilingual children in order to assess potential developmental delays in
bilingual populations and to examine how parents’ linguistic choices may
influence children’s linguistic behavior. 200 children ages 6 to 13 will be
compared to 90 adults (half monolinguals, half bilinguals who simultaneously
acquired two languages). The bilingual population will be tested to evaluate the
acquisitional differences of the socio-politically majority language and the
minority language in a society with stable bilingualism and a strong education
system in the minority language. Children’s comprehension and production will be
measured through oral production and comprehension tasks. Because the pair of
languages studied are null subject languages, the results will contribute to
evaluate two competing accounts of subject over-production in the bilingual
literature ––crosslinguistic influence versus cognitive load–– that are also
central questions in the acquisition of syntax.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.