* 2017945
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Eric Miller, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 321,532.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Fort Lewis College is acquiring a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with an automatic sample
changer to support Professor Kenneth Miller and colleagues: William Collins,
Callie Cole, Aimee Morris and Eric Miller (from San Juan Community College).
This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as the
study of biologically-relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the study of the structure of
molecules. NMR spectroscopy is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
motions and interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching
as well as research and research training of undergraduate students in chemistry
and biochemistry at this institution and the nearby San Juan Community College
in New Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of an NMR spectrometer is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels. This instrument acquisition
impacts the characterization of conformationally-constrained products of
diarylether cyclophanes prepared to develop chiral ligands for asymmetric
catalysis. The instrumentation is also used to establish a library of
diarylmethane natural products and analogues that may be used to gain knowledge
on Leishmaniasis. In addition, the NMR spectrometer is used in the
characterization of water solubilized monoterpenoids and plant resins used
against the varroa destructor virus. Finally, the NMR spectrometer is also used
to characterize synthetic cobalt(III) coordination complexes having potential
prodrug properties and potential carbon-hydrogen activation
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.