* 2017897
* Collaborative research: How variable is magma decompression rate during a single eruption?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Megan Newcombe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2023
* USD 229,568.00

Understanding the processes that govern transitions in volcanic eruptive style
is one of the major outstanding questions in volcanology, with important
implications for hazard mitigation efforts. Syneruptive magma decompression rate
is thought to be a dominant control on volcanic eruptive style, due in part to
its role in modulating the dynamics of bubble formation and migration. In recent
years, techniques have been developed that use chemical gradients in rapidly
quenched volcanic tephra to constrain magma decompression rates; however, the
rarity of suitable samples for the application of these techniques has severely
limited the acquisition of statistically robust datasets that could be used to
explore temporal variations in magma decompression rate over the course of a
single eruption. A newly developed magma decompression “clock” that exploits
water concentration gradients in prevalent olivine crystals can now be used to
overcome this limitation. We propose to apply this new magma decompression clock
to study temporal variations in the decompression rate of magma erupted at
Cinder Cone, Lassen Volcanic National Park, CA. The exceptionally well-preserved
tephra sequence from Cinder Cone captures a transition in eruptive style from
Hawaiian/Strombolian to Strombolian/Violent Strombolian, providing an excellent
natural laboratory for studying the role of decompression rate as a control on
eruptive style. The Lassen region is one of the most active volcanic regions in
the US and poses a significant hazard to Californians, National Park visitors,
and flights to and from the busy San Francisco Bay Area. The results of the
proposed work will be shared with the California Volcano Observatory, the
Cascade Volcano Observatory, and Lassen Volcanic National Park, which manage
volcano-monitoring infrastructure and volcanic hazard mitigation efforts in
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed work, variations in magma
decompression rate will be studied in the context of syneruptive temperature
changes and textural variations in the 1666 C.E. Cinder Cone eruptive deposit.
We will apply three independent techniques to estimate magma decompression
rates: (1) water-in-olivine diffusion chronometry; (2) bubble number density;
and (3) microlite number density. Additionally, we will constrain magma cooling
rates using MgO zonation in olivine-hosted melt inclusions. We will build a
statistically robust dataset of decompression rate and cooling rate estimates
that will be used to assess (for the first time in a basaltic system) temporally
resolved variations in decompression rate and cooling rate across a transition
in eruptive style. This approach will allow the evolution of pressure-
temperature- time conditions in the conduit just prior to eruption to be studied
in unprecedented detail, thereby increasing our understanding of the controls on
the explosivity of basaltic volcanic eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.