* 2017708
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution LC/MS/MS to Enable Undergraduate Chemical and Biochemical Research Across Six Disciplines in the Natural and Applied Sciences at Hope College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Peterson, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 320,498.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Hope College is acquiring a liquid
chromatograph, quadrupole, time-of-flight, tandem mass spectrometer (LC-Q-TOF-
MS/MS)to support Professor Kristin Dittenhafer-Reed and colleagues Jonathan
Peterson, Kenneth Brown, Jason Gillmore and Matthew Smith. In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex matrices. In a
typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are
ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions and their masses are measured.
This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of the
structure of molecules in a complex mixture. A MS instrument with a liquid
chromatograph provides additional structural identification power by separating
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. In the time-of-
flight (TOF) method of mass spectrometry, the mass-to-charge ratio of an ion is
determined by the way in which ions are accelerated by an electric field of
known strength. The velocity of the ion depends on the mass-to-charge ratio
(heavier ions of the same charge have lower speeds). The time that the ions take
to reach a detector at a known distance is measured. This time depends on the
velocity of the ion, and therefore is a measure of its mass-to-charge ratio.
From this ratio and known experimental parameters, the ion can be characterized.
The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the College and
regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving diverse
students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. The acquisition provides training opportunities to a large number of
undergraduate students through a variety of activities such as those studying
local watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass spectrometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The instrument
acquisition especially impacts studies of proteins, protein post-translational
modification, and metabolites. The instrumentation is used for quantifying and
analyzing lipids. In addition, the LC-Q-TOF-MS/MS is helpful in studying
chemical structures, syntheses, and mechanisms of photo- and electroactive
heteroaromatic compounds. The mass spectrometer is also used to carry out
studies related to the environment such as those related to water quality and
surface interactions of nanoparticles which are helpful to understand the fate
and transport of pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.