* 2017368
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Capacities and Personal Vulnerabilities in Encountering Implicit Bias
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* John Bowen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

People are naturally concerned with how they are perceived by others not only
because they desire social contact but also because such perceptions are
important for gaining resources and access to opportunities. This is especially
true for marginalized populations, which often must demonstrate that they are
deserving of certain benefits, services, or statuses. This project explores the
different strategies that marginalized populations leverage in contexts where
they are acutely vulnerable, to improve their access to resources. In addition
to contributing to the training of a graduate student in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, this project will have
significant implications for organizations that seek to ease the socioeconomic
transition and civic participation of asylum seekers and other migrants,
potentially improving the effectiveness of reception programs and facilitating
tailoring of services for particular populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation project will examine the iterative processes by which two different
groups of asylum seekers participating in a reception program at the same
organization demonstrate that they are deserving of asylum by presenting
themselves as both vulnerable and capable in various situations. Do the two
populations strategize differently, and do they tend to play to their perceived
strengths or attempt to compensate for their perceived weaknesses? How do their
strategies change and develop over time in response to various experiences and
interactions? Do organizational professionals work with each population
differently, providing specific advice and guidance depending on each asylum
seeker’s background? Situated in a context that is currently experiencing
increasing numbers of asylum applications, alongside socioeconomic challenges,
this project compares the strategies and experiences of two asylum seeker
populations from different countries of origin: one, with a high level of
cultural similarity, including language fluency, but low perceived
vulnerability; the other, with a low level of cultural similarity but high
perceived vulnerability. This comparison offers the opportunity to parse through
the differential effects of macro-level conditions on micro-level self-
presentation strategies of different groups of people as they pursue common
goals. The researcher will utilize multiple ethnographic methods, including
participant observation, exploratory interviews, and semi-structured interviews
with asylum seekers and organizational workers. These data will be analyzed to
determine whether or not the two groups’ patterns of behavior diverge over time,
how these patterns develop in response to particular experiences, and how asylum
seekers perceive themselves in relation to the other group. This project is
poised to contribute to anthropological knowledge concerning migration,
humanitarianism, and bureaucracy, while also producing broader social scientific
insights about strategic self-presentation, especially as related to implicit
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.