* 2017122
* Collaborative Research: Does Registration and Notification Policy Deter Adolescent Sexual Offending? A Prospective Study of Integrated Criminological and Psychological Theories
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Cynthia Najdowski, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 122,295.00

Despite controversy over whether even adults should be required to register as
sex offenders, currently 41 states have some form of policy requiring
adolescents adjudicated or convicted of sexual offenses to register with local
law enforcement agencies upon completing their sentences. Moreover, 30 states
allow or require online community notification of adolescents who committed
sexual offenses, posting information on public websites or “registries” to
inform residents about the young offenders living in their communities.
Registration and notification policies are partly rooted in deterrence theory,
which presumes that the risk of these outcomes will prevent potential sexual
offenders from offending in the first place. However, criminological and
psychological theories predict different outcomes of these policies, and whether
they actually deter adolescent sexual offending remains unknown. Prior research
suggests that many adolescents are not aware of the risk of registration and
notification posed by their sexual behavior. Moreover, even if they are aware,
psychological science suggests that their developmental immaturity may override
that knowledge and result in offending anyway. This interdisciplinary project
investigates whether and how registration and notification policies deter
adolescents from engaging in criminalized sexual behaviors that are common in
their age group. Findings will inform policymakers working to develop evidence-
based strategies that effectively achieve justice while also protecting
developmentally vulnerable adolescents from excessively punitive and
stigmatizing outcomes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study explicates the
criminological processes that are prerequisite to general deterrence as well as
the developmental psychological mechanisms that may condition those processes.
Specifically, it experimentally manipulates whether adolescents are exposed to
educational information about the risk of criminal justice involvement and sex
offender registration and notification associated with illegal sexual behaviors.
The results will reveal whether and how, even when adolescents are aware that
certain sexual behaviors are prohibited and carry legal risks, their ability to
engage in rational choice and their perceptions of the net cost of sexual
offending moderate the impact of registration and notification over the course
of one year. This project’s experimental and longitudinal approach will allow
for causal determinations about the criminological processes that are thought to
underlie general deterrence as well as the developmental psychological
mechanisms that may condition the ability of sex offender registration and
notification policy to affect adolescents’ risky sexual behavior. This will
transform current understanding of relations between criminological theory on
deterrence, social-developmental psychology, and legal
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.