* 2017289
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Modular experiential learning for secure, safe, and reliable AI (MELSSRAI)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Ajay Gupta, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 314,257.00

In this pilot project, core literacy and advanced skills at the intersection of
Secure, Safe, Reliable (SSR) Computing, High Performance Computing (HPC), and
artificial intelligence (AI) are integrated into educational curricula and
training materials to prepare faculty, undergraduate, and graduate students at
institutions with relatively low rates of advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI)
adoption for large-scale secured data analytics. From self-driving vehicles to
smart digital personal assistants and real-time multilingual translators,
applications of AI have become omnipresent in our daily lives. There is an
urgent need to ensure that current and future scientists who advance AI, as well
as practitioners who use AI, understand the limitations of AI and how to develop
robust and dependable AI. The long-term goals of this project are to contribute
to a pipeline for a SSR AI-minded CI workforce and a self-sustaining advanced CI
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, inspired by authoritative
sources such as Open AI and Partnership on AI, curricular modifications and
materials are developed to educate computer science (CS) students in SSR
techniques from the outset. Intensive, multi-faceted, modular, experiential
learning units are designed to upgrade the skills of current and future CI users
rapidly, so they can apply their new skills to their tasks. The loosely coupled
modules can be integrated into existing classes, including elementary CS classes
taken by non-CS STEM students. Students participate in research activities,
which train next generation interdisciplinary scientists, including many from
underrepresented groups. Universities at varied levels and varied locations as
well as community colleges are included in the project. Using a collective
impact plan, a group of multi-discipline, public-private-sector experts provide
guidance and participate in train-the-trainer activities to multiply the effect.
Lessons learned and best practices are codified into blueprints for reusability
and widespread future adoption across STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.