* 2017743
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Advancing Equity in STEM Academic Careers through Organizational Change at an Urban Public Research University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Alice Hall, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,009,066.00

The University of Missouri â€“ St. Louis (UMSL) will implement an NSF ADVANCE
Adaption project to develop and enhance institutional structures, policies, and
processes that will lead to gender equity among STEM faculty and cultivate an
organizational climate where women as well as African Americans, Hispanics, and
other historically underrepresented groups in STEM will thrive. The UMSL ADVANCE
project has three primary objectives: 1. Recruit, retain, and advance more women
STEM and SBS faculty, particularly African American and Hispanic women, in
tenured and tenure-track positions to better reflect the projected demographics
of the UMSL student body and workforce needs; 2. Educate and empower UMSL
faculty, staff, and administrators on evidence-based methods from other ADVANCE
institutions to address gender- and racial/ethnic-related biases and challenges
that affect the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women faculty,
particularly African American and Hispanic women, and other historically
underrepresented groups in academic STEM and SBS careers; and 3. Modify and
restructure institutional policies and processes to support gender equity among
STEM and SBS faculty, and cultivate an inclusive workplace climate where women
faculty, particularly African American and Hispanic women, and other
historically underrepresented groups in STEM and SBS academic professions will
thrive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in knowledge about the
scalability and replicability of previous ADVANCE initiatives while considering
intersectional issues to learn which initiatives are more or less impactful for
different faculty in STEM. The project will adapt practices from the University
of Michigan, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, and Case Western Reserve
related to search practices, search data collection, and accountability
procedures. In addition, the project will adapt Launch Committees from the
University of California Davis and Florida International University to improve
retention and advancement. UMSL plays an important role in educating the St.
Louis region and improvements to faculty equity at UMSL is expected to have a
positive impact on the local region which has a large percent of STEM
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.