* 2017145
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Emigrant Political Rights in Latin America, Dual Citizenship, Voting, and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Cecilia Menjivar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 25,087.00

For over a century, migrants abroad have supported the economic development of
their homelands by sending remittances. Previous research has shown that this
type of money transfers is instrumental to avoid financial crises in sending
countries. In Latin America, remittances occupy one of the mainline items within
the gross domestic product of several national economies. However, the economic
contributions by citizens abroad have not translated into substantive political
representation. Migrants contribute to the welfare of their households and the
homeland economy, and yet, their political participation in polity of the place
of birth remains incipient. Therefore, understanding the conditions that guided
the creation and implementation of political rights and laws that govern them is
critical for developing public policies aimed at reducing political inequalities
for citizens abroad. After all, as previous research has shown, the political
participation of migrants in their homeland also enhances their political
involvement in the countries where they live as immigrants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last thirty years, Latin American states have
created legislation to approve political rights for its citizens abroad
including dual citizenship, extraterritorial voting, and parliamentary
representation. This legislation, however, has not always translated into
substantive political rights. The scholarship on emigrant politics has focused
on the approval of emigrant political rights without paying attention to the
socio-legal conditions that led to various degrees of implementation. If Latin
American states have created similar legislation on the books, why did different
levels of substantive implementation emerge? This project studies the creation
and implementation of political rights and laws for Latin American emigrants
from a comparative perspective. It combines a two-phase process of data
collection and analysis. First, using numerical data from nineteen countries in
Latin America, this project employs Qualitative Comparative Analysis to develop
a systematic cross-case analysis of causal conditions leading to the creation of
emigrant laws. Second, combining data from interviews, newspaper articles,
administrative records, official documents, and archives, this project deploys
several cycles of qualitative coding techniques to trace divergent political
trajectories of emigrants living abroad. Conceptually, this project emphasizes
how violence, politicization of emigrants, and critical junctures of
democratization influence policy decisions related to extraterritorial political
rights. Findings from this research will provide insights into the
differentiated conditions in which Latin American countries grant political
rights to their citizens abroad, contributing to a growing literature on
democratization and inclusion. Furthermore, this research project will explain
the striking differences between how countries approve policy on paper and how
they implement it on the ground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.