* 2017037
* Immigration Dimensions of Local Governance: Municipalities, Neighborhoods, and Citizenship
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Susan Coutin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 341,085.00

Immigration policy-making is of national and even international importance, but
is also something that manifests locally, within the cities, communities, and
neighborhoods where people actually live. Federal officials have encouraged
local officials to join federal enforcement initiatives, and local residents
have advocated for local immigration policies in their communities. Municipal
officials have responded to these pressures by enacting a wide range of policies
that intentionally or inadvertently address immigration. Schools may be asked to
provide proof of enrollment for Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals
applications, local public health initiatives may need to consider noncitizensâ€™
eligibility for medical insurance, housing assistance may be limited to citizens
and lawful permanent residents, and more. The everyday and mundane
administrative practices carried out by city personnel shape opportunities for
immigrants in their new communities. This project investigates how the issue of
immigration influences the policies and administrative practices of local
government. Understanding how localities participate in the dynamics that shape
immigration policy-making more broadly is key to the well-being of local
communities and of our nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project performs in-
depth research on city agencies and neighborhood associations in Long Beach,
California. Long Beach is a strategic case for this type of study because it is
a mid-sized city with a population of 467,000 residents, it was ranked the 10th
most diverse large city in the nation, and is located between liberal leaning
Los Angeles and conservative leaning Orange County. The study casts a wide net
over the policies of different city agencies and departments. The study employs
several sources of information: (1) the research team will collect and analyze
forms, policy documents, and outreach materials from key city departments. (2)
Interviews will be conducted with public officials in these key departments.
Interviews will focus on how officials conceptualize the communities they serve,
what they see as the key sectors within these communities, and how they engage
these publics. (3) To access community perspectives, the research team will
perform in-depth fieldwork within selected neighborhood associations over the
two years of the study and will interview neighborhood association members and
leadership. This data will provide insight into the issues that community
members care about and how they pressure public officials to be more inclusive,
more restrictive, or both. (4) To supplement interview data, field observations
will be conducted in public settings where city officials interact with
community members. Such settings may include community fairs, educational
presentations, public meetings, and agency outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.