* 2017130
* ADVANCE Partnership: ImPACT IT: Increasing the Participation and Advancement of Women in Information Technology
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Eleanor Loiacono, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 12/31/2020
* USD 998,053.00

The ImPACT IT project will address the lack of gender equity within Information
Systems (IS) academia. Increasing the number of women, especially at the rank of
full professor, benefits all of society since equal representation of women of
all intersectional identities among the senior ranks of IS faculty will enhance
the quality of students’ education, the impact of university research,
engagement with communities, and the leadership of higher education
institutions. Using a three-pronged intersectional approach, ImPACT IT will: (1)
assess, develop, and improve AIS policies and practices, including
intersectional data collection and analysis, (2) create and institutionalize
best practices and systems that support women in their path towards promotion to
full professor; and (3) implement best practices in reducing and mitigating
hidden and implicit biases within the Association for Information Systems (AIS)
and its members. Taken together these activities will catalyze action and foster
accountability around supporting women’s efforts to advance to full professor.
The expected outcome will be increased gender equity within the AIS, its
processes, and policies, as well as increased numbers of women IS faculty
receiving promotion to full professor. Additionally, because this project
includes a diverse cross-section of association members, it will contribute to
the research knowledge base on gender equity and the intersection of gender with
other identities in IT academic careers, such as race and sexuality. By
partnering with successful programs and adapting existing ADVANCE program
supported resources and best practices, greater impact will be achieved. The
ImPact IT model will be disseminated broadly and can serve as a role model for
other associations seeking to increase the number of women promoted to full
professor in higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AIS has only just begun
to grapple with the systemic disadvantages to women and under-represented
minorities in the IS field, and especially in their efforts to advance to full
professor. A primary driver of this has been the lack of comprehensive
demographic data on AIS membership, including the number of women and minorities
in the AIS. The dearth of data makes it difficult to track the success or
failure in AIS’ efforts to support women and under-represented minority members.
The project is unique in the way it builds upon prior research from ADVANCE
grants. Further, it gives greater insight into how STEM associations can engage
their leadership and members to increase the representation and advancement of
women and underrepresented minorities in the rank of full professor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support to collaborations among STEM
professional societies and academic and non-academic non-profit organizations
designed to broaden the implementation of evidence-based equity strategies and
have a national or regional reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.