* 2017096
* Collaborative Research: Using Big Data to Analyze Maritime Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Nico Ravanilla, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 81,991.00

Maritime conflict has been on the rise globally, with hotspots across the
world's regions. Despite growing coverage in the news media, among think tanks,
and great attention from policy makers and politicians, there is limited
systematic data on conflict incidents in maritime regions. This project will
fill two important gaps. First, it will generate a multi-faceted dataset on
maritime conflict that will be shared publicly for use by scholars and
journalists. Second, although theorists have offered many competing accounts for
what to expect in the realm of maritime conflict, there have yet to be any
compelling empirical investigations of what has taken place in the past decade.
This project will develop data collection techniques that will be applicable to
a range of maritime conflict-affected regions, which also have substantial
national security implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social scientists have
increasingly turned to data-driven approaches to answer important questions
regarding international security. Within the world of conflict research,
comprehensive datasets have played a critical role in advancing scientific
knowledge (e.g. AidData, COW, ACLED). Thus far, however, there has been limited
systematic empirical analysis of maritime conflict; a major hurdle is a lack of
data. In this project, the PIs acquire and consolidate comprehensive data on
maritime incidents and make substantial progress toward empirically testing and
resolving competing theories for how maritime conflict may play out over the
next decade. The project refines prevailing theories of power transition, taking
into account the slow but steady change in maritime capabilities of superpowers
as well as the growing economic and political interdependence among nation-
states since the end of the Cold War, to generate new testable hypotheses. The
analysis utilizes the overlapping EEZ zones and territorial waters, variation in
off-shore natural resource distribution, and changes in domestic politics to
test the proposed hypotheses. The data will be made publicly available and
legible to other social scientists so that experts can replicate it for their
own research purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.