* 2017660
* Travel Funds for 15th Dynamic Walking Conference; Hawley, Pennsylvania; May 11-14, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Michael Posa, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 03/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports the next generation of researchers in dynamic systems,
robotics and control by providing funding for graduate students, post-doctoral
fellows and junior faculty to travel to the Dynamic Walking Conference being
held in May 2020. The aim of Dynamic Walking Conference is to provide insight
into the fundamental principles that underlie legged locomotion and the dynamics
of movement, both mechanical and biological. Critical, and overlapping, areas of
interest are the design and control of autonomous walking robots, rehabilitation
of humans and animals, and the design and control of prosthetic and exoskeletal
devices. This annual conference includes a broad and growing community of
roboticists and biomechanists. It encourages new and breaking results and aims
to provide a forum for discussion and sharing of new ideas. This grant will be
used to broaden participation from groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in major robotics and biomechanics conferences, particularly
from women, underrepresented minorities, and researchers from universities which
do not typically have the funding to travel to these
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is specifically focused on broadening
participation and greater inclusivity at the Dynamic Walking 2020 conference.
Dynamic Walking is a single-track conference that focuses on all things related
to walking and running of humans, animals, and robots. This including modeling
system energetics, stability, and control; developing predictive principles and
dynamic models; clinical evaluation and gait recovery for healthy and stroke,
amputee, osteoarthritic, or other limited-mobility patients; analyzing empirical
data in a conceptual framework; as well as design and evaluation of robots,
prosthetics, and exoskeletons. Topics central to dynamic walking include
energetics, stability and control, predictive principles and models, dynamic
modeling, empirical data in a conceptual framework, and robot successes and
failures. Participants include both academics and industry designers with a
mixture of researchers studying human and animal legged locomotion and those
designing and controlling walking robots. One goal of Dynamic walking is to
bring together researchers from different fields, especially biomechanists and
roboticists. Despite sharing a common interest in walking, these two groups
typically lack a shared vocabulary and set of tools. As a result, a central
focus for the conference is bridging these two disciplines and, ultimately,
breaking down barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.