* 2017802
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Achieving Excellence and Equity through Academic Leadership Development
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Joanne Goodell, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 10/31/2024
* USD 999,886.00

Cleveland State University will implement a NSF ADVANCE Adaptation project to
create comprehensive chair training focusing on: 1) improving faculty work-
nonwork balance through practices such as Family-Supportive Supervisor
Behaviors; 2) improving departmental culture for work-nonwork balance by
addressing key assumptions and language surrounding work; and 3) improving
advocacy for women faculty by addressing implicit bias, providing stronger
letters of recommendation, and encouraging faculty to promote themselves more
strongly. The ADVANCE project will complement many other on-going efforts at CSU
to enhance diversity, equity, and inclusion within the STEM faculty including
participation in past ADVANCE partnership project with Case Western Reserve and
participation with the INCLUDES ASPIRE center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSU
Adaptation project draws on evidence-based practices both outside and inside
academia, including previous ADVANCE awardees. Specifically, the project draws
from empirically supported work of previous ADVANCE projects (University of
Washington) and research on non-academic organizations (the Work, Family, and
Health Network). These strategies will be adapted to be effective at CSU as well
as include focuses on issues of intersectionality such as national origin and
age. The project has the potential to show how these techniques may need to be
adjusted depending on the context, national origin, age, or other
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.