* 2017712
* Nonspecific DNA Sensors for Scalable Pathogen Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Richard Baraniuk, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 260,000.00

The rapid identification of pathogens is essential for clinical diagnostics and
biodefense. Given timely information, clinicians can prescribe better treatments
and slow the rise of drug resistant bacteria, and U.S. biosurveillance efforts
can track the emergence and spread of both existing and newly evolved pathogens.
While most rapid diagnostic tests have sensors that are each specialized to
detect only one kind of pathogen, this research effort is developing new DNA
sensing techniques to efficiently detect large numbers of pathogens with just a
few sensors. By minimizing the number of necessary sensors, new pathogen
surveillance devices could be portable and inexpensive for routine use. The
technology additionally provides an approach to detecting emerging novel
pathogens without the need to create and deploy new test kits. In addition to
furthering development of new pathogen identification technologies, the project
develops a hands-on experimental module exploring this methodology and
implements it in a biosensing and imaging course serving undergraduate and
graduate engineering students at Rice University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research effort applies compressed sensing which allows just a few DNA probes to
(1) give each species a fingerprint response and (2) unmix these fingerprint
signals when a few pathogens are in the same sample. Compressed sensing assumes
that the sample is sparse. Sparsity occurs because although there may be dozens
or hundreds of possible species to account for, any single sample from a patient
or the environment will have only a few pathogens of interest for relevant
applications. For pathogen detection, DNA probes each bind multiple times to
microbial species. The number of binding events between a few probes and the
microbes gives each of hundreds of species a “fingerprint” response, much like
how 10 digits can give everyone in the U.S. a unique phone number. The first aim
of this project is to develop a new DNA signal amplification technique that
allows fewer binding events to be detectable. This amplification strategy also
lets signals be positive or negative, effectively allowing fingerprint signals
to spread further apart. The enhanced incoherence of the sensors is known to be
very helpful for compressed sensing. The second aim is to use new technologies
in microfluidics to capture individual pathogen cells in very small droplets and
acquire fingerprint signals from each droplet separately. By analyzing every
droplet, this project pushes towards single-cell resolution which would enable
its broader application in any task that demands the characterization of unknown
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.