* 2017920
* Neural Responding to Infant Distress Cues over the Transition to Motherhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Ashley Groh, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 698,085.00

For the nearly 4 million American women who give birth annually, infant crying
is a significant stressor. The transition to motherhood may be a time of neural
plasticity during which the brain undergoes change supporting distress
responding. Further, this normative transition may be disrupted by maternal
psychological risk. However, little is known about how change in neural
responding to distress unfolds over the transition to motherhood, whether
psychological factors disrupt such change, and whether such brain responses
impact parenting and infant adjustment. The objectives of this research are to
identify (1) normative change in neural responding to infant distress over the
transition to motherhood, (2) psychological factors (depressive symptoms,
attachment insecurity) that disrupt such change, and (3) neural responses to
distress that impact parenting and infant social and emotional adjustment.
Clearer understanding of these processes is critical because infant crying can
trigger maladaptive coping, abuse, and infanticide and parenting stress due to
crying costs millions of dollars annually. Advancing knowledge of changes in
brain responding to distress over the transition to motherhood that support
parenting and infant adjustment and identifying mothers at-risk for atypical
change will reduce these burdens and improve children's quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This longitudinal study over the transition to
motherhood of 200 primiparous mothers and their infants will use
electrophysiological measures (EEG/ERP) of neural responding to distress and
observations of parenting and infant adjustment to identify psychological
factors placing women at risk for atypical change in neural responding to
distress over the transition to motherhood integral to parenting and infant
development. A control group of nulliparous women will complete assessments of
psychological risk and neural responding to distress to test expected
specificity of findings to the transition to motherhood. This research will
extend knowledge of the brain bases of parenting by providing the first
longitudinal evidence that mothers' neural responding to distress impacts
caregiving and infant adjustment and is disrupted by maternal psychological
risk. Expected findings will identify the transition to motherhood as a window
for intervention for mothers at-risk for disrupted neural adaptation to
parenting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.