* 2017452
* ADVANCE Adaptation: ASPIRED: Adaptions for Sustainable Policies and Increased Recruitment Excellence in Diversity
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Stephanie Ivey, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Adaptations for Sustainable Policies and Increased Recruitment Excellence in
Diversity (ASPIRED) at the University of Memphis will adapt evidence-based
strategies from other ADVANCE institutions to change the institutional climate
at the University of Memphis (UM) and increase gender equity in recruitment,
hiring, retention, and advancement in STEM. UM needs a strategic institutional
investment in recruitment and retention activities, coordinated initiatives
across the institution, and improvement of institutional processes to foster a
culturally and gender inclusive environment that promotes the advancement of
STEM women faculty, especially URMs (Underrepresented minority). The ASPIRED
strategies will serve as an exportable best-practice model with impacts far
beyond the UM. Diversifying the faculty and improving the climate in STEM
departments at UM is an important step towards closing the achievement gap by
improving retention (e.g., URM student and faculty) and ultimately enhancing the
STEM workforce in the Memphis region and beyond. Additionally, broader
participation will be encouraged at the UM through opportunities to participate
in UM-Connect STEM webinars, that will increase networking and collaboration as
well as exposure to minority STEM leaders and academic leaders of the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASPIRED aims to address four problems identified by
STEM women faculty: 1) implicit bias, 2) isolation, 3) ambiguity and inequality
in career advancement, and 4) poor work-life integration. To do so, ASPIRED will
deploy three interventions across all STEM disciplines, each incorporating
multiple strategies: UM-Intersect will improve awareness of diversity and
inclusion best practices campus-wide to foster an inclusive, culturally
responsive work environment through educating search committees, providing
training on implicit bias using online case studies, and implementing department
climate improvement workshops and grants; UM-Connect will improve social and
professional connections to increase women faculty’s sense of belonging and
career advancement through networking, and professional development
opportunities; UM-Integrate will improve women faculty’s satisfaction with their
work-life-family integration by developing a culture that values personal,
familial, and professional roles through policy awareness and development as
well as work-family integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is
designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support
for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-
profit institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.