* 2017874
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Pressure and Temperature True Triaxial Testing Equipment with a Multiphase Fluid Flow System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Pejman Tahmasebi, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 794,593.00

The demand for better underground civil infrastructure requires an improved
basic understanding of the complex behaviors of man-made or natural materials
such as bedrocks. This MRI award supports the acquisition of a true triaxial
testing equipment with the capability to simulate high pressure and temperature,
three-dimensional stresses, and multiphase fluid flow conditions. Valuable
experimental data will be generated to improve our understanding of coupled
thermo-hydro-mechanical-chemical-biological (THMCB) interactions of these
materials. The scientific knowledge gained will 1) improve the reliability of
our civil infrastructure, 2) reduce risks and economic losses during subsurface
exploration, 3) ensure a safe and permanent storage for pollutants, and 4)
improve extraction of drinking water, hydrocarbons, and alternative energy
sources. This project also will train future scientists and engineers as well as
broadening the participation of women, underrepresented minorities, and persons
with disabilities in STEM fields. Some educational activities will be pursued as
part of this project, including the incorporation of equipment testing into
existing undergraduate and graduate courses, Wyoming State Science Fair
exhibits, and Engineering Summer Program classes. Other activities include
establishment of an educational website, an outreach program for Wyoming School
Districts, and annual workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
advance our understanding of the fundamental aspects of THMCB processes in solid
and porous media. Acquisition of the instrument will provide the unique ability
to reproduce most in-situ subsurface conditions or extreme conditions that are
unattainable through conventional instruments. The equipment can apply three
independent principal stresses, heat multiple pore fluids at the same
temperature of a test specimen, and perform coupled process measurements over
complex loading trajectories. The project will advance fundamental research on
rock mechanics, materials science, geophysics, biological engineering,
environmental engineering and sustainability, hydrologic science, transport
phenomena, and THMCB processes. The project will 1) reveal the physics behind
the complex failure mechanism of materials, 2) quantify three-dimensional
material strengths, 3) determine the impact of chemical and biological processes
on permeability, 4) develop new numerical techniques to study groundwater flows,
5) improve interpretation of geophysical data, and 6) advance multiphysics
computational models for simulating coupled THMCB processes of porous materials.
The project will promote regional and national research collaborations from
universities, government agencies, research institutions and private companies
to tackle critical issues like global warming, energy independence, water
resource demands, and natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by CBET-MRI Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.