* 2017726
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Community Paralegal Model and Access to Justice
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Mark Massoud, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2023
* USD 22,669.00

Access to justice and legal empowerment interventions can be crucial for states
to combat violence and poverty and for ordinary people to address a range of
socioeconomic challenges. This project will explore the rise of the community
paralegal model as a means of increasing access to justice and legal
empowerment. As this study will examine successful donor-civil society legal
empowerment partnerships, it will be relevant to scholars and policymakers
interested in how site-specific legal knowledge is created and the politics of
how the community paralegal model are put into practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ historical and archival research
of primary and secondary sources to trace the creation of community paralegal
organizations, their organizational histories and features, and changes to the
legal and political frameworks in which they operate. Interviews and participant
observation will be conducted with community paralegals, authorities, and
stakeholders. This project will examine the political, historical, and social
context of paralegal work, how paralegals reshape understandings of law, and how
that paralegal work reverberates throughout relevant policy arenas over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.