* 2017045
* The impact of social norms on intergroup attitudes and behaviors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Markus Brauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,026.00

Prejudice, racism, and discrimination represent some of the greatest challenges
to a civil society. Ever since the Civil Rights Act of 1964, great efforts have
been devoted to combatting and reducing prejudice and discrimination in the
United States. Despite the decades-long effort, data show the persistence of
these problems. Although many interventions have been developed, very few are
supported by rigorous scientific evidence. Among the methods that have undergone
at least some evaluation in the field, many appear to be ineffective and some
even backfire. Research shows that most mandatory diversity training programs do
not have the intended effect and do not create more inclusive environments. This
project focuses on a different approach to promoting inclusive behaviors. It
relies on the influence of positive descriptive norms. Descriptive norms are
one’s perceptions about the beliefs and behaviors of most people. Positive
descriptive norm messages communicate the desirable actions of others, such as
stating that most of one’s peers strive to be inclusive. Descriptive norms are a
good target for interventions because they are relatively easy to influence and
because people have a natural desire to belong and be accepted by the social
groups with which they identify. The research develops and tests a theoretical
model suggesting that positive, but not negative, descriptive norms have
beneficial effects for a variety of diversity-related
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven experiments examine the influence of
descriptive norms on social climate. Two experiments aim to establish the impact
of positive and negative descriptive norms on attitudes and behavior in the
context of a university social climate. Two more experiments explore moderators
that are hypothesized to increase or decrease the effects of salient descriptive
norms. The project concludes with three studies designed to test whether
positive descriptive norms have powerful effects on intergroup behavior and
other consequential outcomes. One study focuses on developing and establishing
the effects of a designed intervention. A second study evaluates the impact of
that intervention on students’ classroom behaviors over the course of an entire
school term. Outcome measures include observed behaviors, self-reports from
members of marginalized groups, grades, and cross-group friendships in social
networks. The final experiment delivers a descriptive norm intervention in the
context of a national survey of adults. Rather than curbing people's worst
possible selves through references to widespread discrimination, this project
aims to demonstrate the value of helping people realize their best possible
selves through messaging about positive social norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.