* 2017655
* Behavioral Effects of Exposure to Extremist Content in Social Media
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sandra Gonzalez-Bailon, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,548.00

The goal of this project is to determine if social media in general and one key
social media platform in particular are shifting how people access civic
information. Social media platforms have allowed a universe of alternative media
to arise. These media create networks with millions of followers that, some
argue, are increasingly detached from mainstream outlets. One platform, in
particular, stands out in its ability to reach mass audiences while relying on
distributed, networked forms of communication. In this project the prevalence of
extremist content on this platform is quantified, audience engagement with that
content is tracked, the pathways visitors follow to reach the universe of
alternative media are identified, and these dynamics are contextualized in the
broader frame of online exposure to such content including the web and other
social media platforms. Findings are relevant to decisions on issues such as web
use and the role of algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique observational
dataset tracking domain-level and individual-level web browsing behavior,
including platform-specific activity, is analyzed, using two different
representative panels of the U.S. population during a period of four years. The
analysis of these data allows measurement of the impact social media platforms
have on exposure to extremist content. This project offers unprecedented
findings by parsing web and social media activity for a specific population and
reconstructing individual-level trajectories within platforms, thus reflecting
different interests and choices but also the personalized recommendations
received. By analyzing time-stamped data drawn for representative panels
tracking observed behavior, this project provides a more fine-grained analysis
of exposure to extremist content than past research that has relied on audits of
recommendation algorithms or statistics collected from publicly available APIs.
This award is jointly supported by the Sociology Program and the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.