* 2017678
* Summer Institutes in Social and Personality Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Sapna Cheryan, Society for Personality and Social Psychology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2025
* USD 421,165.00

Theory, methodology, and statistics in support of research in social and
personality psychology has grown in complexity over the past three
decades. These scientific advances are partly due to increasingly connected and
diverse academic and professional networks among faculty. This project
supports the continuation and extension of Summer Institutes in Social and
Personality Psychology (SISPP). Graduate students from social psychology and
personality graduate training programs attend the advanced two-week intensive
training program, led by renowned scholars and teachers in the field. Training
at this level helps to advance these fields of science and supports the
production of important innovations. The Institute also focuses on
broadening the participation of graduate students who may be from groups
historically and currently marginalized in these fields and who may not have
intensive access to scholars in multiple subfields of their interest. Evaluation
of the previous training institutes (supported by NSF) reveals that graduate
students who participate are successful in obtaining academic positions, peer-
reviewed publications and funding for their research. Affording graduate
students with cutting-edge theoretical and methodological training enhances
their ability to participate in interdisciplinary and international
collaborations, which are increasingly important across all of
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scheduled every two years, SISPP provides an
opportunity for approximately 100 advanced graduate students in social and
personality psychology Ph.D. programs to obtain intensive experience and
instruction in cutting-edge theories, research, and methods. Because graduate
programs offer strengths in different areas, preference for attendance is given
to students whose home institution does not offer strengths in the topics
covered during a particular Summer Institute. SISPP has been successful in
fostering diversity in the field, both in promoting the careers of members of
historically underrepresented groups and in enhancing the graduate training of
students from programs with different emphases and resources. SISPP has been
successful in fostering research collaboration and communication networks among
individuals from different laboratories, universities, regions, and nations, and
creating a collaborative scholarly community for a new generation of
researchers. The diversifying experiences enabled by SISPP are critical for
fostering creativity, innovation, and flexible scientific practices, and for
expanding the scientific potential for social and personality
psychology to support solutions to important
societal challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.