* 2017767
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Developing a Best Practices Training Program in Cyberinfrastructure-Enabled Machine Learning Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Peter Rose, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is targeted towards the NSF research workforce who need to develop
machine learning applications that will run on the national cyberinfrastructure
(CI). At the heart of this project is the CI-enabled Machine Learning (CIML)
training system and repository that will support the development of
cyberliteracy in the ML space. Unlike much of current ML-related training
material found easily online, CIML material will be centered on science and
engineering applications that make use of CI-enabled ML techniques and will be
used to train a research workforce that is capable of understanding the
challenges of working with CI, new HPC architectures, software, and
applications. The user community for CIML training material will include
students (undergraduate, graduate), postdocs, PIs, researchers, educators, and
HPC trainers, each with their own diverse backgrounds and application
requirements. The project will support national educational goals by ensuring
that the CI modules run on advanced CI tools and resources, and that core
literacy and discipline appropriate skills in advanced CI will be integrated
into curricula and instructional material. CIML will support national security
concerns by facilitating a workforce capable of developing ML applications in
scientific domains such as climate and weather, the biosciences, physics, and
chemistry. As a result of outreach and extension of the training efforts, this
program will impact thousands of users and help develop the next generation of
the CI research workforce. CIML training material will be available online, so
the project has a huge potential to reach beyond the NSF cyber workforce to
impact other communities including hospital and medical treatment systems,
transportation and electrical monitoring systems, stock market monitoring
systems, and disaster response systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Cyberinfrastructure-enabled Machine Learning (CIML) training system and
repository will use a “best practices” approach to develop a unique program
targeted towards the research workforce who use machine learning (ML) and big
data analytics methods for their domain specific applications or instructional
material on large-scale cyberinfrastructure. The project will apply methods of
Cyber Literacy and HPC Competencies to define a set of core ML and domain
specific literacy areas as a function of the dimensions of learning ranging from
a technological focus to a problem-solving focus or a focus on ML or
computational science. Sources for the CIML system will be drawn from the work
of HPC training, existing HPC researchers and users, collaborators, as well as
new code and methods. The materials developed will be available via the CIML
repository, which includes a web site, documentation, GitHub repositories for
code, data, and related materials. CIMIL will become a useful tool for 2
communities: users who want to understand what technologies and skills they need
to master in order to run a particular ML application, what systems to use, and
suggested software libraries; and trainers who need to know what topics to
teach. The outcome of these efforts will result in a community of machine
learning and data analytics CI Users (CIU) and Contributors (CIC) who actively
contribute to the training material repository and incorporate the materials
into their projects and courses. As a result of these efforts, the CIML program
will extend the scope of the ongoing education and training across the research
workforce by developing cyberinfrastructure-based materials that will utilize
and contribute to training material developed for XSEDE training, higher
education, and other programs, and will impact thousands of existing and new
users, including students (undergrads/grads), postdocs, PIs, researchers, and
educators, each with their own diverse backgrounds and application requirements.
CIML training material will be available online, so the project has a huge
potential to reach beyond the cyber workforce and to impact many communities,
including hospital and medical treatment systems, transportation and electrical
monitoring systems, stock and market monitoring systems, and disaster response
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.