* 2017506
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Enabling Dark Matter Discovery through Collaborative Cybertraining
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Andrew Renshaw, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 162,118.00

Detecting dark matter in the lab would be transformational for physics, and such
a difficult measurement requires providing a foundation for early-career
scientists in advanced data analytics. The science question being pursued is
generally acknowledged to be one of the most important questions in particle
physics and astrophysics and is key to understanding what makes up the vast
majority of the universe. Effective training in good computing practices is
required for major research advances in this field. The project will consolidate
and strengthen training efforts in scientific software development and data
analysis within the field of experimental dark matter research. Scientifically,
the training will enable discovery that will come from a world-wide effort
consisting of hundreds of junior scientists searching for extremely-rare events
on petabytes of data - effectively looking for a needle in a haystack the size
of Texas. The project serves the national interest as stated by NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science by preparing a workforce trained in
cyberinfrastructure, and will support STEM disciplines with critical software
training that is much needed both in scientific fields and in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dark matter community consists of more than a
thousand scientists at the frontier of ultra-rare event searches whose efforts
support more than twenty different experiments. Searching for dark matter in
multiple ways has resulted in disparate and often inadequate computational
training. This project addresses the training problem to maximize impact across
the field. Representing three leading dark matter experiments, the project
investigators will develop educational material and training workshops for
systematic data science education to ensure early career scientists can harness
the data volumes being produced by modern experiments. The project will host two
training workshops per year, toward the goal of developing a community of
instructors and also a set of training materials for free distribution and
reuse. Beyond domain-specific training in rare-event searches, foundational
computational knowledge will be developed when necessary by working with
partners such as the Software and Data Carpentries. The project includes
specific goals to engage women and underrepresented minorities in the training
activities and broaden their advancement within the field. Additionally, the
project will provide mentors for advanced students through hackathons. These
trainings will directly contribute to broader STEM workforce development while
training students such that they can pursue careers in data science and/or data-
intensive research. This project is funded by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering and the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.