* 2017946
* American Households During the Assimilation Era 1900-1940
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Christian Dippel, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 464,040.00

Despite important historical legacies of the Assimilation Era for American
Indians, historical data from this era are exceedingly difficult to access and
use because of limitations and inconsistencies in how the Census Bureau
historically enumerated Native Americans. This has severely constrained high
quality quantitative research on Native American economic, social, and social
history. Researchers have had to rely almost exclusively on reservation-
aggregate data, and many Native Americans remained hamstrung from studying their
own past, so has the general population. This proposed research project is
designed to resolve four major data challenges in the historical Census, through
a combination of novel data collection and record-linkage of existing data. The
project will: (i) resolve inconsistencies in the enumeration of Native Americans
from 1900-1940; (ii) supplement Census-enumerate person-records with more tribal
information; (iii) link individual and households across waves; and (iv) link
individual level census data to individual level data from other sources. Once
completed, the new data will enable the researchers to answer a range of
causally identified questions on the effects of Assimilation-era policies on
Native American populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
undertake a massive and innovative data collection effort on Native American
families during reconstruction, digitize the data, and make it available freely
to researchers. The project makes four major improvements to existing data set:
(a) to resolve inconsistencies in the historical enumeration of Native Americans
in the Full Count Censuses from 1900--1940; (b) to supplement Census-enumerated
Native American person-records with information on which tribe a person belonged
to, using information on the location of historical enumeration districts; (c)
to link Native American individuals and households across Census waves using new
record linkage methodology that trades off noisy individual-level information
against higher-quality household-structure information; and (d) to link person-
records in the Population Census to records in other individual-level data
sources, namely reservation rolls and Indian boarding school rolls. Once these
data improvements are completed, the PIs will focus on three questions that have
hitherto been “unanswerable”: the effect of Indian land allotment on Native
American households, the effect of Indian boarding schools on Native American
households and children; and the effects of federally imposed institutional
arrangements on the long-run success of reservations/tribes as modern-day
polities. The results of this research will shed light and a better
understanding of Native American economics and social
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.