* 2017068
* Removing Barriers to Recovery: Community Partnering for Innovative Solutions to the Opioid Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Cordova, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 476,999.00

&lt;p&gt;The opioid epidemic has become one of America's deadliest crises,
surpassing car crashes, firearms, and HIV/AIDS as a leading cause of death for
Americans under fifty years of age. People trying to recover from opioid-use
disorder face many obstacles. Obstacles such as minor legal problems (e.g.,
arrest warrants for failure to pay a fine, failure to appear in court, or late
child support payments) can undermine the stability needed to overcome opioid
dependence. Outstanding legal obligations make it difficult to find jobs and to
secure housing. They can result in removal from treatment programs as well as
incarceration. Resolving these legal problems requires coordination,
organization, preparation, travel, and time-expectations that may be problematic
for many people in the early stages of recovery. Yet technology has the
potential to make resolving these legal problems much easier. Online platform
technology is now available that can guide people in recovery through the
resolution of many legal problems at no cost and without an attorney,
potentially doing so quickly, remotely, and at any time of day.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p&gt;This study of individuals in treatment in Michigan tests whether
resolving outstanding legal issues improves drug treatment outcomes. The
research also examines whether and to what extent resolving legal issues
supports family reunification, reduces future criminal behavior, and improves
access to jobs and housing for clients in treatment for opioid use disorder. The
researchers use a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to determine the effects of
resolving legal issues on these outcomes. For identification, the investigators
leverage the random assignment of legal services to treatment center clients,
along with the random assignment of clients to treatment centers by birth month.
The investigators assemble a novel longitudinal dataset of hundreds of clients
in treatment for substance use disorder and link these clients to several
administrative datasets and qualitative data, which allows investigators to
measure a range of important outcomes: (1) housing, including homelessness,
household composition, and homeownership; (2) financial health, including
employment, earnings, public assistance receipt, and financial obligations to
the state; (3) justice-system involvement, including civil and criminal legal
system encounters; (4) health, including substance use, disability, mental
health diagnosis, and mortality. This study also uses linked client and
administrative data to research the population in opioid treatment centers, the
follow-up behaviors of clients with and without outstanding legal issues, and
whether the consequences of providing no-cost legal services differ by client
background. Findings from this research will improve America's understanding of
the acute socio-legal needs faced by those experiencing opioid use disorder and
provide recommendations to help target resources toward the areas that best
support long-term abstinence from opioids.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/p&gt;