* 2017159
* Collaborative Research:  Electric Field- and Light-Modulated Thermal Transport in Superatomic Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Alan McGaughey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 289,999.00

The ability for a material to transport heat is governed by its thermal
conductivity. High thermal conductivity materials are thermal conductors, while
low thermal conductivity materials are thermal insulators. The objective of this
project is to discover materials whose thermal conductivity can be quickly
changed. Such thermal conductivity switches will be useful in reducing the
temperature of electronic devices that intermittently overheat and in converting
heat into electricity. The proposed approach is based on controlling the
rotations of molecules inside a new class of material called superatomic
crystals. When the molecules rotate, the thermal conductivity is low. The
application of an electric field or light will cause the molecules to stop
rotating and increase thermal conductivity. The supported graduate students will
be recruited from diverse pools and will gain cross-cutting experimental and
modeling experience in chemistry, thermal transport, and materials science. The
team will develop educational modules to expose middle school, high school, and
undergraduate students to the links between a materialâ€™s atomic structure and
its properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superatomic crystals are assembled from
precise molecular building blocks called superatoms. Their scalable synthesis
and multi-functional properties make them attractive for energy conversion
applications. Orientational disorder (i.e., rotation) of C60 superatoms in some
superatomic crystals at elevated temperatures decreases their thermal
conductivity. The overarching hypothesis of this project is that C60
orientational disorder can be actively manipulated using electric fields and
light. Through synthesis and crystallography at Columbia and thermal transport
measurements and atomistic modeling at Carnegie Mellon, this hypothesis will be
tested on the novel superatomic crystal [Co6Te8][C60]3. Polar intercalants and
photoactive ligands, triggered by electric fields and light, will become monkey
wrenches that lock the C60 gears of the superatomic crystals to switch thermal
conductivity on demand. Such thermal switches can be used to create transient
heat fluxes from steady-state sources to improve the performance of pyroelectric
and thermoelectric devices. Thermal switches will also enable active control of
heat pathways and new approaches for managing heat in electronics. Three
interdisciplinary tutorials will introduce chemistry students to thermal
transport and engineering students to chemical bonding and superstructures.
Outreach activities in underserved communities in Pittsburgh and New York will
expose middle and high school students to the intersection of chemistry and
engineering. The graduate students supported by the project will be recruited
from diverse pools and will gain interdisciplinary experience in chemistry,
X-ray crystallography, optics, and computational materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.