* 2017586
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Gender Equity Advances Retention in STEM at Wayne State University (WSU GEARS)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ece Yaprak, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 992,495.00

Wayne State University (WSU) is an urban campus in the heart of Detroit,
Michigan. WSU GEARS ADVANCE project focuses on systemic institutional and
cultural change to move WSU toward a place of belonging and valuing diversity
where women STEM faculty thrive and succeed. In 2010, women comprised under 14%
of STEM faculty. WSU began to address this gender imbalance through increased
oversight of regular search procedures and by workshops that stressed the value
of diversity and the risks of implicit bias. The result was a steady increase of
women in WSU’s STEM faculty to 20% in 2018; notably less than 3% of these women
were underrepresented minorities. While WSU has continued to increase these
numbers and strengthen pathways for success of women and underrepresented
minorities, addressing structural challenges at all institutional levels remains
a priority. WSU GEARS will leverage successful intervention strategies developed
by WSU and NSF ADVANCE peer institutions. This project will reshape the campus
inclusion culture by capitalizing on existing momentum and collaborations,
adapting relevant policies and practices at departmental, college, and
university levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSU GEARS ADVANCE Adaptation Project
will reduce inequities for women and underrepresented minorities in STEM faculty
through systemic change. Specifically, this project will tackle three barriers
to the hiring, promotion, and retention of women and underrepresented minorities
in STEM on the WSU campus: (1) toxic work environments, (2) work/family/life
strains, and (3) unequal workload burdens. To overcome these barriers, WSU GEARS
will adapt proven programs developed under prior ADVANCE programs through the
following integrated tracks: nuanced data collection to inform policies and
practices (Wayne Drives), enhancement of existing WSU programs (Wayne Shifts),
and creation of new WSU programs (Wayne Accelerates). The WSU GEARS Project
will: 1) promote successful programs that improve campus climate and create
greater equity among STEM faculty in hiring and retention; 2) identify
additional barriers for women and underrepresented minorities in STEM,
especially for intersecting identities, that need to be tackled beyond the
current programs; and 3) provide nuanced data to guide institutional
improvements for women and underrepresented minorities. WSU is committed to
sustaining outcomes beyond the award term and will invest in institutionalizing
successful programs to continue to enact positive systemic change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE “Adaptation” awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.