* 2017926
* Acoustic Propulsion in Liquid and Air
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,904.00

This research explores acoustic propulsion of microrobots in liquid and air, to
navigate to destinations without mechanical engine or propeller and driven only
with electrical signal and power. This research is based on the preliminary work
that in liquid, acoustic streaming effect makes liquid jet be shot out from a
focused ultrasonic transducer, causing the transducer to move in liquid. In air,
synthetic air jet through an orifice has been shown to move the transducer in
the opposite direction of the jet flow. Here the fundamental principles and
underlying mechanisms in acoustic propulsion in liquid and air will be studied.
Various microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) based propellers with high
efficiency and directionality will be explored. The novelty of the proposed
research of acoustic propulsion in air and liquid is that it does not require
moving parts, heat, audible sound, or combustion of fuel, and is very friendly
to environment. The successful outcome of the research will result in a
subminiature electric propulsion unit (including the drive electronics), that
can produce thrust ratios of 10:1 and 40:1 in air and liquid, respectively.
Thus, the research will greatly impact propulsion technology for microrobots and
implantable devices. The research will also produce new insights on how to
produce powerful ultrasound with MEMS piezoelectric transducers and sub-
miniature electronics over a wide frequency range from 40 kHz to 900 MHz.
Students from underrepresented groups will actively be recruited and given
opportunities to be involved in the proposed research. The high school students
will participate in the design and experimentation of acoustic propellers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is to explore various MEMS based acoustic
transducers for ultrasound generation in air and liquid over a wide frequency
range (40 - 500 kHz in air and 0.5 – 900 MHz in liquid). As the transducers are
designed and microfabricated, the transducers’ acoustic intensities and their
field patterns will be simulated and measured. To ensure large sound outputs and
controlled propulsion directionality, the transducers will be operated at their
resonant frequencies, and novel focusing techniques will be explored and
developed. The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to develop MEMS-based,
wireless and battery-powered acoustic propulsion systems for microrobots in
liquid and air. Various microfabrication technologies for the processing of the
transducers and associated components will be explored. Prototype units with the
transducers and electronics will be developed, and fundamental limits on thrust
force per unit weight (or volume) of the propulsion system and precision control
of the thrust direction will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.