* 2017732
* Revisiting the Freshwater Imperative: A workshop to synthesize and prioritize key challenges in freshwater science
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Michael Vanni, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,107.00

Freshwater is a critical resource that remains threatened by a wide range of
human activities and environmental change. The workshop supported by this award
is predicated on the 25th anniversary of the Freshwater Imperative, a research
agenda developed by scientists concerned about sustainable management of
freshwater environments. The original Freshwater Imperative was a collaborative
effort to develop to a predictive understanding of freshwater ecosystems that
would translate to improved management and mitigation practices in changing
environments. During this workshop held on the 25th anniversary of the
Freshwater Imperative, participants will reflect on what freshwater scientists
have accomplished over the past decades, what research opportunities have been
missed, and what lessons have been learned about responding to environmental
crises. Through multiple activities, workshop participants will identify grand
challenges in freshwater science and craft a forward-looking research agenda.
The workshop will aim to identify the key challenges for freshwater ecosystem
research and management, to synthesize existing understanding in an effort to
fill critical knowledge gaps, and to consider how cutting-edge analytical
approaches and emerging methods can inform both short- and long-term research
agendas. Specifically, the workshop participants will be asked: Have predictions
of the Freshwater Imperative been realized? What current threats and challenges
were not predicted? What are the components of a new research agenda? These
questions are motivated by the continued, and in many cases, accelerating
degradation of freshwater resources, combined with an explosion of innovative
research tools and approaches developed over the past 25 years, many of which
were unanticipated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will encompass three main
activities. First, it will conduct a Grand Challenges survey of the scientific
community to allow for broad participation and input. Second, it will host a
special session at a relevant research conference to allow for community
engagement through a combination of retrospective talks and prospective talks
about emerging tools and research directions. Finally, it will organize a
workshop to synthesize the Grand Challenges and address the primary questions.
Participants will include predominantly early career scientists in addition to
some who were part of the original Freshwater Imperative. The workshop will
involve scientists with a range of expertise related to freshwater environments,
and will use team science approaches to develop products that will inform the
scientific community about critical unanswered questions, as well as provide
guidance to policy makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is supported by
the Ecosystem Science program in the Division of Environmental Biology and the
Hydrologic Sciences program in the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.