* 2017704
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Advancing Equity through Systemic Strategies to Improve Leadership, Departmental Collegiality, and Data Transparency at Texas Tech University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Jones, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2024
* USD 976,173.00

Texas Tech University (TTU) is located in the agricultural and rural South
Plains region of the state of Texas. TTU is a large, public, Hispanic-serving
institution (HSI), with a Carnegie R1 highest research activity designation.
TTU’s ADVANCE Adaptation project, “Advancing Equity through Systemic Strategies
to Improve Leadership, Departmental Collegiality, and Data Transparency at Texas
Tech University,” will address gender, race, and ethnicity systemic issues at
the institution. Systemic inequities can hinder the success of faculty, and most
specifically women and underrepresented minoritized faculty (URM). In addition,
these inequities contribute to a toxic university climate that leads to faculty
attrition and dissatisfaction. TTU will adapt evidence-based strategies from
prior and existing ADVANCE recipients to address these challenges. In addition,
TTU will leverage existing and develop new strategies including the
establishment of a Faculty Success Center and a Faculty Resource Network to
provide professional development and mentoring needs for faculty as well as to
produce and disseminate research that supports best practices for ensuring
equity. These identified strategies will enable TTU to reach its goals of
systematically changing the institution to one that is equitable, evidenced
through its policies and practices as well as increased faculty satisfaction and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TTU’s ADVANCE project activities are designed to
eliminate organizational barriers that prevent equity in the work life of
faculty, with specific focus on STEM faculty. Three institutional challenges,
identified through self-study, are addressed: 1) dissatisfaction with department
chair leadership; 2) dissatisfaction with department collegiality in STEM
departments; and 3) lack of organizational infrastructure and professional
development opportunities to support faculty success. The goals to address these
challenges are: 1) leadership development of department chairs through
intersectional approaches; 2) enhance data infrastructure and operating policies
to support data-driven decision-making, accountability, and equity; and 3)
establish organizational infrastructure and provide professional development for
advancement and leadership. The strategies to address these organizational
barriers, framed by organizational theory, are focused on institutional learning
to ensure change occurs that eliminates the barriers that historically have
affected faculty, with specific focus on the intersections of gender, race,
ethnicity, sexual identity, employment status, and disability. Adapted evidence-
based strategies from prior and existing ADVANCE institutions, existing TTU
initiatives, and new strategies will be implemented across all STEM disciplines.
If successful, the project outcome will be that TTU learns at the deepest level
of organizational learning, with evidence of change occurring through its
policies and practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is
designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support
for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-
profit institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.