* 2017424
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: INnovative Training Enabled by a Research Software Engineering Community of Trainers (INTERSECT)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ian Cosden, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 255,953.00

Software forms the backbone of much current research in a variety of scientific
and engineering domains. The breadth and sophistication of software skills
required for modern research software projects is increasing at an unprecedented
pace. Despite this fact, an alarming number of researchers who develop software
do not have adequate training in software development. Therefore, it is
imperative for researchers who develop the software that will drive tomorrow’s
critical research discoveries to have access to software engineering training at
multiple stages of their career, to not only make them more productive, but also
to make their software more robust, reliable, and sustainable. This project,
INnovative Training Enabled by a Research Software Engineering Community of
Trainers (INTERSECT), provides training on software development and engineering
practices to research software developers who already possess an intermediate or
advanced level of knowledge. To achieve this goal, INTERSECT provides expert-led
training courses and workshops to help build the pipeline of computational
researchers trained in best practices for research software development. This
project serves the national interest and NSF's mission of promoting the progress
of science by preparing a workforce who are trained in research software
engineering best practices and addresses a gap in the current training and
education available to research software developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
INTERSECT project provides training in research software engineering practices
for researchers who are engaged in software development by (1) involving
practicing Research Software Engineers (RSEs) in workshops to curate, develop,
and refine training material and (2) using experienced RSEs to conduct training
courses focused on that material. INTERSECT assembles experienced RSEs from the
growing RSE community across the country who are interested in being
instructors, to gather information about their capabilities, knowledge, and
expertise. In addition to developing materials, INTERSECT is curating the
materials used in the workshops and training sessions into existing frameworks.
This curation provides an open-source platform that allows RSEs to have ongoing
engagement with the training material and helps coordinate efforts across the
RSE-trainer community. To support the generation and curation of materials,
INTERSECT sponsors multiple RSE-trainer workshops. These workshops connect
practicing RSEs, who are also instructors, from across the country to both
leverage the diversity of knowledge present in different institutions and to
build and strengthen a national community of this increasingly important group
of Cyberinfrastructure Professionals. By contributing to the growth of this
community, INTERSECT will have a broad and long lasting impact on research
software through increased access to peer support, resource and knowledge
sharing, and networking opportunities for community members. By providing
intermediate and advanced level training events and RSE workshops, INTERSECT
will help to cultivate sophisticated Research Software Developers, bring
awareness to the RSE career path, and strengthen the nascent national community
of RSEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.