* 2017396
* I-Corps:  Chemometric fluorescence microscopic imaging and virtual staining for rapid label-free histopathology
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Min Xu, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
robust, rapid, and label-free biological sample evaluation. Cancer is a
worldwide public health problem, and its diagnosis currently depends on
evaluation of specimens of biological material. Time-efficient and objective
alternative methods are urgently needed to address several shortcomings of the
existing process, which is time-consuming, labor-intensive, and subject to
interpreter variations. The proposed project is a validated method using light
on unprocessed or minimally processed cell and tissue specimens. The proposed
method particularly meets the demands of rapid and accurate diagnosis in
surgical suites and telepathology laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is to advance the translation of chemometric fluorescence
microscopic imaging and virtual staining (CFM-VS) on unstained cell and tissue
specimens. Using endogenous cellular fluorescence, CFM produces 2D images
revealing both subcellular morphology and function, visually differentiating
specific cell properties including structure, cellular metabolism, and protein
production. One unique advantage of CFM is the quantification of the absolute
concentration of the endogenous fluorescent biomolecules, enabling reliable and
accurate diagnosis. CFM and the derived virtual staining (CFM-VS) have been
successfully applied to differentiate and diagnose lung and prostate cancers.
The virtually stained images for unstained histological slides not only share
the morphology of traditional hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) stained image
counterparts, but also indicate the biochemical alterations due to cancer.
Attractive features of CFM-VS include: ability to image unprocessed or minimally
processed cell and tissue sections in close to real-time; yields virtual H&amp;E
stained images familiar to pathologists; eliminates distortions introduced in
tissue processing; and robust diagnosis is achieved and may be improved through
adaption of the algorithm from learning with the accumulation of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.