* 2017822
* Collaborative Research: Snapshots from the ancient Indo-Pacific: remarkable Eocene fish faunas and their Implications for the origin of a modern marine biodiversity hotspot
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Friedman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 346,910.00

Some regions of the world are home to a greater variety of species than others.
How these so-called biodiversity hotspots arise and change over time is an
important question, especially as these areas are under pressure from human
activities. The major marine hotspot lies in the Indo-West Pacific region, and
is home to the greatest diversity of fishes anywhere on the planet. The sparse
fossil record of fishes in the region, however, has been an obstacle to
understanding the origin of this remarkably diverse modern fauna. This project
will focus on three distinct assemblages of marine fish fossils from Pakistan
that begin to fill this gap. Between 48 and 43 million years old, these fossils
date to a time when Indo-Pakistan was a large island in what would become the
Indian Ocean. They provide ‘snapshots’ of fish life in the Old World Tropics and
provide important clues into how the modern biodiversity hotspot came to be.
This study will provide training for undergraduate, Master’s, and PhD students
at two public universities. Results will be published in scientific articles and
presented at professional meetings. Outcomes from the project will be shared
with the public through a combination of visible preparation labs, events held
at museums and other public venues, and an interactive display featuring fossil
specimens, touchable casts, and life reconstructions of fossil
fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fossils examined are from two marine Eocene
formations in Pakistan, representing three distinct environments. Specimens will
be prepared using chemical approaches, mechanical techniques, micro-CT scanning,
or radiography, depending on their mode of preservation. Taxonomic
identifications will be made through comparison with skeletal preparations of
modern and fossil specimens. We will quantify the similarity of the Eocene
assemblages from Pakistan to modern and ancient marine fish faunas to test
hypotheses of a shifting marine biodiversity hotspot proposed on the basis of
other taxonomic groups. A select number of specimens will be subject to detailed
anatomical and phylogenetic analysis incorporating morphological, molecular, and
stratigraphic data. Resulting phylogenies will be used to test hypotheses about
the timing of trophic and ecological innovation apparent among some early
Paleogene teleostean fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.