* 2017011
* Cybertechnology Development and Exploration of Learning Processes in Augmented Reality Team Environments  (CyberlearnAR)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Amy Phelps, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Augmented reality (AR) allows the real world to be enhanced, or augmented, by
computer-generated objects that are “added” to the real world. For example, a
furniture store may use AR to allow a customer to “see” what a piece of
furniture would look like in their home. AR has the potential for helping
students to visualize, interact with, and learn about complex physical systems.
The CyberLearnAR project at Middle Tennessee State University in Murfreesboro
Tennessee, will explore how wearable AR technology when combined with best
classroom practices affects the learning process of college-level STEM students.
Groups of students will view and manipulate 3D holographic objects in a
collaborative learning environment. A team composed of computational/computer
scientists, disciplinary experts, and a social scientist, will examine how the
use of AR impacts student learning. This work will guide the development of the
next generation of AR technology, and add to our understanding of the use of AR
technology in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AR is a potentially
transformative first-generation technology. However, current platforms lack
applications for STEM teaching at the introductory college level. The
CyberLearnAR team will develop a shared augmented reality and spatial computing
group educational environment that can easily accommodate changes in the
underlying technology. Using this environment, the project team will study the
technological, sociological, and cognitive obstacles to, and the benefits of,
using the new technology in two different target audiences according theoretical
frameworks for learning. Quantitative measures on learning will be collected to
determine if is there a differential performance on content knowledge between
the intervention treatment group and the associated comparison group. Additional
Analysis of Covariance procedures will be conducted to examine the moderating
effect of individual differences (ID), including a main effect for ID, main
effect for treatment, and the interaction effect of treatment and
ID.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.