* 2017588
* EAGER: Manufacturing Nanocomposite Materials Using Ultrasound Directed Self-Assembly and Additive Fused Deposition Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Bart Raeymaekers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award focuses on
understanding the basic science required to demonstrate feasibility of a
manufacturing process that combines ultrasound directed self-assembly and
additive fused deposition modeling to fabricate complex three-dimensional
nanocomposite materials. Ultrasound directed self-assembly organizes
nanoparticles dispersed in a fluid into user-specified patterns using an
external ultrasound wave field. Fused deposition modeling is an extrusion based
additive manufacturing process to make three-dimensional objects from a variety
of materials. Current methods for patterning nanoparticles involve electric or
magnetic field-directed self-assembly, which places strict requirements on the
material properties and shape of the nanoparticles. In addition, the need for
high electric and magnetic field strengths to organize particles into user-
defined patterns limits dimensional scalability of the nanocomposite materials.
Ultrasound wave fields permit the manipulation of nanoparticles independent of
their material properties and dimensions, thus removing material and size
restrictions. Additive fused deposition modeling in combination with the low
field-strength required for an ultrasound wave field to penetrate viscous
liquids enables dimensional scalability of the manufacturing process because
ultrasound waves can propagate over macroscale distances. This project creates
new knowledge in ultrasound directed self-assembly of nanoparticles in moving
fluids such as in fused deposition modeling. This project contributes to the
education of graduate and undergraduate students. The research results are
integrated into graduate teaching activities and disseminated into the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this EAGER
research is to show proof-of-concept of a combined ultrasound directed self-
assembly (DSA) and fused deposition modeling (FDM) manufacturing process, in
which nanoparticles dispersed in a molten FDM filament are organized into
specific patterns as it extrudes from the FDM three-dimensional printer nozzle.
To achieve this goal, an ultrasound transducer is integrated into the printing
nozzle of an FDM printer to enable control of nanoparticle
patterning/structuring after melting the FDM filament loaded with nanoparticles.
A numerical simulation of the ultrasound wave field determines the ultrasound
transducer operating parameters required to obtain user-specified patterns of
nanoparticles, accounting for the material properties of both the filament and
nanoparticles. This manufacturing process allows the fabrication of 3D
macroscale nanocomposite materials of any geometry using FDM and with
hierarchical structures that cover multiple length scales using ultrasound DSA.
The research focus is on fabricating circular patterns of nanoparticles. The
project evaluates whether the circular patterns remain in place when the FDM
filament solidifies and is deposited on a substrate. Solving this problem
provides the knowledge to devise a combined ultrasound DSA/FDM manufacturing
platform. This project allows the PI to advance the knowledge base in
nanocomposite materials, additive manufacturing and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.