* 2017162
* Collaborative Research: Mapping Relational Data in Civil Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Max Gallop, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 445,616.00

More than half of the countries in the international system have experienced a
civil war in recent decades and a growing number of countries face violent
internal conflicts. The majority of civil conflicts since 1946 have had at least
three active armed groups and some have had up to ten groups, yet most analyses
only examine interactions between the government and an assumed homogeneous
opposition group. Research has fallen short in measuring and modeling techniques
that adequately capture network and relational characteristics essential to the
data-generating process needed for understanding civil conflict. This project
unmasks the interdependent dynamics of civil conflict by conceptualizing actors
and battles as a set of nodes and ties that constitute a network. The project
will generate a user-friendly statistical package and website, called
conflictNet, that will allow researchers to more easily conceptualize and study
civil war. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of literature demonstrates that
controlling for interdependence in relational data yields less biased parameter
estimates and allows us to better understand how conflict will evolve.
ConflictNet will be a valuable contribution to the field and enable scholars
interested in the analysis of current political events and civil conflict in two
keys ways. First, from a modeling perspective, the creation of a tool that
allows for the easy generation of network data on subnational-level conflict
will improve the ability to conduct inference on the drivers of civil conflict,
and operationalizing conflict between armed actors using a network perspective
will allow for greater accuracy in forecasting future occurrences of conflict.
Second, this project not only addresses critical gaps in the literature but also
paves the way for new directions in intrastate conflict research: the prediction
of battle-level incidents at fine-grained unit of analyses; new hypotheses on
how violent events are conditional on the ebb and flow of group level
characteristics, motivations, and socio-political connections; and a deeper
understanding of how interdependence across armed actors escalates violence
against civilians and poses new challenges for government
actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.