* 2017869
* MRI: Acquisition of a room-temperature transmission electron microscope for FSU
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Qian Yin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 347,692.00

An award is made to Florida State University to support the purchase of a
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). The new system will replace an
antiquated system and allow for active research by faculty across the FSU campus
and in the surrounding region. The new TEM will modernize Florida State
University’s shared specimen screening instrumentation to streamline sample
optimization for final imaging on higher-resolution cryo-TEM systems. The new
TEM will also expand the service capabilities of the Biological Science Imaging
Resource, where the TEM will be housed. Student training will also be advanced
by the new system through the development of a hands-on laboratory course that
uses TEM imaging and enhanced usage by undergraduates working on research
projects. The availability of the new system will improve training for the next
generation of researchers from among the very diverse students at FSU, and
through the use of the TEM by students in summer research programs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The new TEM will support high-resolution structural studies by
allowing researchers to easily screen negatively stained samples, a necessary
step on the way to cryo-EM structure determination. The major users’ research
programs are diverse and supported by extramural funding for studying topics
that include: mechanisms for biogeochemical cycling of sulfur; structural
studies of large GTPAses; bacteriophages of rhizobial bacteria and the role of
rhizobial molecular determinants in plant host invasion efficiency;
understanding molecular motors in contractile tissues, and the development of
tools and methods for high-throughput 3D electron microscopy. Results from the
research performed with this instrumentation will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed scientific journal publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.