* 2017278
* Enhancing Biology Education Research by Bridging Disciplinary Boundaries between Discipline-based Education Research in Biology and Learning Sciences.
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Melanie Peffer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,745.00

A working knowledge of biology is increasingly important as society grapples
with new genetic technologies, conservation, and the impacts of climate change.
To help ensure a scientifically literate society that is prepared to deal with
these issues, it is thus in the national interest to develop effective methods
of teaching biological concepts. To that end, collaborations between scientists
in discipline-based education research in biology (DBER-BIO) and learning
sciences (LS; including cognitive, educational, and developmental psychology)
have resulted in new theories and pedagogical strategies that advance
understanding of learning in biology. Despite the benefits, however, these
partnerships are relatively uncommon. Although the DBER-BIO and LS communities
share the goal of understanding learning, connecting the two groups is often
hindered by differences in training, methodologies, and practices. To facilitate
collaboration between DBER-BIO and LS, the PI team will host a one-day workshop.
The goals of the workshop are to develop connections between researchers from
different disciplines, increase awareness of differences and similarities in
perspectives towards education research, and equip participants with strategies
for engaging in interdisciplinary work. Fostering these interdisciplinary
collaborations will result in improved research on learning in biology that will
ultimately improve undergraduate biology education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will support a one-day workshop for researchers in the LS and DBER-BIO
communities. The workshop will foster interdisciplinary connections and identify
strategies for collaboration through three activities: small group work, a panel
discussion session with researchers who have experience in interdisciplinary
collaborations, and a poster session. By the end of the workshop, it is
anticipated that participants will have gained an appreciation of the value of
interdisciplinary research and be equipped to pursue it. Data collected during
the workshop will include discussion comments, collaborative strategies, and
responses to an end-of-workshop survey. This data will be analyzed qualitatively
using an in vivo approach for the first cycle of coding and focused coding for
the second cycle to identify workshop outcomes. In turn, these will be evaluated
to determine if the anticipated outcomes were met and to identify barriers to
and facilitators of interdisciplinary collaboration as well as productive
collaborative strategies. The PI team intends to share the results of this
analysis through a meeting report, thus enabling the insights and strategies
generated in the workshop to reach a broad audience.This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.