* 2017544
* Agent-based modeling of incentives to encourage pre-disaster relocation in anticipation of coastal flooding
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Vicki Bier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2023
* USD 403,756.00

Extreme storms such as Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy have made clear that forced
relocation due to floods is a major and growing problem. By contrast to short-
term evacuation, relatively little is known about how to manage long-term
relocation. Extensive social-science research has documented the advantages of
voluntary vs. forced relocation. Strategies for encouraging voluntary retreat
from at-risk coastal areas prior to catastrophic flooding can reduce the number
of people affected, the resulting disruption and property loss, and the costs
for emergency relief. Moreover, the relatively predictable nature of sea-level
rise makes it possible to know well in advance which geographic areas are most
likely to face increasing flooding hazards. This predictability facilitates
proactive planning and anticipatory relocation as one way of reducing projected
increases in flood damage, as recommended by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. However, many responses to sea-level rise can be problematic.
Anticipatory relocation of entire communities is extremely costly (roughly $1
million per person). Furthermore, the effectiveness of many community and
household-scale flood-protection efforts can be limited. For example, buying out
flood-damaged properties after a flood does not prevent disruption and loss of
personal property; similarly, protective barriers, such as seawalls, frequently
encourage development in at-risk areas. Taken together, these observations
suggest that it is worth exploring methods to encourage voluntary relocation
before severe flooding. We study possible ways to incentivize relocation prior
to flooding, focusing on two areas vulnerable to coastal flooding (Brooklyn, NY,
and Galveston, TX) with different housing costs and with
socioeconomic/demographic characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies
examining mitigation of risks in vulnerable coastal areas adopt the viewpoint of
a single decision maker (either a prototypical resident, or a local government),
without considering different stakeholder goals, values, or preferences. In this
work, game theory is used to model interactions between government vs. private
citizens, to identify solutions whereby government can incentivize residents to
relocate before they otherwise might. Agent-based modeling is used to enhance
the realism of the game, address decision-maker heterogeneity, and explore
behavior that may be difficult to model analytically (such as emergent network
effects influenced by the behavior of other residents). Few researchers to date
have approached the issue of relocation as a problem that can be addressed using
formal methods such as game theory. The proposed project explicitly considers
the different discount rates of stakeholders involved in relocation decisions
(government vs. private individuals), making it possible to frame the problem as
a multiplayer game rather than merely a decision problem for a single decision
maker. A game-theoretic perspective facilitates the identification of “win-win”
solutions whereby government can encourage relocation sooner than would
otherwise occur. Sensitivity analyses will address uncertainty about flooding
risks, network effects (such as cascading or tipping), free-rider effects (e.g.,
residents who take advantage of government subsidies but would have relocated
even without subsidies), and differing behavioral models of resident decision-
making. The project contributes to improved societal understanding of mechanisms
for reducing vulnerability to coastal flooding from sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.