* 2017000
* Analyzing and Supporting Students' Learning Behaviors in Computational STEM Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,162.00

Computational thinking (CT) is the foundation of modern competency in a
multitude of STEM-related fields. Learning strategies influence the way a
student processes information and learns, which in turn, requires the proper
control and regulation of their cognitive processes. More specifically, an
effective learning strategy requires students to have adequate descriptive,
procedural, and conditional knowledge of the strategies they apply. This project
will study the learning processes of middle school students when they are
involved in learning science using a computational modeling approach. The
research that will be performed will help us to better understand how to
effectively integrate CT and computing into the K-12 science curricula. To
examine how learning evolves, and the difficulties students face in developing
and applying synergistic processes, a task-oriented framework will be developed
to analyze student learning behaviors as they work on modeling and problem-
solving tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use adaptive scaffolding
to synergistically teach scientific concepts with computational modeling to
middle school students. Student learning behaviors will be analyzed using self-
regulated learning theory. This project aims to make the following research
contributions: (1) develop a framework for analyzing student learning behaviors
and strategies as they are involved in their model building, model debugging,
and problem solving tasks; (2) use a combination of students activity logs and
eye tracking data to understand student cognitive and metacognitive processes as
they work in the C2STEM environment; and (3) study the effectiveness of the
adaptive scaffolding and feedback generation framework by analyzing how this
helps students overcome their difficulties, and progress in their learning and
problem solving tasks. An intelligent peer agent in an artificial intelligence
system will be developed to achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.