* 2017553
* The effects of markers of shared identity on inflammation and stress
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Michael Muehlenbein, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 04/30/2024
* USD 204,055.00

Identity transcends individuals, shaping social interactions and senses of
shared belonging. Despite their importance as signifiers of social belonging,
visible markers of identity have received limited attention in terms of their
attendant impacts on health. This study will thus investigate how consonance
with cultural values around specific markers of identity impacts health. The
researchers will measure a series of biological markers of endocrine and immune
function among individuals with and without visible markers of identity who
report varying degrees of shared identity. The project will train students from
backgrounds underrepresented in the sciences. Additional outputs will serve the
public, including free online teaching modules, museum exhibits, a book and a
documentary film identity markers and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this 3-year project are to investigate identity markers as important facets of
shared belonging, testing the degree to which expressing belonging can influence
health. The first phase of research involves developing a culturally valid
questionnaire about the relative importance of social signifiers of identity to
participants' senses of belonging. The second phase correlates results of the
questionnaire to measures of health, including immunoglobulin A, interleukin-1β,
interleukin-6, C-reactive protein, alpha-amylase, and cortisol derived from
saliva samples. The biocultural approach taken utilizes a mixture of proven
methods for empirically measuring the internalization and impact of culture and
advanced field techniques for assessing immune and endocrine response, providing
a holistic sense of how signifiers of identity contribute to or depart from
shared belonging and in turn impact health. The results will contribute to
theories of embodiment and cultural consensus theory. This project is jointly
funded by Cultural Anthropology and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.