* 2017652
* The Political Economy of Business-Government Connections
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Bauerle Danzman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,567.00

The relationship between private industry and governments has attracted
substantial interest from scholars, policymakers, and the general public in
recent years as pro-business institutions have been blamed for a host of
contemporary issues. While most studies of business influence focus on
relatively narrow aspects of potential business-politics interaction such as
lobbying, campaign contributions, and the “revolving door” between regulators
and industry, direct connections between business and politics remains an
underexplored mechanism for business influence in political systems. This
project collects data on the explicit links between public officials and
registered businesses globally. The dataset allows researchers to describe the
extent of the political-business linkages, the types of connections across
industries and firm size, the potential transnationality of business-politics
ties, and the relationship of connections to policy outcomes. These data also
allow researchers to evaluate a wide range of hypotheses about expressions of
and implications of business power. The dataset represents a major advance on
prior research on business-politics connections, and the public release of these
data contributes to the type of transparency that is necessary for good
governance and democratic accountability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
primary objectives of this research program. First, the research assesses the
country-, industry-, and firm-level factors associated with national and
transnational connections between business and government. Second, the research
measures the economic value of such connections to firms, by comparing the
performance of politically-connected firms to unconnected firms. Finally, the
research links what political connections exist to macroeconomic and
macropolitical outcomes by determining how country-level experiences with
business-government connections affect the functioning of political
institutions, citizens’ perceptions about their governments, and macroeconomic
outputs. The project develops a new dataset of the explicit links between
politicians and businesses using business information from the Orbis database of
Bureau van Dijk and data on politicians from the Every Politician database, the
Keesing’s World News Archive, and government websites. The research design
involves a multi-method quantitative analysis of these data, with appropriate
explanatory and control variables taken from a variety of public databases and
using complex network methodologies implemented in the statistical software
R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.