* 2017316
* NSF Travel Grant Support for ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks 2020 (ACM WiSec)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Ning Zhang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 03/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal supports student travel to attend the 2020 ACM Conference on
Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks (ACM WiSec) to be held in
Linz, Austria from July 8-10, 2020. The ACM WiSec conference is a leading venue
for quick and wide dissemination of cutting-edge research results in on the
security and privacy of wireless communications and mobile networks. This travel
grant enables career development and learning opportunities for US-based and/or
US citizen graduate students. Attending conferences is an important component of
graduate school education for our society's future computer security
researchers. Students have the opportunity to discuss leading edge research with
world-class computer security researchers, and establish networks, connections,
and mentoring relationships that will serve them well during their research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support to encourage
participation in the 2020 ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and
Mobile Networks by students who would normally find it difficult to attend.
Criteria for selection include evidence of a serious interest in the field, as
demonstrated by research output, coursework and/or project experience.
Organizers encourage participation of women and students from other under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.