* 2017828
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 400-MHz NMR Spectrometer with Nitrogen-Cooled Cryoprobe
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ned Bowden, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 431,230.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Iowa is acquiring a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with an inverse probe and
a liquid-nitrogen cooled probe. The instrumentation supports Professors James
Gloer, Leonard MacGillivray, Santhana Velupillai, Ned Bowden, Scott Daly and
other colleagues. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such
as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance,
as well as permitting study of biologically relevant species. In general, NMR
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution and nearby
institutions such as Augustana College, as well as Des Moines Area, Kirkwood,
Indian Hills and Iowa Valley community colleges and some industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the
discovery of bioactive natural products and the analyses of environmental
degradation products of steroids and other pharmaceuticals, as well as the
studies on the role of hydrogen sulfide and its controlled release in
agriculture using dithiophosphates. The instrumentation is also utilized for
studying synthetic coordination chemistry and ligand design for carbon dioxide
reduction and separation of actinides from lanthanides, and for the development
of asymmetric synthetic strategies with applications to bioactive molecules
relevant to human health. In addition, it provides information to understand the
disposition and toxicity of environmental pollutants and their biotransformation
products, and for the analyses of products formed from template-directed
synthesis of complex molecules in the solid state. The NMR spectrometer is also
used to develop catalytic transformations and strategies for bond activation and
to study boron-mediated chemistry, exemplified by nitrene formation to generate
amines through carbon–hydrogen functionalization
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.