* 2017870
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Constraining the continental-scale terrestrial carbon cycle using NEON data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jingfeng Xiao, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 597,760.00

Plant life in U.S. forests consume large volumes of carbon dioxide, playing an
important role in regulating the concentrations of this important gas in the
atmosphere. There is an urgent need for scientists to reduce uncertainties in
future projections of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations and to more
confidently assess whether plants in forests will continue to offset carbon
dioxide emissions to the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels. The NSF-
funded National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) is a continental-scale
ecological observation facility that collects and provides quality-controlled
data from 81 field sites across the United States that characterize and quantify
how our nation's ecosystems are changing. NEON's measurements of plant
photosynthesis and respiration are providing the data needed for computer
projections of continental scale patterns, year-to-year variations, and trends
in the global carbon cycle. This project will develop more refined continental-
scale carbon profiles by using a novel approach to improve complex computer
models and delivering a widely-sought application of NEON data. The
investigators will broaden impacts of this project by providing training to
early-career scientists, broadening diversity, sharing products with the
research community, and enhancing research and education infrastructure. The
results are anticipated to be of high value for integrated assessments of global
change and will be useful for federal, state and local agencies, and land
managers who are making decisions on managing U.S. natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will constrain the
continental-scale terrestrial carbon cycle by integrating observations from
NEON, satellite data, data-driven methods, and data-model integration
techniques. The objectives are to: (1) use NEON data to develop continental-
scale flux products that are need to help realize NSF's goals for NEON; (2)
evaluate information content of NEON data sets for reducing model uncertainty;
(3) assimilate multiple NEON data sets into complex land models to quantify the
U.S. land carbon sink and its uncertainty; (4) understand the continental-scale
carbon dynamics and underlying regulatory mechanisms. First, the investigators
will utilize NEON data to develop an hourly, gridded Gross Primary
Production(GPP) product with uncertainty estimates based on satellite
observations and meteorological data. Second, they will use NEON data along with
solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence (SIF) data from satellites to develop
gridded complimentary GPP products with uncertainty estimates. Third, they will
utilize multiple heterogeneous datasets from NEON and the gridded GPP products
for quantifying the US land carbon sink potential and assess the effectiveness
of NEON data to constrain parameter estimation and model prediction. Fourth,
they will develop a multiple model ensemble to understand constraints of flux-
vs. pool-based data on structure uncertainty in model prediction. Fifth, they
will apply data assimilation techniques to quantify parameter uncertainty and
assess constraints of multiple vs. single NEON data sets on parameter estimation
with three different models. Finally, they will assess the US land carbon sink,
its uncertainty, and regulatory mechanisms with NEON data-based gridded flux
products, NEON data-trained models, and the traceability framework. This project
will ultimately provide feedback towards improvement of models and NEON
observations via uncertainty analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.