* 2017971
* GOALI: Data Driven Remanufacturing: Foundation for Modeling the Impact of Product Middle-of-Life Data on End-of-Life Recovery Decisions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Sara Behdad, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 148,334.00

1705621 (Behdad). The objective of this research is to create a framework for
application of middle-of-life product data toward making sustainable product
end-of-use recovery and reuse/recycle/etc. decisions. The framework to be
developed has three main components: 1) Data collection: the definitions of
different types of data that are generated over the middle-of-life phase of the
product, particularly from the consumers' usage behavior, and also the types of
uncertainty included in the data; 2) Data analytics: the evaluation of future
reusability of consumer electronics based on usage profiles; and 3) Decision-
making techniques: the identification of the best End of Use (EOU) options
(e.g., reuse, recycle, remanufacture, refurbish, and disposal) not only based on
product reusability, but also planned-obsolescence and market acceptance.
Several application areas will be studied with the help of an industry partner.
The focus will be on collecting consumer usage data for charge and discharge
usage of lithium-ion laptop batteries and Hard Disk Drives (HDDs) data from
home-run and office-run personal computers. This research is targeted to allow
information flow to go beyond the first product lifecycle and to feed the
information gathered in the first lifecycle to remanufacturing decisions being
made at the start of the future lifecycles. Particularly, a prognostic method
will be developed that predicts the future reusability of different components
of a product, aggregates the data together and further optimizes the appropriate
EOU option.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will include three major
activities: 1) Characterizing product usage behavior of consumers to identify
general product usage patterns. Data will be collected from surveys and
information collected by industry partners on the specific category of
electronic devices to quantify the conditions under which certain electronics
have been used; 2) Creating a new class of predictive modeling techniques to
quantify the future reusability of products based on the lifecycle profile and
consumer usage behavior, and developing a set of decision models in the form of
prognostic algorithms to determine the best EOU recovery option for used
products incorporating the reusability assessment as well as the information
from product technical life, market life, design life and physical life; and
finally 3) Evaluating the proposed decision-making methods. This research has
potential in facilitating the reusability of consumer electronics. These
practices are essential for responding to the growing global hunger for
electronic devices in newly industrialized countries that lack the sufficient
systems, policies and infrastructure for appropriate management and recovery of
electronic waste (e-waste). With the help of an industry partner, the project
seeks to advance remanufacturing by providing massive and heterogeneous industry
data &lt;br/&gt;in a challenging e-waste application area.