* 2017173
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal Preferences and Civil War Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Liana Reyes, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2022
* USD 22,477.00

Civil wars are notoriously difficult to resolve and often times likely to recur.
This project will study how legal preferences shape peace negotiations, the
termination of civil wars, the outcome of civil wars, and the duration of peace.
More particularly, this project will focus on the divergence of insurgent and
government legal systems over salient issues and how this discrepancy in legal
preferences might affect conflict resolution and structuring the post-conflict
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating a mixed method approach with a case
study using archival data of the warring parties’ legal preferences during the
conflict and peace negotiations, as well as quantitative analyses of dyads of
warring parties across a time period of nearly 70 years, this project will
present a novel theory of peace and conflict in civil wars while implicating
numerous disciplines. The study will produce a dataset of incumbent and rebel
legal systems disaggregated across several theoretically-driven issues,
including property rights, justice, societal relations, membership/citizenship,
and source of law. These dyadic data on intrastate conflict will detail specific
legal regimes of the warring parties, as well as the compatibility of their
legal preferences, de jure power-sharing, and the termination/recurrence of
conflict. This study will inform theoretical, empirical, and public
understandings of civil wars across time and space. Moreover, data and findings
will be publicly disseminated to allow policymakers, scholars, and the public to
better determine how popular approaches to conflict management and termination
of civil war can have a long-term impact on peace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.