* 2017968
* Collaborative Research: Improving Design for Additive Manufacturing through Physically-integrated Design Concepts Generated from Computationally Efficient Graph Coloring Techniques
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Sara Behdad, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2021
* USD 151,375.00

Additive manufacturing or 3D printing has been hailed as the third industrial
revolution because of the unique way it changes how products are conceived,
designed, manufactured and distributed to end users. This research project
addresses key scientific and engineering barriers that currently prevent the
production of additively manufactured products at an industrially-relevant
scale. In particular, the project focuses on how to better design products that
will be produced via additive manufacturing by considering manufacturing
constraints and challenges associated with assembling parts into final products.
The study will result in fast algorithms for generating and selecting design
concepts that have the minimum number of parts required to cover all functional
requirements and that meet constraints imposed by the additive manufacturing
process. This will facilitate high-volume, mass production of 3D printed
products, thereby furthering the practicality and economic impact of additive
manufacturing. The project spans several disciplines through a joint effort
between the University at Buffalo (UB) and Rochester Institute of Technology
(RIT). The project will enhance the curriculum related to design for additive
manufacturing at the two participating universities by introducing results from
this research into existing courses. Outreach activities will promote the
recruitment of women and minorities to advanced manufacturing through workshops
aimed at K-12 students organized in partnership with the Tech-Savvy program at
UB. The research community will be engaged through a road-mapping workshop on
computationally efficient methods in decision-based design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to define a prescribed
theoretical framework and practical methods for classifying and generating
physically integrated design concepts that can be realized effectively through
additive manufacturing. The framework is based on the independence of functional
requirements principle and modeling of physical integration problems as graph
coloring problems. The research will result in new, computationally efficient
(polynomial-time) graph-coloring algorithms based on discharging techniques in
combination with Combinatorial Nullstellensatz. The new algorithms and design
framework will be demonstrated and evaluated on representative design problems
with the resulting designs being realized through additive manufacturing.
Manufacturing productivity measures such as surface roughness, buildup time and
cost, will be considered.