* 2017877
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Strategies for surviving climate change and invasive species: Integrating multi-scale remote sensing and experimental common gardens
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,449,527.00

Our nation’s health, prosperity and welfare depends, in part, on the resilience
and stability of natural ecosystems and the services they provide. Many of these
ecosystems are threatened due to the combined impacts of environmental change
and invasion by exotic species. In the American Southwest, which is experiencing
record increases in temperature and exotic species disturbance, there is a
pressing need to understand whether plants and animals will be able to adapt to
a rapidly changing landscape. This project will use the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) and data collected with NEON's airborne observational
platform to study forested river and stream ecosystems, which are critical for
providing clean water, nutrient cycling, natural water flow, agricultural
productivity and many recreational activities. Using a combination of
experimental gardens composed of thousands of Fremont cottonwood trees, and
airborne remote sensing technology, the team will examine the capacity these
trees have to tolerate heat stress, drought and habitat disturbance caused by
salt cedar, a major invasive plant of the southwestern U.S. They will
investigate different strategies which the trees may use to adapt to
environmental change including physiological and genetic mechanisms, and through
the interactions of their roots with fungi in the soil. The studies will include
training opportunities for postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate
students. Results from this project will increase our understanding of how
tolerant cottonwood forests are to the combined impacts of environmental change
and invasive species. The researchers will also develop an education program for
high school students, site tours, workshops and land management strategies that
capitalize on these trees’ natural abilities to adapt to rapid environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three major hypotheses will be tested: 1) Fremont
cottonwood genotypes from warm and cool regions of the species distribution will
show differential strategies for regulating leaf temperature and carbon balance
as an adaptive response to heat stress; 2) Naturally occurring interspecific
hybridization will produce hybrids that are better adapted to both drought and
salt cedar invasion; 3) mycorrhizal symbioses associated with cottonwoods will
promote survival and adaptation to drought and soils that have been altered by
invasive tamarisk. These hypotheses will be integrated from the perspective of
phenotypic plasticity - an organism’s response to a changing or novel
environment - that is often a primary mechanism of adaptation. Phenotypic
plasticity will be evaluated using a combination of greenhouse experiments,
established common gardens and remote sensing technology using a NEON
hyperspectral/lidar platform. This platform will allow us to scale measurements
taken from local, replicated tree genotypes (greenhouse and common gardens) to a
landscape scale by critically evaluating tree genotype responses that involve
gene, environment and gene x environment interactions that occur across the
species’ distribution. We will apply the knowledge gained in the common gardens
to broad parts of the Southwest and predict, at the canopy scale, which trees
may be more susceptible to environmental change. Results are anticipated to
provide critical information on key adaptive strategies that riparian foundation
trees may use to cope with the combined impacts of temperature increase and
exotic species’ invasion. Our over-arching goal is to develop solutions to these
combined threats using a foundation species that is recognized as being
critically important for biodiversity conservation and could serve as a model
for adaptive management of arid regions in the Southwestern U.S. and around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.