* 2017267
* Testing the impact and malleability of neural biases in outgroup deindividuation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Brent Hughes, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 494,668.00

People tend to see members of their own racial groups as individuals but
consider members of other racial groups as interchangeable and indistinct, a
phenomenon known as deindividuation. Deindividuation facilitates group-based
discrimination and increases social inequality. For example, White eyewitnesses
misidentify Black individuals as perpetrators at a much higher rate than White,
which results in a larger proportion of wrongful convictions among Black
individuals. This research tests the limits and malleability of how low-level
perceptual and neurocognitive mechanisms habituate more quickly to other-race
individuals as repeated instances of the same broad category, but habituate less
to own-race targets, leading to better identification for ingroup members. In
particular, this research tests these processes across different affective
states to test how fear influences face identification processes. It also tests
how threat and affiliation cues influence identification processes.
Understanding how the brain “sees” racial outgroup members is important to help
mitigate race-based disparities and outcomes in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses behavioral, physiological and
neuroimaging experiments to examine the consequences of perceptual biases
involved in person perception processes. Research shows that there is coarser
neural tuning of face selective processing for outgroup faces compared to
ingroup faces. This results in poorer recognition for racial outgroups than
ingroups. This research tests these perceptual biases, their flexibility, and
whether they can be eliminated. One series of studies examines whether
deindividuating racial outgroup members in perception can lead people to
generalize fear across a wide range of outgroup members. Specifically, this
research tests the degree to which experiencing an aversive event paired with
one outgroup member elicits a similar fear response to other individuals who
look more or less similar to that target. Another series of studies examines the
extent to which the brain habituates to groups of Black or White faces, testing
whether biases in perception are fixed, or flexible depending on emotion or
superordinate group membership. A final study combines these approaches to test
whether interventions that combat group biases can prevent the spread of fear
across outgroup members. This research has direct relevance for the formation of
prejudice and discrimination, and can eventually address eye-witness
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.