* 2017965
* A combinatory microfluidic and in vivo modeling approach to evaluate collective migration during retinogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/23/2019,07/31/2022
* Maribel Vazquez, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2022
* USD 286,983.00

The coordinated migration of groups of cells is a central element of tissue
development as well as of stem cell-based repair in the nervous system. In an
idealized model, stem-like cells (STLCs) are introduced into a damaged tissue
and migrate collectively, as one unit, toward precise injury sites to
reestablish neuronal connectivity. In truth, the effects of cues from a cell's
genetic makeup and its external environment on collective migration have been
only partially explored. The developing retina provides a unique opportunity for
quantitative study of collective migration to support the natural development of
vision. As the signaling cues that guide retinal development are surprisingly
similar among different species, the common fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
provides a simple yet excellent model to study this phenomenon. The study of how
STLCs naturally migrate to initiate or re-initiate connectivity of the neurons
with the retina will greatly deepen our understanding of retinal development and
could greatly advance therapies to restore vision. Educational efforts will
develop opportunities for undergraduates to teach and mentor summer high school
students in retinal research by establishing integrated course modules that
engage student teams in device prototyping, design innovation and cell-based
laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the
collective migration of STLCs using in vivo genetics to regulate intracellular
Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor (FGF-R) signaling in Drosophila melanogaster
(as a model) and microfluidic systems to control extrinsic FGF environments. The
study is motived by knowledge that FGF signaling pathways in the Drosophila
model are known to mediate the neural migration needed to initiate vision via
the optic stalk, but it is not clear if FGF-R regulation alone is sufficient.
The system will facilitate genetically-controlled study of FGF-R-mediated
chemotaxis with micrometer resolution in tandem with quantitative study of the
intercellular signaling needed to preserve spatial cohesion across motile STLC
collectives (cell-cell adhesion via innexin-1). The Research Plan is organized
under 3 aims. AIM 1 will develop a microfluidic model of the retinal optic stalk
(the portion of the developing retina between the Drosophila Brain Lobe and the
Eye Imaginal Disc) to generate controlled, extrinsic FGF fields. Experiments
will prototype an in vitro system on the scale of the Drosophila retina and
develop an analytical model (Finite Element simulation) to describe
concentration gradient fields therein. Characteristics of collective in vitro
migration will be evaluated by targeted, quantitative parameters. AIM 2 will
examine the collective migration of glial and neuronal cells expressing
genetically-modified elements of FGF-R, i.e., cells with and without functional
receptors. Genetic FGF-R alteration will be used to experimentally determine
contribution of FGF-R to the size of motile collectives as well as their neural
composition and cell-cell adhesion within the microfluidic system. AIM 3 will
evaluate in vivo retinal formation using genetically modified FGF-R glial and
neuronal collectives. The specific role for FGF-R during collective migration in
vivo will be studied by examining retinogenesis using neural collectives lacking
FGF-R function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.