* 2017872
* Supporting Student and Diversity Involvement at the 2020 Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering and Biotransport Conference; Vail, Colorado; June 17-20 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Jonathan Vande Geest, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2022
* USD 49,891.00

This award will provide support for the annual Summer Biomechanics,
Bioengineering, and Biotransport Conference (SB3C) in Vail, Colorado form June
17th - 20th of 2020. This conference will bring together current and future
leaders across the broad fields of bioengineering and biology to promote state-
of-the-art research, collaboration, and international scientific discourse.
Sessions will span a broad range of topics including Cell &amp; Tissue
Engineering, Computational Biomechanics &amp; Diagnostic Models, and
Rehabilitation &amp; Assistive Technologies. This year’s conference will place
particular emphasis on mechanobiology, which studies how physical forces and
changes in the mechanical properties of cells and tissues can alter the function
of an organism. The primary objective of this award is to enable the
participation of students and early career scientists in the 2020 SB3C,
especially those from underrepresented groups. A secondary objective is to
include supporting highly-qualified student researchers who write the most
meritorious scientific abstracts in the Student Paper Competition. Finally,
discussions at the conference will be captured by a professional science writer
and disseminated via a published paper. This will be in addition to the
publicly-available conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, these activities will build a foundation for a more
diverse professional bioengineering workforce. Offering merit-based diversity
travel fellowships pay for conference registration costs for students
(undergraduate and graduate), postdoctoral fellows, and early career scientists
from underrepresented groups will broaden participation. All who receive these
funds will participate in a novel Diversity Mentor-Mentee Event. This event will
provide an environment where attendees can network, initiate long term mentoring
relationships, and discuss challenging aspects of being successful researchers.
Students who receive support as finalists or winners in the student paper
competition can add this information to their resumes, and the competition
provides an opportunity for students to develop as researchers and is a
significant career boost, enhancing retention of the most talented students and
providing role models for all student attendees. Finally, the creation of a
scholarly publication synthesizing the state-of-the-art discussions on bridging
mechanics and biology will provide a lasting, tangible record of contemporary
discussions on the conference theme – “Mechanobiology: Linking physics, form and
function”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.