* 2017218
* Finite-frequency Imaging of the Mantle Transition Zone  Discontinuities
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ying Zhou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 201,013.00

Due to increased pressure, minerals in the Earth’s subsurface undergo major
phase transitions in the mantle transition zone at depths of about 410 km and
660 km. Processes in the Earth's mantle transition zone provide important
constraints on the mass exchange between the shallower upper mantle and the
deeper lower mantle. Those are dynamic processes that are responsible for plate
tectonics, earthquakes and volcanoes. This research takes advantage of a new
seismic imaging theory and data collected by seismic stations around the world
to map the structure of the mantle transition zone. This research aims to
advance understanding of mantle dynamics with focuses on major subduction zones
(where massive oceanic plates subduct into the deep mantle) as well as volcanic
hotspots in global oceanic regions. High-resolution images of the mantle
transition zone will be made available to the broader Geosciences community for
future multidisciplinary studies. Hands-on course projects and labs based on
this research will be developed and implemented in undergraduate teaching, and a
graduate student will be supported and trained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slab pull
is generally considered as the dominant force that drives the global movement of
tectonic plates. This convection mode is well constrained in the upper mantle
but the convection pattern in the mid mantle is more speculative. This research
will build a global dataset of finite-frequency travel time measurements of SS
precursors to image the global structure of the 410-km and 660-km
discontinuities based on Born sensitivities calculated in the framework of
traveling-wave mode coupling. Finite-frequency receiver function measurements at
GSN and USArray stations will be used as complementary datasets to improve
regional resolution beneath continents. The new high-resolution MTZ
discontinuity models will be analyzed together with published seismic wave speed
and anisotropy models to advance fundamental understanding of Earth processes in
the mantle transition zone, with focus on the structure and dynamics of stagnant
slabs in subduction zones as well as thermal and compositional variations
beneath oceanic hotspots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.