* 2017165
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food Security, Heritage, and Sustainability in Urban Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Kathryn Lafrenz Samuels, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 24,444.00

The research supported by this award investigates the creation and consequences
of urban sustainability initiatives that use food heritage as a springboard for
development. This project examines how community groups are building divergent
visions of what the desired city looks like based on different conceptions of
the past. Understanding how to evaluate, articulate, and bring together these
visions is essential to pursuing food security, minimizing risk to communities,
and ensuring the long-term sustainability of urban places. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project will
engage a broad cross-section of urban community groups engaged in a
collaborative development initiative. It will also provide insight into the role
heritage plays in informing how different groups negotiate development programs,
with significant implications for planners working in urban development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be carried out by University of
Maryland anthropology doctoral student Ellen Platts, under the supervision of
Dr. Kathryn Lafrenz Samuels. At a site in the Southwestern United States where
sustainable urban development initiatives based on food and culture are being
created, this project explores how the politics of sustainability are negotiated
in planning for the future. The research questions center on what food heritage
means for different groups, how its use in development is perceived and pursued,
and what different visions for a sustainable city exist. Data will be collected
through semi-structured interviews, participant observation, and archival
research. Findings will contribute to improved theoretical and practical
understandings of the processes that underlie the use of heritage in
development, by actors such as grassroots community organizations, municipal
governments, and private investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.