* 2017191
* SBP: Evaluating the Causal Role of Inflammation in Social Prejudice
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Anastasia Makhanova, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 168,396.00

It can be difficult for people to interact with others who they perceive to be
different than themselves. New theoretical models suggest that although people
possess adaptive behavioral strategies to help them avoid contagion from
potential sources of pathogens, these strategies can manifest in negative social
processes such as prejudice. This research tests the hypothesis that one factor
that can activate those disease avoidance strategies and lead people to be more
biased is immune system activation. People’s immune systems are activated by
recurring experiences like fighting off an illness or dealing with a stressor.
This research experimentally induces acute inflammation to test if immune system
activity leads to prejudicial responses. It is expected that people in the
experimental group, for whom the immune system was activated, will produce more
bias against others than people in the control group. More broadly,
understanding the factors that can increase conflict between people from
different backgrounds and perspectives is necessary to facilitate fair
evaluations of others in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research adopts an
inter-disciplinary approach combining social psychology with
psychoneuroimmunology to examine whether people’s immune systems affect the way
they view and react to others around them, especially others they perceive as
different. This research examines the causal link between inflammation and
prejudice by experimentally manipulating acute inflammation via the use of
vaccines. Vaccines result in higher immune system activity on the next day. The
research tests the hypothesis that inflammation results in more social biases
against various groups (immigrants, elderly, people with obesity, people with a
disability). The research also tests the hypothesis that people’s beliefs that
they are protected from the threat of germs can mentally block the impulsive
bias that may result from the immune system activation. This project will thus
identify a biological process that can lead to prejudice and
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.