* 2017829
* Collaborative Research: MSA: Development and Validation of a Continuous Soil Respiration Product at Core Terrestrial NEON Sites
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Zobitz, Augsburg University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,427.00

Soils contain a large amount of the Earth's carbon. The rate at which this
carbon gets released as carbon dioxide (CO2) depends on a number of factors,
including changes in soil microbial activity and environmental characteristics.
Measuring the rates of CO2 emission from the soil to the atmosphere is an
essential component needed to model and understand global environmental change.
The NSF-supported National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) makes
continuous measurements of all the required components to determine soil carbon
flux (the balance between the rate of carbon buildup vs. discharge as CO2) at a
given site. The researchers in this project will compute soil flux at each of
the twenty core NEON sites across the continental U.S. and cross-reference them
with other existing databases. The researchers will also recruit five faculty at
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) for a faculty training cohort in a
suite of instruction, peer mentorship, and educator development activities. This
cohort will result in greater engagement of faculty and undergraduate students
with existing NEON data and ecology research. In collaboration with the
recruited faculty, the researchers will develop a series of education modules in
biology that is estimated to impact several hundred undergraduate students
annually. The faculty cohort will also engage in professional development
focused on broadening participation among diverse undergraduate students and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEON infrastructure includes soil sensor
arrays that record all the necessary components for calculating continuous soil
CO2 flux. The delivery of computed soil CO2 flux values as a higher-level data
product is a widely-sought application of NEON data. This project will fill this
data gap by developing and field-validating a freely available R package to
easily and rapidly calculate soil CO2 flux at any core terrestrial NEON site.
The researchers will validate the results through direct measurements, ground-
truthing the measurements against existing soil respiration databases, and apply
the soil flux data product in modeling and data assimilation to parameterize
soil biogeochemical models at a focal core NEON site. During the third year of
this project, the researchers will recruit five faculty from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to engage in a faculty mentoring cohort.
Participating faculty will: (1) join together in a mentoring cohort to refine
and pilot education modules in macrosystems environmental science for
undergraduate students, thus building networks of practice in the teaching of
macrosystems ecology; (2) contribute to the validation of the soil CO2 flux data
product, thus building their technical skills in instrumentation, data analysis,
and facility with NEON sites and data products; and (3) develop their
intercultural competency skills, increasing their ability to mentor
undergraduate researchers from underrepresented backgrounds, thus working
towards diversifying environmental science and its STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.