* 2017976
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patterns of social bonds and developmental outcomes in juvenile primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Amy Lu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 28,152.00

Although a growing body of research has pinpointed how strong social bonds
improve survival and health across both human and nonhuman primates, the
importance of social connections in early life has been comparatively
understudied. This doctoral dissertation project will integrate behavioral,
hormonal, and immune data to quantify early-life social bonds and assess their
developmental consequences in a wild primate. By studying these connections in a
nonhuman primate species, this research will provide comparative data for
investigations of early-life social bonds in humans. The investigator will
engage in mentorship and education programs both in the U.S. and abroad,
mentoring undergraduates in crafting research projects, designing science
programs for libraries in underserved neighborhoods, and leading conservation
education activities with local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will examine the role of early-life social bonds in wild, juvenile
gelada monkeys. Geladas inhabit complex societies in which immatures play with
both familiar groupmates and unfamiliar neighbors. First, this project will
determine whether maternal dominance rank, the number of close relatives, and
the presence/absence of a sibling predict the quality and/or quantity of social
bonds, taking into account potential sex differences in these patterns. Second,
this project will examine whether strong bonds buffer juveniles from social
adversity, reducing rates of received aggression, increasing alliances during
competitive encounters, and decreasing physiological stress measures. Lastly,
this project will investigate the stress responseâ€™s impact on both innate
immunity and adaptive immunity. While social isolation and associated
physiological stress may impair immune function wholesale, it may instead lead
to trade-offs between these two sub-systems, prioritizing immediately
beneficial, innate immune defenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.