* 2017898
* Social Response to Environmental Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Peter Johansen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,938.00

This project will conduct interdisciplinary archaeological research to
investigate social factors that contributed to community vulnerabilities and
resiliencies to climate change in the past. The study will contribute to a
growing corpus of scholarship from both the social and natural sciences on
human-environmental relationships. The project contributes to this scholarship
by moving beyond an assessment of human-climate interactions at the scale of the
globe, the human species as a totality, or even entire societies, to foreground
instead an evaluation of how human and community responses to environmental
changes in the past were differentiated within societies to various degrees of
success. For instance, the researchers ask: how were social differences and
inequalities related to the persistence and resilience of specific communities
of inhabitants during periods of climate change? And how did economic exchange
networks and mechanisms contribute to social resiliencies and vulnerabilities to
regional climate change? Although there is a tendency to view precarious
conditions and vulnerabilities related to contemporary climate change as a
wholly unique phenomenon, a significant body of archaeological scholarship has
demonstrated comparable vulnerabilities of communities in the past to
transformations in climate. Archaeology is thus especially well suited to
investigate differentiated responses to climate change because the
archaeological record provides multiple case studies of how distinct communities
in the past experienced climatic and precipitation
stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will collect archaeological and
paleoenvironmental data to evaluate social and economic factors related to
climatic vulnerabilities and resiliencies during two periods of rapid
transformation in climate. More specifically, the research will examine
differentiated responses to relatively dramatic changes in the behavior of a
regional summer monsoon during prehistoric and historic periods; the first
context targets community responses and vulnerabilities to decreased
precipitation during two periods in which the region experienced extended
periods (&gt; 30 years) of monsoon failure. Previous archaeological evidence
indicates that some communities persisted through extended periods of climatic
stress during both of these periods, while others living in the same area did
not. By combining archaeological and environmental data from these different
periods and cases it will be possible to evaluate how these different outcomes
occurred and potentially to generalize about social factors that contributed to
shaping specific vulnerabilities, in terms of material dependencies between
environmental and subsistence resources (e.g., correspondences between water
needs of cultigens and precipitation variability), the possible advantages of
diversified resources, and the significance of social relationships and
distribution mechanisms to withstanding environmental
stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.