* 2017294
* C and H Retention Mechanisms in the Deep Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Quentin Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 452,341.00

The cycling of carbon and water between the Earth’s rocky interior and its
surface is critical for the genesis and long-term evolution of oceans and
atmosphere. It influences the composition, melting, and viscous flow of the
planet’s solid mantle. The genesis of continents, the production of most
volcanism, and likely plate tectonics itself hinge on the way carbon and water
(or its constituent hydrogen) are stored within the Earth and released from its
interior. Yet, measuring C and H chemical properties at mantle conditions is
challenging, because of the extreme pressures and temperatures prevailing at
depth. Here, the researchers investigate experimentally how C and H are stored
within the minerals present in the mantle. They also test the conditions in
which these minerals persist or release these elements. The team develops and
uses state-of-the-art high-pressure devices to reproduce the mantle’s extreme
conditions. During the experiments, they explore the way C and H behave in their
host minerals at various pressures and temperatures. Their tools are powerful
X-rays at a national synchrotron facility, and infrared and laser light in their
home laboratory. The project also provides support and training for graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of California Santa Cruz. It is co-
funded by the NSF Geophysics program and Petrology and Geochemistry
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team conducts single-crystal X-ray diffraction
and vibrational spectroscopic measurements (Infrared and Raman) at room and high
temperature in the diamond anvil cell, where extreme pressures are produced at
the tips of two opposing diamonds. The researchers investigate a sequence of
carbonated and hydrated phases of interest for volatile retention and cycling
within Earth. Phases that are relevant for both the planet’s volatile budget and
the sequestration of incompatible elements are probed. Specifically, the project
aims to: (1) characterize the shifting bonding environment of the carbonate unit
in targeted phases under compression - a unit that may undergo anomalous bonding
changes at high pressures; and (2) probe at an unprecedent resolution the high-
pressure structure of the hydrated phase whose stability field most closely
approaches the conditions of the mid- to deep-upper mantle. The team also
continues to augment and test the capabilities of a community-accessible, high-
pressure/high-temperature single crystal X-ray diffraction facility located at
the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National
Labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.