* 2017826
* MSA: Understanding spatial patterns of abundance and occupancy in terms of taxa, traits, and space
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Tad Dallas, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2022
* USD 274,542.00

Species that are more geographically widespread also tend to occur at higher
numbers in each sampled location. Decades of research has attempted to use this
relationship to understand how habitat degradation might affect species
abundance at different sites. For example, if the geographic range of a species
is suddenly restricted due to land use change or other factors, how might local
abundance in the other sites change? However, these so-called abundance-
occupancy relationships are far from general. The proposed research aims to
gauge the generality of abundance-occupancy relationships in a diverse set of
species groups across both aquatic and terrestrial systems. In doing so, the
research will estimate the dependency of these relationships on sampling
procedures, geographic distribution, environmental conditions, and species
groups. This collaborative research will involve the training of multiple
graduate students, and the science will be incorporated into teaching and
workshops aimed both at college undergraduates and high school students in
underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scaling of species abundance
with occupancy is claimed to be a general law in population ecology and
macroecology. However, the data to test these relationships often comes from
non-standardized, opportunistic surveys of a small subset of species. Combined
with the variety of statistical methods applied, there is mixed support for
abundance-occupancy relationships for single species. Understanding the
conditions which lead to this variability in evidence is an obtrusive knowledge
gap challenging this fundamental macroecological hypothesis. Leveraging
spatially replicated and standardized data resources of the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON), this research will examine how slopes of abundance-
occupancy relationships vary as a function of species traits (e.g., trophic
level), taxonomic relationships, habitats (e.g., aquatic, terrestrial),
geographic range, spatial distribution of sampled sites, and the local community
context. Further, the project will use theoretical models to determine the
conditions under which abundance-occupancy relationships emerge. This exhaustive
exploration of species life history, niche requirements, and the spatial
structure of sampled sites will challenge the abundance-occupancy relationship
against the hypothesis of simple stochastic processes. This proposal will
leverage NEON data on species abundances and fraction of occupied sites to
examine abundanceâ€“occupancy relationships for a large set of taxa. Combining the
NEON data and theoretical metacommunity models, this research will expand the
theory underlying abundance-occupancy relationships, and gauge the empirical
support for these relationships. Together, this will lead to a more synthetic
understanding of these relationships and how they relate to other
macroecological patterns in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.