* 2017491
* The Cultural Anthropology Methods Program (CAMP): Advanced Research Training for Ph.D. Students
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* H. Russell Bernard, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 356,000.00

This project provides cutting-edge methods training to early-career social
scientists and conducts research to evaluate the effectiveness of techniques for
teaching research methods. The PIs bring together a community of over 100
anthropologists and social scientists to develop and disseminate methods through
outreach, publication, teaching, and mentorship. A major focus will be summer
Cultural Anthropology Methods Program, in which diverse Ph.D. students from
across the U.S. will be recruited for intensive methods instruction and
mentorship in research design. In addition, the project will create a publicly
available online learning course that makes easy-to-use anthropological research
methods widely accessible. This will substantially enrich the availability and
quality of nationally available methods training in cultural anthropology and
allied fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance scientific knowledge of how to
teach methods in cultural anthropology, this project will also serve as a
research platform. All stages of project implementation, from planning, to
teaching, to student success, will be used to generate data. Datasets generated
will include: meeting recordings and transcripts; participant-observation and
field notes; direct observations; student interviews; and pre-test/post-test
assessments of student learning. Research will examine the efficacy of our main
teaching modalities (hands-on instruction, flipped classroom models, interactive
lectures, student-led presentations, small groups, and one-on-one instruction).
In addition, we will compare student outcomes in online (Year 1) and in-person
(Year 2-3) versions of graduate student instruction. Results will be published
and disseminated widely, including via a publicly available website, to ensure
that research capacity extends beyond Program
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.