* 2017814
* What Controls the CO2/SO2 Ratio in Arc Volcanic Gas?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Shuo Ding, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 257,440.00

The degassing of carbon dioxide and sulfur from arc volcanoes is fundamentally
important to eruption forecasting and cycling of volatiles through subduction
zones. Measurements of carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide in high-temperature
volcanic gases have become the main approach to quantifying the arc volcanic
carbon dioxide and sulfur outflux to the atmosphere. New high-rate, long-time
series measurements of gas emissions from several volcanoes have now shown
precursory signals in the rise of carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide weeks before the
eruption, which is typically considered to reflect deep, high pressure gas
moving into the system. On the other hand, recent work has shown that volcanoes
with intrinsically high carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide gas ratios seem to
correlate globally with regions of carbonate subduction. Such correlations have
led to the suggestions that carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide reflects the source of
the parental magma. The source of variation in carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide of
magmatic gas is thus debated. This project aims at resolving the pressure vs.
source effects on carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide by providing novel data on the
melt phase for volcanoes with published gas records. This project bears directly
on the interpretation of carbon dioxide/sulfur gas precursors to volcanic
eruptions, of relevancy to developing timely forecasts and warnings to local
populations. This project will form the core of the postdoctoral project of an
early-career female scientist at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. It will also
enable an undergraduate student to participate in the proposed research via an
NSF-funded research experience for undergraduates program at Lamont-
Doherty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microanalysis of water, carbon dioxide, and sulfur
in mineral-hosted melt inclusions can be a powerful tool for the study of carbon
dioxide and sulfur degassing. However, vapor “shrinkage” bubbles present in melt
inclusions can cause a significant underestimate of carbon dioxide contents in
the bulk melt inclusion and lead to false estimates of degassing pressures and
carbon dioxide outflux. The published melt inclusion database is rife with this
issue. This project will constrain the carbon dioxide and sulfur contents in
parental and degassing arc magmas by experimentally rehomogenizing olivine-
hosted melt inclusions in the eruptive products from five volcanoes (San
Cristóbal, Telica, Masaya, Poás and Turrialba) along the Costa Rica-Nicaragua
volcanic arc. The rehomogenized melt inclusions will be used 1) to infer the
carbon dioxide and sulfur contents of parental magmas (from basaltic end-
members) and entrapment pressures (from water-carbon dioxide barometry), and 2)
to calculate the coexisting fluid/vapor composition to compare with the volcanic
gas data and to inform existing thermodynamic models. In this way, our data will
test the extent to which the pressure of degassing versus the parental magma
drive carbon dioxide/sulfur dioxide variations in arc volcanic gas, and quantify
the origin of eruptive gas precursors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.