* 2017314
* Use of the PBS1 Decoy System to Engineer Resistance to Plant-Parasitic Nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,990.00

Plant-parasitic nematodes (PPNs) are estimated to cause over $170 billion in
lost agricultural production globally each year, with losses of over $13 billion
in the United States alone. To meet expected food demand in 2050, when the world
is projected to have an additional 2 billion people, it is imperative that we
reduce crop losses to PPNs. The goal of this project is to develop genetic-based
resistance to PPNs using soybean and the soybean cyst nematode (SCN) as model
pathosystem. Plants have the ability to detect disease-causing organisms
(pathogens) and then activate a robust defense response that ultimately leads to
localized cell death to stop the invader. To detect pathogens, plants use sensor
proteins that are modified by enzymes that pathogens secrete during the
infection process. This project focuses on identifying enzymes secreted by SCN
that are required for infection of soybean. Once such enzymes are identified,
sensor proteins will be designed that can activate defense responses in soybean
upon modification by these SCN enzymes. Such a system would thus confer
resistance to infection by PPNs without the use of costly and environmentally
damaging pesticides and should be transferrable to a wide array of important
crop plants that are damaged by PPNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many plant pathogens
depend on proteases to infect host plants. The Innes laboratory has developed a
novel method for engineering resistance to such pathogens based on detecting
these specific proteases. In Arabidopsis, cleavage of the host kinase PBS1 by
the pathogen protease AvrPphB activates a strong defense response. The AvrPphB
recognition sequence within PBS1 (seven amino acids) can be replaced by the
recognition sequence for other pathogen proteases. These ‘decoy’ kinases can
then be cleaved by the matching protease, which activates resistance. Thus, by
manipulating the PBS1 amino acid sequence, it is possible to engineer
recognition of many pathogen proteases. This proposal seeks to extend this
discovery to the crop plant soybean by engineering resistance to its single most
important pathogen in North America, soybean cyst nematode (SCN). Prior work has
shown that modification of soybean PBS1 so that it is cleaved by the NIa
protease of soybean mosaic virus (SMV) confers complete immunity to infection by
SMV. To assess whether proteases secreted by SCN contribute to virulence, the
expression of candidate protease genes will be reduced using RNA interference
and then the impact on soybean root infection will be assessed. Proteases that
contribute to infection will then be further analyzed by identifying their
targets in soybean root cells using biotin proximity labeling, and their
cleavage sites identified using mass-spectrometry. SCN protease cleavage sites
will then be inserted into soybean PBS1 genes using CRISPR-Prime genome editing,
thus generating soybean lines that are resistant to SCN infection and free of
transgenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.