* 2017519
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of Various Storage Temperatures andTtime on Microbiome of Forensically Relevant Biological Samples
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Baneshwar Singh, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 30,527.00

The confirmatory identification of forensically relevant body fluids is a
fundamental part to forensic investigations as this information can aid
investigators in crime scene reconstruction and resolving mixtures such as those
often encountered in sexual assault cases. The majority of current body fluid
identification methods are presumptive, and the sample consumption is not ideal
for forensic casework. For new methods to be accepted into the community,
methods should be robust, reliable, sensitive, and confirmatory to each body
fluid while producing stable results over time. This study aims to determine how
short- and long-term storage conditions of human biological samples impact the
microbial community structures associated with these samples, and to determine
whether these conditions impact the accuracy of a newly developed microbial
signature-based method for the body fluid identification. Biological sample
storage regulations were created without microbial evidence in mind, and it is
therefore important to determine whether these samples are stable under various
storage times and temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will 1) look
at the microbial signatures of each body fluid to determine whether there are
significant differences in their compositions once stored at various
temperatures at extended periods of time and 2) determine whether these storage
conditions impact the accuracy of the previously developed body fluid
identification method. Samples from ten individuals will be stored at four
different temperatures (-20째C, 4째C, 25째C, 37째C) for 3 storage periods (30 days,
60 days, 90 days). To evaluate these changes, 16S rDNA dual-index high
throughput sequencing will be performed using the MiSeq FGx sequencing platform.
Data analysis will follow the mothur MiSeq SOP. The variation in bacterial
signatures will be assessed between all temperature/time groups. Ensemble
subspace classification and L1-norm regularized classification methods
previously developed will be tested using the bacterial structures obtained to
determine how storage conditions may impact the classification accuracy. The
findings from this study will be useful in streamlining the previously developed
body fluid identification method and will provide additional suggestions for
standard operating procedures. This is not only useful for the forensic science
community but can contribute to stability, standardization, and mobility of
microbial research as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.