* 2017337
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Using Problem-Based Learning for Vocational Training in Cyberinfrastructure Security at Community Colleges
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Irfan Ahmed, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Professionals in the cybersecurity field are in high demand. Many sectors,
including the research, military, civil law enforcement, corporate, and private
sector communities, all benefit from a larger, highly skilled cybersecurity
workforce, particularly considering the increasing number and sophistication of
cyber attacks. Challenges for academia include producing diverse and high
quality professionals, and unfortunately, the demand for cybersecurity
professionals far exceeds the supply of students. Community colleges can play a
crucial role in meeting the demand for cybersecurity professionals. This project
uses problem based learning, an innovative approach to teaching cybersecurity,
to bring community college students into the high rewarding cybersecurity field.
The educational methods and products developed through the project will be
broadly applicable, beyond community colleges, and will contribute to a better
trained and more diverse cybersecurity and research workforce. Ultimately, the
project will contribute to the health, safety, and economic well being of
society by protecting the nation's cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the project is to provide vocational training in
cyberinfrastructure security to community college students, to address the
shortage of technical staff in cybersecurity. Community colleges have a
significant student population of low income, diverse, first generation college
students that have the potential for enabling a new stream of cybersecurity
professionals. These colleges, however, face significant challenges to teaching
advanced cybersecurity skills for cyberinfrastructure. To address these
challenges, the project will develop vocational training modules on
cyberinfrastructure security. Each module will consist of multiple micro-modules
and target the skill sets required for entry level jobs in the cybersecurity
field. Specifically, the approach involves three major tasks. The first task
involves creating training modules on several offensive/defensive topics on
cyberinfrastructure, including network penetration testing and digital
forensics. The contents of the modules support problem based learning with a
strong hands on components. The second task involves developing CRICE (Cyber
Range Infrastructure for Cybersecurity Education) on NSFCloud to support problem
based learning. NSFCloud is an NSF funded public cloud service available for
research and training purposes. This will help community colleges to utilize the
training modules effectively without requiring their own expensive computing
infrastructure. The third task involves integrating the modules into the
curriculum of two community colleges and evaluating the effectiveness of the
problem based learning and CRICE in terms of cost, ease of adoption, student
learning gain, and attitudinal survey on the students' experience. The project
research contribution lies in exploring the effectiveness of problem based
learning for vocational training in cybersecurity in the context of community
colleges in the United States. The project will show that problem based learning
is effective in providing both conceptual and practical understanding of
cybersecurity topics. This project is funded by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering. The Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program in NSF's
Division of Undergraduate Education is providing co-funding for this project in
recognition of its contribution to education in community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.