* 2017857
* I-Corps:  A data capture and management technology to transform data access, structure, and security
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Ahmed Gomaa, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project investigates
applications of technologies describing health and wellness data. Researchers
conducting clinical trials can use this technology to capture real-world patient
data and streamline large-scale late phase trials, accelerating the development
of new pharmaceuticals and treatment modalities. Life scientists could use this
technology to accelerate basic science discovery and facilitate translation of
these findings from the bench to bedside. Human resources personnel could better
track, manage, and act on data generated in employee wellness programming toward
fewer sick days, more productivity, and higher employee satisfaction. Health
program coordinators could potentially facilitate public health interventions
and perform research. Care managers and clinicians could deploy and manage
remote management services to chronic disease populations, preventing
unnecessary hospitalizations, improving health outcomes, and lowering the cost
of care management.

This I-Corps project explores the trade space of a data capture and management
technology to transform data access, structure, and security. This technology
consists of several core components, including (1) A universal wrapper
application program interface (API) that scales with existing and future
hardware, software, and other data sources; (2) A data normalization algorithm
and entity relationship model to structure data and affiliate it with the data
source; (3) Security and privacy controls to protect data source privacy and
end-user regulatory compliance; (4) Machine learning and predictive analytics
using data in different modalities to translate data into actionable insights
for a variety of commercial uses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.