* 2017791
* MSA: Modeling and Forecasting Shifts in Migratory Patterns Under Changing Hadley Circulation Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Naresh Neupane, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,763.00

Every year billions of insects, birds, and bats fly from central and South
America through Mexico up into the United States and Canada. These migrations
are one of the most spectacular and visible phenomena of the natural world. Yet
factors that initiate and guide these migrants year after year remain poorly
understood, especially for insects. One factor that is known to be important,
but not well understood, is the direction and strength of prevailing winds,
which are largely determined by atmospheric circulation cells. These cells are
dominant environmental drivers impacting not only the pattern of prevailing
winds, but also the location of ecological biomes across the Earth. The largest
of these cells, called the Hadley cell, operates in the tropical zone
approximately from latitude 30°S to 30°N. In this cell, winds rise around the
equator and then move both North and South at higher altitudes. As they fall to
the ground closer at the edge of the tropics, they bring dry air, but also
potentially carry the migrants. Monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus), the
best-known insect migrant, overwinters in Mexico, near the focal point of the
Hadley cell updraft and migrates North to lay eggs in Texas, near where the
Hadley cell subsides. Yet the connection between Hadley cell and monarch
migration to date has not been explored. This study will examine the role of the
Hadley cell in the annual migratory dynamics (timing and success) of eight
species of butterflies, including monarch, that migrate across Mexico and into
the US. This work will develop migration model / educational modules that will
be applicable for understanding aerial migrant across the globe. Results will be
shared among the stakeholders and public through the three-butterfly websites
run by the research team, and the results will also be incorporated into the
regular lectures on quantitative ecology at Georgetown
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration accounts for massive transfers of
nutrients and biomass in ecosystems worldwide and also provides a key strategy
for species survival. Yet migration is a particularly challenging phenomenon to
study due to its large spatial extent. Given the importance of environmental
drivers such as temperature, precipitation, and wind for migration,
environmental change may have substantial impacts on animal migration,
particularly for insects. This study will develop a framework using global
atmospheric circulation cells to understand long-distance migration. Models will
be validated using data from seven sites of the National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON) in the southwestern US and also with data from several citizen
science butterfly monitoring networks. Further, the team will use climate models
to project these patterns into the future under different climate scenarios. The
study’s specific objectives are to quantify the degree to which the largest
atmospheric circulation cell, the Hadley Cell, underlies the mechanistic
dynamics of departure, migration and arrival for insects migrating from the
tropics to the temperate zone. This work will model migration of eight butterfly
species, three of which show classic round-trip migration (e.g., monarch) and
the remaining five migrate one-way only in the fall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.