* 2017581
* Collaborative Research: Time-Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS): Proposal for Renewed Support, 2020-2023
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Druckman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,971,978.00

Time-sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS) provides a platform for
social scientists to conduct survey experiments on probability-based sample of
United States adults. TESS democratizes access to high-quality, original
experimental data, thereby putting the power of population-based survey
experiments in the hands of researchers from all backgrounds, types of academic
institutions, and career stages. TESS capitalizes on economies of scale by
pooling expenses from otherwise separate studies, and makes all its data
publicly available, providing an unparalleled archive of social science
experimental stimuli and data that can be used for replications, re-analyses,
and meta-analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TESS accepts proposals from researchers
at any career stage across the social sciences. These proposals are peer-
reviewed, and the best are selected to be fielded. TESS fields projects using
the NORC AmeriSpeak panel, which is the highest-quality probability-based
Internet panel available for surveying US adults. Because TESS performs a large
number of studies on this panel, we achieve significant cost savings than what
the studies would cost if each were funded separately. TESS uses the Open
Science Framework to archive all data and make it publicly available, and we
will also be working with the Roper Centerâ€™s iPoll database to make TESS data
even more accessible to secondary users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.