* 2017008
* Fostering Aptitudes, Attitudes and Aspirations of Girls in STEM Through 4D Printing of Robotic Materials
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lining Yao, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 711,640.00

To support national needs for the future of work, schools and informal learning
institutions integrate STEM topics, such as robotics and programming, into
curricula. However, current STEM activities that appeal to girls are limited.
Women remain underrepresented in STEM fields, such as computer science,
engineering, and the physical sciences. By fostering interests of young girls in
STEM areas, this project seeks to teach and engage, and so promote their
aspiration towards STEM-related careers and becoming leaders. This project
brings hands-on, interest-driven learning to girls through activities involving
cutting edge 4D printed robotic material technologies. 4D printing is a research
area involving digital fabrication of dynamic forms, such as printing processes
that produce flat objects capable of self-folding into 3D shapes when triggered
by heat or other physical stimuli. Robotic materials, in this context, refer to
substances, which have dynamic behaviors, and can sense, respond and act. This
project will develop and study a new computational design environment centered
on 4D printing of robotic materials to foster curiosity and confidence among
girls through interdisciplinary design areas, including shape-changing food,
dynamic fashion, and self-folding decor. Examples of materials to be modeled
include pasta cooking and a jacket folding. The project will develop the new
robotic materials design tool through educational and fun work with young women,
in community centers, in socioeconomically diverse
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses technology innovation to
work for inclusiveness and equity in STEM education through hands-on,
interdisciplinary making, with implications for educational research,
computational design, and the development of robotic materials. It will work to
advance inclusive STEM education for girls through contextualized development of
a 4D robotic materials design environment and associated curriculum. Iterative
design will be performed through studies conducted via workshops in informal
learning environments. The project will engage middle and high school girls in a
combination of creative play and structured tasks, with 4D robotic morphing
materials, to investigate three research questions. (1) How to support their
learning STEM concepts and skills? (2) How to challenge their preconceived
attitudes about their own abilities in STEM, narrow the pre-existing knowledge
gap between genders, and decrease stereotype threats? (3) How to contribute to
girls gaining new confidence and STEM career aspirations? The investigation will
combine constructivist learning through doing with design-based approaches of
ethnographic action research, open portfolio, and artifact-based
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.