* 2017564
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Collaborative and Integrated Training on Connected and Autonomous Vehicles Cyber Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Qing Yang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,438.00

In response to the quick development and adoption of connected and autonomous
vehicles (CAVs), U.S. cities and states have recently started building CAV
cyberinfrastructure. However, there is not an adequate supply of skilled
research workforce in this field. A key obstacle to such workforce development
is the lack of well-structured training programs for utilizing CAV
cyberinfrastructure to enable and potentially transform fundamental CAV
research. To address this issue, a project-oriented training program will be
developed in this CyberTraining project to enable scientific research workforce
development for CAV cyberinfrastructure. It is estimated that the adoption of
CAVs would lead to nearly $800 billion in annual social and economic benefits by
2050, therefore, it is important for the nation to invest in CAV
cyberinfrastructure research workforce training programs. The proposed training
program targets students and early-stage researchers who are interested in CAVs,
including participants with a broad diversity in academic level and in
experience level with CAVs. It is expected that more than 100 trainees will
participate every year in the training program, including researchers from
various domains such as cyber-physical systems, edge computing, wireless
networking, deep learning, computer vision, and big data. A longstanding
collaboration with the trainees and/or their advisors will be built to ensure a
broad adoption of CAV cyberinfrastructure by the research community to catalyze
major research advances. The long-term goal of this project is to develop a
first of its kind open CAV cyberinfrastructure, an integrated training and
research hub, to accelerate research and education in
CAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
collaborative and integrated training program to enable scientific research work
force development for Connected and Autonomous Vehicle CyberInfrastructure (CAV-
CI) and foster broad adoption of CAV-CI to advance fundamental CAV related
research. To achieve these goals, the project will leverage existing
partnerships with relevant stakeholders to create tailored, high-impact,
engaging, collaborative, and integrated training modules for CAV-CI research
workforce development. With the aim of enhancing trainees design and
implementation capabilities, problem-solving skills, and critical thinking
ability, the proposed training program will result in: (1) a project-oriented
short course plus long-term coaching and support, (2) hands-on training modules
on the perception, network, and application layers in CAV-CI, (3) an annual
research workshop that disseminates research results and receives feedback on
the training program from the research and industrial communities, and (4)
research projects for students supported through NSF's Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU)program and capstone projects for senior undergraduates.
During the training workshops, project-oriented training will be offered to
actively engage trainees in learning and solving real-world problems. Three
sample research projects will be designed, allowing trainees to develop complete
research skills, i.e., competency to solve authentic problems. Following every
sample research project, with each having a strong practical relevance and
meaningfulness, two versions of training modules will be developed to reach a
broader trainee group: a fundamental training module for undergraduate students
and community college educators, and a research-intensive training module for
graduate students and postdocs. By taking either the fundamental or the
research-intensive training modules, trainees will enhance their problem-solving
skills, improve their creative and independent thinking ability, as well as
gaining enthusiasm and confidence in conducting CAV-CI enabled research. The
CAV-CI education, research and training activities include specific goals to
train individuals from underrepresented groups and the broader STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.