* 2017042
* An Embodied, Augmented Reality Coding Platform for Pair Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ying Choon Wu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 774,414.00

Augmented reality (AR) allows the real world to be enhanced, or augmented, by
computer-generated objects that are “added” to the real world. For example, a
clothing store may use AR to allow a customer to “see” how clothes would look on
them before they are purchased. This project at University of California San
Diego will use AR to create an environment in which students can practice pair
programming in an AR environment. Pair programming is a software development
technique in which two programmers work together at one workstation, on the same
piece of code. Wearing AR headsets, students will be able to manipulate, in
three-dimensional space, using familiar gestures such as pointing and grabbing,
a piece of code. The use of a AR programming environment, that immerses students
in their code, will result in a more intuitive and collaborative computing
experience that will engage learners with low confidence in programming, while
supporting growth in their computational thinking
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A human-centered AR coding platform will be
developed for the creation of three-dimensional assets, artwork, and
computational logic. This platform will be a merged digital/physical workspace
where spatial representations of code, interactive outputs, and user editing
activities are simultaneously located. While wearing AR headsets, learners will
manipulate virtual code blocks in real space to assemble programs, and they will
debug their code by evaluating the representations that they create. The
approach will build on the accessibility and sense of play in successful visual
learning technologies (e.g., Scratch), but will leverage regular patterns of
perception, action, and social interaction in the three-dimensional physical
world. The goal is to increase participation and interest in groups
traditionally underrepresented in the educational and career pathways of
computer science, including females and some minority students, who often
exhibit lower confidence in STEM-related abilities relative to other
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.