* 2017949
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Scaling from Traits to Forest Ecosystem Fluxes and Responses to Climate Change, from Stand to Continent
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anna Trugman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 873,699.00

Knowledge of changes in forest carbon and water, the “breathing of the
ecosystem”, is critical to assess how forests function and the stresses they
face, and to predict and manage the Earth environment. However, there are large
gaps in our understanding of fluctuations in forest characteristics, and in how
they vary in time and space. These gaps hinder our ability to predict how
different forests respond to environmental change. This project utilizes an
unprecedented opportunity provided by the NSF National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON) to determine how forest response to climate instability depends
on the properties (traits) of the plant species in the forest. This project will
address critical gaps by clarifying how plant traits that influence forest
growth and water use vary with the environment at given sites and across the
continental U.S. Researchers will also use state-of-the-art models to provide a
new ability to predict forest function from the level of small clusters of trees
all the way to the continental scale. They will then use this information to
develop a new theory to enhance the ability of ecologists to predict forest
ecosystem responses to environmental change. This project will be integrated
with broader impacts in student training, and local workshops to communicate the
science and its accessibility to the local research and education communities
within our institutions and in the proximity of NEON sites, and beyond, to the
global research and education communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide a mechanistic understanding of the role of traits in determining
fluxes for 10 forested NEON sites across the continent and a new paradigm to
upscale fluxes from stand to the continental US. Our overarching hypothesis is
that species’ traits strongly mediate the temporal and spatial scales of
variation in ecosystem responses to climate in relation to carbon and water
cycles. We will answer three key questions: (1) How do functional traits vary
with environment and climate across forests of the continental USA? For species
of NEON sites we will measure traits with crucial influence on water transport,
gas exchange and resource economics, test the relationships of traits to
climatic factors, and apply these relationships to map traits across forests of
the continental USA. (2) How do climate and traits influence forest water use
and productivity? We will assimilate the trait data into mechanistic terrestrial
ecosystem models to quantify the sensitivity of predicted canopy fluxes to trait
diversity within and across sites at multiple time scales. (3) How will shifts
in climate, disturbance and species composition influence canopy fluxes? Using
parameterized models, we will test the influence of climate and disturbances on
ecosystem fluxes, and how these vary depending on trait diversity within and
across forest sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.