* 2017252
* Collaborative Research: Development of a high-efficiency mass spectrometer: transitioning a high-efficiency ion source to a modern mass spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Jesse Reimink, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 46,019.00

This EAR Instrumentation and Facilities Program award (a collaborative between
Penn State and Carnegie Institution of Washington) will support the installation
and testing of a newly developed, high-ionization-efficiency cavity ionization
source on a modern multi-collector mass spectrometer, the Thermo-Fisher Triton.
The ion source development was supported previously by the EAR/IF Program
(EAR-1758571). If successful, the source augmented mass spectrometer promised
significantly enhanced analytical precision for isotope ratio analysis with the
potential for future transformative scientific advances in our understanding of
the early evolution of Earth and planetary reservoirs (e.g., crust, mantle and
core differentiation). The project involves an early career researcher and will
result in construction and operation of a fundamentally new type of mass
spectrometer, which if successful, has potential for commercialization and
broader community use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate precision of mass
spectrometry-based isotopic analyses is limited, in large part, by detector
counting statistics. The cavity ion source may present a major step forward in
the ability to produce large ion beams from geologic samples and may make it
able to achieve isotope-ratio precisions currently unattainable with modern
thermal ionization mass spectrometers (TIMS). Support will provide for
installation of the developed ion source onto an existing Thermo-Fisher Triton
TIMS and subsequent analytical testing. The investigators have preliminary
demonstrations that the source produces: 1) large, stable ion beams for long
periods of time, and 2) higher ionization efficiency than traditional flat-
filament thermal ionization sources for select elements. The source-enhanced
instrument has significant potential to advance research on fundamental
questions in the geosciences, from radiometric dating to tracing first-order
chemical processes that formed and modify various reservoirs on Earth and other
planets, by providing large increases in the analytical precision achievable for
targeted radiogenic isotope ratio determinations (e.g., Sm/Nd system for
understanding the earliest history of Earth and the Solar System), that in
allows for analysis of smaller rare samples than currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.