* 2017375
* SBP: Developmental mechanisms underlying the emergence of racial bias
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Marjorie Rhodes, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 715,573.00

This project will provide new insights into how racial biases emerge and develop
in early childhood. Racism remains a pervasive force with widespread and well-
documented harmful consequences. An important step towards redressing these
problems is understanding the psychological processes that maintain and
reinforce them. Young children begin to develop harmful and problematic beliefs
about race in early childhood (often by 3 years of age), and a majority of
children and adolescents of color report experiencing racially-based
discrimination. Yet, some children develop stronger racial biases than others,
suggesting that the persistence of racial bias is not inevitable. This project
will reveal how racial biases emerge and develop in children living across the
United States and will examine how parent-child conversations might lead
children to form harmful beliefs about race (or serve to prevent them). In doing
so, this project will address fundamental questions about how racial biases take
root in early childhood and will identify ways that parents can prevent this
development. By partnering with several community organizations to implement
this project and using an innovative, webcam-based lab for remote developmental
research, this project will maximize the opportunities for this research to lead
to rapid changes in parenting practices with the potential to reduce the
emergence of racial bias in early childhood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
part of this project will explore the foundational beliefs that predict the
emergence and development of racial bias in children across the United States
via a longitudinal study with 300 children and parents who will participate in
this research from home using an online lab. This project will examine how
children’s emerging beliefs about interracial friendships and racial
inequalities predict the future development of racial biases. Specifically,
every six months over a three year period, children will complete a series of
assessments that gauge their racial biases (e.g., how much they like and want to
play with Black and White children), their beliefs about interracial friendships
(who their parents would want them to play with, who their friends would want to
play with), and whether they believe that racial inequalities are due to
essentialist (e.g., inherent/intrinsic differences between racial groups) or
structural (e.g., differential access to resources and opportunities) factors.
This study will test the hypotheses that children who hold more exclusive
beliefs about interracial friendships and more essentialist beliefs about racial
inequalities will develop higher levels of racial biases. The second part of
this project will explore an important developmental mechanism by which children
develop problematic beliefs about interracial friendships and racial
inequalities: parent-child conversations. Using our online lab, 105 children and
parents will complete a series of role-playing activities designed to spur
conversations about racial inequalities; conversations will be coded for subtle
linguistic cues that imply that racial and socioeconomic groups reflect
inherently different types of people, as well as for essentialist and structural
explanations for racial disparities. These features of parent-child
conversations will then be used to predict children’s racial biases and
foundational beliefs as in Part A. Thus, this project will advance our
understanding of how racial biases emerge and develop in early childhood. By
identifying the core features of parent-child conversations that can foster or
impede these beliefs, this project will also inform future interventions aimed
at reducing the development of racial bias. By disseminating the results of this
research via our online lab, we will enable easy access to our findings for
researchers, parents, educators, and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.