* 2017333
* Improving Online Learning with Interpolated Retrieval
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chun-Kit Chan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 642,010.00

Online learning represents a rapidly growing feature of post-secondary
education. According to a recent report from the National Center for Education
Statistics, it is estimated that 1 in 7 students enroll exclusively online, and
that 1 in 3 students have taken at least one online course, notwithstanding the
fact that COVID-19 has forced most education online, at least temporarily.
Within the context of online learning, video-recorded lectures represent the
primary mode of information delivery, but learning from online lectures is often
plagued by bouts of inattention that impede effective learning. This award will
allow the researchers to build on their preliminary work demonstrating that
breaking long lecture videos into shorter, more manageable segments, and asking
students to express what they have learned during these breaks can reliably
improve attention and learning. More specifically, the researchers will aim to
(1) develop and evaluate a theoretical framework to better understand why it is
effective to intersperse video-recorded lectures with brief quizzes, (2) test
the generalizability of this behavioral intervention across multiple STEM areas
and student populations, including both students who enroll in public
universities and in community colleges, and (3) construct evidence-based
guidelines around optimal parameters for interspersing video-recorded lectures
with brief quizzes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher education is increasingly being
delivered online, where students are prone to inattention and poor learning
outcomes relative to in-person instruction. One technique that supports
attention and learning is interpolated retrieval—the act of inserting brief test
questions into prolonged sequences of learning. Although substantial empirical
data have provided support for its effectiveness, existing research has
progressed in the absence of a guiding theoretical framework, without which
future research would likely remain limited in scope. In this proposal, the
investigators introduce and evaluate an Attention-Integration theoretical
framework of interpolated retrieval practice. According to this framework,
interpolated retrieval enhances learning via two routes. First, interpolated
retrieval increases learners’ engagement with and test expectancy for the
material, which improves processes associated with attention. Second,
interpolated retrieval induces changes in learners’ strategy and increases the
accessibility of the tested information, which allows learners to meaningfully
integrate the contents of study into a coherent mental representation. Four
studies will test the critical assumptions of this framework. Studies 1 and 2
are designed to test the attention component of the framework; Studies 3 and 4
are designed to test the integration component of the framework. All four
studies will use the same set of materials and similar participant samples,
which allows the investigators to conduct a large-scale mediation-moderation
analysis at the conclusion of data collection for all studies. This analysis
will be instrumental to the refinement and clarification of the interrelations
among the various components of the Attention-Integration
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.