* 2017319
* Collaborative Research: Convective Gravity Waves in the Stratosphere (CGWaveS)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* David Nolan, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,132,332.00

Gravity waves in the atmosphere occur when a parcel of air is lifted, usually by
terrain or updrafts in thunderstorms, and then gravity serves as a force to try
to restore the parcel to an equilibrium state. The waves occur as the parcel
overshoots its equilibrium point, rising or sinking because of its own momentum.
Gravity waves play a large role in the atmosphere due to their ability to affect
circulation patterns. This award is for the study of thunderstorm-induced
gravity waves in the lower to middle atmosphere, using a research aircraft and
remote sensing instruments. The observations will be combined with state-of-the-
art numerical models to improve understanding of gravity waves and provide
guidance for improving their representation in weather and climate models. The
project will provide training opportunities for a number of students and early
career researchers and public outreach will be conducted during a facility day
and K-12 school visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative research team
will conduct a field campaign and associated modeling effort to increase
understanding of convective gravity wave (CGW) dynamics and their role in
atmospheric circulation, structure, and variability from Earth’s surface to the
stratopause and above. Gravity waves that are generated by deep convection have
not previously been quantified by full-column measurements. The CGWaveS field
campaign will be conducted in the central US in June 2022 using the NSF/NCAR G-V
research aircraft. The G-V will make in situ measurements using tracers of
vertical transport and mixing and remote sensing measurements of radial winds
from 15-25km using a Na resonance lidar and temperature and perturbations from
25-60km via a Rayleigh lidar. OH airglow measurements at 85km will provide
additional data about the atmospheric structure. Multiple numerical models will
be used, including the WRF in idealized and real-case configurations, the GATS
Complex Geometry Compressible Atmosphere Model (CGCAM) and ERAU Model for
Acoustic-Gravity wave Interactions and Coupling (MAGIC) for CGW responses
extending throughout the stratosphere, and the GATS spectral DNS models that can
resolve instabilities and turbulence. The measurement campaign and analysis and
modeling efforts would focus on four main science goals: 1) Measure and quantify
CGW generation, propagation, and variability throughout the troposphere and
stratosphere, 2) Identify and quantify the convective source dynamics that
dictate CGW character and orientations for a variety of source conditions, 3)
Quantify CGW refraction in variable winds, breaking and instability dynamics,
mean-flow interactions, and their effects in the stratosphere for a range of
environments, and 4) Advance the parameterizations of both CGW generation by
WSR-88D measurements and the resulting CGW nonlinear dynamics and influences in
the troposphere and stratosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.