* 2017837
* Coordination of Political Integration and Nomadic Statehood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* William Honeychurch, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,198.00

The making of political integration by way of sharing power and authority might
seem a uniquely modern topic representing the foundations of democratic
political process. However, human communities have been organizing at regional
scales to create states and empires for millenia and have achieved many versions
of integration in different ways. Archaeologists are particularly well equipped
to study early integration in order to better understand what factors promote
resilient and inclusive forms of political organization over time. Such issues
are particularly relevant in today’s world where many so-called “failed states”
explicitly lack a basis for achieving equitable power sharing arrangements that
promote the integration of ethnically, linguistically, and culturally diverse
populations. Historical and anthropological scholarship both suggest that
certain pastoral nomadic polities enfranchised a system of integration through
power sharing among aristocratic lineages as a way to create large-scale states
from dispersed and potentially militaristic nomadic communities. Despite these
seemingly untoward political conditions, nomadic polities lasted for centuries
and are believed to have developed unique systems of internal political
negotiation as a means to encourage stability. Far from being democratic
institutions, these “headless states” are nevertheless important case-studies in
the art of balancing centralized and local forms of leadership over time and
changing conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;That these early political examples
hold lessons for our collective present and future is a guiding precept of our
archaeological research. This project tests theoretical models for the early
integration of the nomadic state. The research seeks to discover whether the
role of power sharing was indeed a more effective political device in the
process of state building than the typical hypothesized scenario of coercive
incorporation. To accomplish this, archaeologists as well as students will
conduct systematic ground survey and mortuary excavations in conjunction with a
broad suite of laboratory analyses to evaluate competing explanations for multi-
community political integration. In addition, the project is intended as a
training ground for students and younger scholars at multiple institutions. The
collaborative nature of this research builds sustainable scientific capacity in
the field of archaeology, STEM analytical skills, and cultural heritage
management. We achieve these objectives through direct training, support of
education, and the sharing of ideas and experience with colleagues and with
undergraduate and graduate students. The project therefore promotes the kinds of
international relationships, understandings, and interactions upon which the
endeavor of scientific research ultimately depends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.