* 2017017
* ADVANCE Partnership: AccessADVANCE
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,099,206.00

AccessADVANCE is an NSF ADVANCE Partnership project that is designed to increase
the participation and advancement of individuals who identify as women with
disabilities in academic science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
careers. Female faculty with disabilities in STEM fields is an understudied and
often invisible population. Issues related to this population are particularly
important to address because any faculty member may at some point in their
career become disabled, permanently, or temporarily. To create truly inclusive
and equitable academic workplaces, it is imperative to systematically address
issues impacting faculty with disabilities. The AccessADVANCE project will
facilitate systemic changes within postsecondary STEM departments, NSF ADVANCE
and NSF INCLUDES projects, and other organizations such that those with
disabilities in academic positions feel welcome, are fully included, and can
achieve success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AcccessADVANCE will (1) engage a
nationwide online community of practice and (2) provide on-site capacity-
building institutes. The purpose of this engagement is to develop systemic
change strategies for postsecondary STEM departments and other organizations
that make them more welcoming to and inclusive of female faculty with
disabilities. Participants in these activities will help create resources that
can be used to improve the climate and culture experienced by female faculty
with disabilities in academic departments and relevant organizations. The
project will also encourage engagement of female faculty with disabilities and
their allies in the ARC Network and the INCLUDES National Network. Importantly,
the project will provide ongoing technical assistance to collaborators to help
make changes to their policies, practices, and resources. Finally, the project
will develop widely available online resources related to institutional
practices to increase the success and advancement of women with disabilities in
academic STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed
to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institution of higher education and non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.