* 2017457
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Translation, Scientization, and Branding in Medical Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Sonia Das, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 25,109.00

Natural products, broadly sourced from plants and animal parts, are consumed
worldwide to enhance general health and well-being. A lucrative industry that
manufactures and sells natural products as medicines and dietary supplements
increasingly relies on scientific evidence of these products’ medical
effectiveness as communicated by medical professionals, scientists, marketers,
and government agencies in official reports and routine conversations. This
linguistic anthropological dissertation project investigates how scientific
research on the effectiveness of natural products is translated into everyday
language to market their therapeutic properties. Research findings will be
disseminated to medical professionals in the pharmaceutical industry, scientific
academies, government agencies, and NGOs who seek to educate about scientific
literacy to help the public make informed decisions about the consumption of
natural products. The research will further aid policy makers in introducing and
regulating natural products in national health care systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigate how scientific terminologies and
language are used to brand natural products as effective medicine and
communicate their value in different national and global medical markets. The
researcher will carry out linguistic and ethnographic research in farms,
laboratories, and marketplaces where natural products are cultivated,
manufactured, studied, and marketed to consumers. Using the methods of
participant observation to study work activities, semi-structured interviews,
analyzing scientific papers, and media and archival research, the researcher
will examine how networks between the government, the farming industry,
scientists, pharmaceutical companies, and consumers facilitate communication
about the scientific properties of natural products. The results of this
research will contribute to anthropological theories about science’s role in
shaping social institutions, government, and global markets, by providing
empirical data on the use of language in creating scientific
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.