* 2017679
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Dimensions of Dementia and Aging in Indigenous Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Teresa de Jesus Martinez Chavez, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 8,890.00

Dementia is a neurological impairment characterized by a decline in memory and
other cognitive abilities. As a major public health concern, officials have
categorized dementia as a new epidemic. Memory loss acutely appears to be of
increasing concern for Indigenous people, for whom respect and care for the
elderly are built into the fabric of their communities. However, few have
observed the experiences and conceptions of dementia within Indigenous contexts.
Accordingly, this project asks how Indigenous people come to experience and
understand the changes associated with aging and neurological impairment? How is
Indigenous understanding of memory loss affected by socioeconomic constraints,
and different cultural perspectives of age and memory? In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in scientific
methods, this award will enable findings to be shared with Indigenous
communities, health professionals, academics, governmental, and non-governmental
institutions invested in improving health disparities of Indigenous people. The
project also broadens the participation of groups underrepresented in science.

Through a combination of participant observation, and semi-structured interviews
with family members of dementia patients, medical professionals and
intermediaries, and document analysis, the investigators will examine how
dementia is locally constructed in Indigenous communities. Specifically, they
will examine how Indigenous women negotiate local understandings of dementia and
care for their elderly within emerging medical dementia frameworks outlined by
the state. This project seeks to contribute to a growing body of accessible
public knowledge on practices and policies that target healthcare practices
among Indigenous people. A better understanding of the social construction of
dementia can provide a backdrop for wide-ranging implications to address
dementia care, policies, and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.