* 2017998
* Fundamental Investigation of Surfactant-Assembly-Regulated Interfacial Polymerization (SARIP) for Fabricating Next-Generation Membranes for Precise Solute-Solute Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Gannon Jennings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 486,994.00

Membranes are used in industry to separate components from a mixture (a
solution). Most membranes are used to remove solutes (dissolved molecules) from
the solution. For example, wastewater treatment processes sometimes use
membranes to remove contaminants, and seawater desalination often involves using
a reverse osmosis membrane to remove salts from seawater. Membranes can also be
used to separate solutes from each other, which is called "molecular sieving."
Molecular sieving is an important separation process for the pharmaceutical,
petrochemical, and energy industries. For example, membrane-based extraction of
lithium (an important material for batteries) from seawater or brine requires
high-precision molecular sieving. Membranes capable of selectively separating
chemically similar solutes are challenging to manufacture in large volumes and
at low cost. A primary challenge is that molecular sieve membranes must have
exceedingly small pores, less than a nanometer, that are uniform in size. The
investigators plan to develop an adaptable method for manufacturing molecular
sieve membranes by chemically controlling pore size uniformity. The method
combines readily available chemicals (surfactants and monomers) at an oil-water
interface above a layer of support material. The interactions of the surfactants
with both the oil and water causes the surfactants to accumulate in between the
two. The accumulated surfactant spontaneously forms a network of flexible pores
that allow the monomers to pass through to the support material. The monomers
subsequently form a homogenous layer of pores comprising the membrane. The
membrane structure and chemical composition, as well as the processes by which
they are formed, will be characterized to understand how the approach works.
This method for forming uniform, sub-nanometer polymer pores is expected to be
both inexpensive, efficient, and compatible with existing infrastructure for
membrane manufacturing. The outcomes of this project will rapidly advance the
current state-of-the-art in membrane technology and separation science, serving
to displace more energy-intensive and costly industrial separation methods. The
project will also provide educational opportunities including undergraduate
research experiences, graduate and undergraduate course-based instruction, and
hands-on workshops for high school students through the Vanderbilt Summer
Academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a universal
approach for forming highly uniform pores (free volume) in the polyamide active
layer of nanofiltration membranes formed via interfacial polymerization. The
investigators hypothesize that the interfacial polymerization process can be
regulated by introducing a dynamically self-assembled, highly organized
"network" of surfactants at the hexane/water interface, which is expected to
result in the formation of a polyamide active layer with enhanced pore-size
homogeneity. The uniformity in pore size is further expected to result in
membranes with ultra-sharp selectivity for precise solute-solute separations.
The investigators call this novel approach surfactant-assembly-regulated
interfacial polymerization (SARIP). The investigators will test the hypothesis
and uncover the attendant mechanisms through three research objectives. The
first objective focuses on demonstrating that selected surfactants can sharpen
the selectivity of thin film composite polyamide (TFC-PA) membranes. Surfactants
with different hydrophilic charge groups or hydrophobic tails of varying length
will be evaluated. Second, the investigators will assess the impact the
surfactant functional groups and structures have on the SARIP-formed TFC-PA
nanofiltration membrane material properties and performance. Finally, the impact
of surfactant self-assembly on the kinetics of amine diffusion across the
hexane/water interface in the absence and presence of polymerization (with acid
chloride) will be determined. The development of a universal, scalable approach
for fabricating membranes with highly uniform free volumes is expected to
advance membrane technologies for sub-nanometer scale solute
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.