* 2017251
* Adaptation of control processes in code-switching
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Edith Kaan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 432,237.00

Bilingual individuals, broadly defined as anyone who can communicate in more
than one language, encounter a myriad of linguistic choices, often guided by the
linguistic needs of their conversation partners and the environmental setting
such as being in a commercial setting, school, or work. They confront even more
complex choices when conversing with other bilinguals. While bilinguals may
choose to stay in one language, they may also code-switch between languages
within a conversation. This immense variability in bilingual language use
potentially relies upon general cognitive control mechanisms which over time may
result in more efficient processing, a hypothesis known as the bilingual
advantage. Prior research has had mixed results in confirming or disconfirming
this hypothesis, in part due to reliance upon between-groups experimental
designs and correlational analyses. This project builds on prior work by
examining what aspects of bilingual language use may engage cognitive control
within the same bilingual individuals and across the comprehension and
production modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes an
experimental paradigm known as conflict adaptation across four experiments. The
experiments intersperse two different tasks, one linguistic and the other not,
under the assumption that engaging with cognitive control to resolve conflict on
one task will lead to more efficient use of cognitive control on a subsequent
task (the conflict adaptation effect). The four experiments test whether
different forms of code-switching that vary in their degree of complexity will
lead to differences in behavioral (Experiments 1, 2, 4) and neural (Experiment
3) performance on a subsequent non-linguistic task. Experiment 4 further tests
the relationship between production and comprehension. Results from this project
will help refine recent models of language control and lead to a better
understanding of the link between bilingualism and cognitive control,
underscoring the dynamic and adaptive nature of human sentence
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.