* 2017313
* Assessing the Validity of Forensic Decisions Through Interrater Reliability
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Stephanie Madon, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 04/30/2023
* USD 349,999.00

This project will investigate the reliability and validity of forensic decision
making in the context of the technique of fired cartridge case comparison. It
does so by examining whether inconclusive forensic decisions result from truly
ambiguous physical evidence or from non-evidentiary factors. The project
additionally will study whether pattern evidence produced by two different
sources is sufficiently distinct to be consistently detected by forensic
examiners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ an experimental
approach to test the validity of forensic analyses of fired cartridge cases.
Through interrater reliability, the research will assess the tendency for
multiple forensic examiners to reach similar conclusions when evaluating the
same evidence. The project also will ascertain whether the toolmarks left on
fired cartridge cases by two discrete weapons are sufficiently distinct to be
detected by different examiners. These comparisons will enable the project to
test the validity of pattern matching forensic techniques that necessarily rely
on subjective human judgments. As this research addresses issues relevant to a
multitude of forensic techniques, it will significantly advance knowledge about
the probative value of decision making throughout the forensic
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.