* 2017740
* Collaborative Proposal: MRA: Using NEON data to elucidate the ecological effects of global environmental change on phenology across time and space
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Anthony Dell, Lewis and Clark Community College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 211,894.00

Global environmental change is causing shifts in species’ phenologies (the
timing of ecological processes) and rates of acclimation (physiological
adjustments to environmental change), the physiological precursors to
phenological shifts. These shifts are important because they can create
'mismatches' in the performance and timing of interacting species, such as
predators and prey, hosts and parasites, competitors, and plants and
pollinators, which can adversely affect biodiversity and the services that
ecosystems provide to humans. Despite extensive data on the phenology and
acclimation of individual species, no general framework exists that can predict
how phenological responses of species – and by extension species interactions –
will respond to environmental change. To address this knowledge gap and provide
broader impacts to society, a research team has been assembled with expertise in
global change and thermal biology, ecoinformatics, mathematical and statistical
modeling, and geographic information systems. The broader impacts of the project
include: training the next generation of STEM undergraduates and graduate
students across diverse ethnic backgrounds and genders, a graduate course on
large scales and ‘big data’ in biology, and new databases for posterity that
will guide conservation and monitoring for species invasions and infectious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a scientific perspective, this team proposes
to i) expand phenological datasets, ii) gather data from the literature on
environmental change effects on species interactions, iii) develop a
quantitative global framework for predicting the direction and magnitude of
effects on individual species’ phenologies and species interactions based on
latitude, climate, and organismal traits, and iv) validate present-day
predictions of the model by working with at least 13 existing National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) datasets. The specific objectives are to:
1) assemble a database of time series describing phenological shifts, local
climatic drivers, latitude and elevation, and organismal body sizes; 2) develop
a mathematical framework for predicting the phenological responses of species to
environmental change, by quantifying how phylogeny, body size, habitat,
latitude, phenological trait, and environment (temperature and precipitation)
affect phenology; 3) use NEON data to validate this framework by testing whether
it can accurately predict the phenological responses of individual species to
variability in present-day climate, from local to continental scales; 4) use
NEON data to evaluate the ability of this framework to predict how variability
in present-day climate will affect the strength and outcome of species
interactions and ecosystem functions; and 5) once validated, couple the
framework to local environmental change projections to predict species and
locations around the globe that will be particularly sensitive to changing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.