* 2017729
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nutrient Pollution, Riverine Mud Investment, and Environmental Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Andrea Ballestero, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 25,175.00

The incorporation of nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorous into
agricultural fertilizing practices over the last century has enabled a dramatic
increase in both the scale and efficiency of agricultural production. An
additional consequence, however, has been an increase in the pressure placed
upon local ecosystems to absorb the excess leaching of such nutrients from
agricultural fields. This phenomenon, referred to as nutrient pollution, has
notably been found to significantly threaten the health of critical freshwater
supplies as excess nutrients can encourage the growth of harmful algae blooms
which release harmful toxins to both human and nonhuman populations. As a
result, there has been recent scientific and legal investment in riverine mud
located on the periphery of industrial farmlands, which mediate the transference
of nutrients from fields to waterways in critical, albeit little understood
ways. This project, which supports the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, investigates how scientific and legal framings of riverine mud create
a new tool for confronting the problem of nutrient pollution and the
consequences of such a tool for local and national health and
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through participant observation, interviews,
focus groups, ethnographic film elicitation, archival research, and the creation
of a regional-specific historical database of the social and environmental
significance of riverine mud, the investigators will examine the practical,
scientific, and bureaucratic work carried out by state-funded scientists and
policy makers to transform riverine mud into a valuable resource for
environmental governance. Following such practices across scientific field sites
in farmlands near major freshwater supplies, laboratories where nutrient
pollution is studied, and offices where nutrient pollution policy is created,
this research aims to clarify the technical complexities of environmental
governance practices more broadly. Additionally, by focusing on the specific
material of riverine mud and its relation to the problem of the nutrient
pollution governance practices, this research aims to better understand how
specific material and historical concerns inflect contemporary state efforts to
govern in ways which are both environmentally sustainable and economically
viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.