* 2017626
* Local adaptation and the evolution of plasticity under predator invasion and warming seas: consequences for individuals, populations, and communities
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 643,873.00

Over the past two decades, the Gulf of Maine has experienced unprecedented
warming that, among other things, has further enabled the invasive green crab to
expand its range in rocky shore habitats. The adverse ecological impacts of this
invasive predator have been documented worldwide. This study examines how
geographic variation in the capacity of two common prey species to respond to
the combination of this predator and warming ocean temperatures can shape prey
feeding and performance and impact community structure and dynamics. Hence, this
research enhances understanding of the evolution of phenotypes, their
plasticity, and the nature of adaptation and its role in eco-evolutionary
dynamics. More broadly, it informs understanding of how organisms and marine
communities may respond to future environmental change. In addition, this
project makes contributions to the STEM pipeline by providing middle and high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students with cross-disciplinary training in
evolutionary and community ecology. In collaboration with an institutional
outreach program, the investigator is also developing web-based multimedia
projects and teacher resource materials based on this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central principle in ecology is that species
residing in the middle of food chains must balance the benefits of eating with
the risk of being eaten by their predators. Solving this foraging-predation risk
trade-off often involves plasticity in prey traits with consequences for the
evolution of adaptation and species interactions that drive community-level
processes. Hence, the foraging-predation risk trade-off provides a powerful
conceptual framework that links evolutionary and community ecology. Yet at the
same time, other environmental stressors like temperature can shape this trade-
off, adding complexity that makes it difficult to predict the capacity of
organisms to adapt to environmental change and the consequences for communities.
The investigator is conducting this study in rocky shore habitats of the Gulf of
Maine (GOM) which have long been influenced by strong latitudinal temperature
gradients and non-native species invasions. The overarching hypothesis is that
predation risk and temperature are factors shaping geographic variation in
plasticity and adaptation, with consequences for individuals, populations, and
communities. First, the investigator is conducting field experiments to document
geographic variation in the trait plasticity of two common prey species in the
green crabâ€™s diet. Second, he is using reciprocal transplant experiments to
examine trait plasticity in response to risk and water temperature, generating
data to compare with similar experiments conducted in the late 90s prior to
recent ocean warming and expansion in range of green crabs. Third, he is
conducting a laboratory common garden experiment to evaluate the effects of risk
and water temperature on trait plasticity. Finally, he is using reciprocal
transplant experiments in the field to understand the interactive effects of
risk and water temperature on prey foraging rates and the abundance of a species
that plays an important role in intertidal community structure and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.