* 2017577
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the source of oceanic dissolved black carbon using compound-specific stable carbon isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 12/12/2019,03/31/2022
* Sasha Wagner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2022
* USD 342,050.00

The char and soot remaining after fire is broadly referred to as black carbon.
When char interacts with water, some of it dissolves and is carried away by
rivers to the ocean. This soluble component of char is termed "dissolved black
carbon" (DBC). Recent research has revealed DBC to be a major component of the
carbon cycle. Most notably, DBC is now known to make up 10% of all dissolved
organic carbon that rivers carry to the sea. Once in the ocean, DBC remains
there for thousands of years, storing carbon that would otherwise be in the
atmosphere as carbon dioxide. As carbon dioxide contributes to the greenhouse
effect, with higher carbon dioxide in the atmosphere leading to warmer global
temperatures, it is important to understand where DBC in the ocean came from and
how long it will stay locked away in the deep ocean. In this funded work, we set
out to determine the source of the DBC in the ocean. Based upon our previous
work that shows rivers export massive amounts of DBC to the coast, it has been
suggested that rivers are the main source of DBC to the open ocean. However, in
looking more closely at the DBC in rivers and the oceans, we found them to
differ in one critical way: they have different isotopic signatures. This
precludes them from having the same source, indicating that the DBC in the
oceans is not from rivers. Our preliminary work only looked at a small river in
Georgia, USA, and in the coastal waters offshore. In this funded project, we
will take a global look at the isotopic signatures of DBC collected from large
rivers such as the Amazon, Mississippi, and Yukon, and from the middle of the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. If we find there is no overlap in the isotopes of
the DBC from these major global rivers and ocean waters, we can conclude that
rivers are not the main source of oceanic DBC and will need to search for new
explanations of how molecules produced by fire end up in the deep ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance the career and continue the
training of a first-time investigator and train undergraduate students in real
world research through the Northeastern University Cooperative Program. In
addition, our findings be adapted to produce learning materials for high school
students in collaboration with the Science Journal for
Kids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous efforts to track DBC sources in natural
waters have come with major limitations, preventing definitive connections to be
made between oceanic DBC and its pyrogenic source. Photodegradation, a
significant removal process for DBC in surface waters, drastically alters the
molecular composition of DBC and erases any potential link between DBC chemical
composition and its source. Bulk stable carbon isotopic measurements cannot
unambiguously identify sources of DOC subcomponents, such as DBC. As such, this
project aims to constrain the oceanic source of DBC by measuring compound-
specific stable carbon isotopes of molecular markers (benzenepolycarboxylic
acids, or BPCAs), derived exclusively from DBC. Our preliminary data show BPCA-
specific isotopic values to have a sufficiently wide dynamic range between
riverine and oceanic samples to test our hypotheses. In the current proposal, we
aim to 1) isotopically characterize the largest quantified flux of DBC to the
ocean (global rivers), 2) assess in situ oceanic variation in DBC stable carbon
isotopic signatures, and 3) investigate the potential BPCA-specific
fractionation effects of DBC photodegradation. In establishing a robust tracer
for DBC source, we will be able to accurately constrain sources of oceanic DBC
and further investigate the biogeochemical cycling of DBC across the
terrestrial-marine continuum. The results of our research will also assist in
answering larger research questions, specifically those regarding the fate of
terrigenous DOM in the ocean, which have plagued biogeochemists for
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.