* 2017086
* Conference: Language Acquisition and Language Processing: Finding New Connections
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* John Trueswell, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2021
* USD 14,007.00

A central goal of cognitive science is to understand how the human brain
acquires language and uses it to communicate with others. Basic research into
understanding human language abilities also holds practical value in areas such
as education (where difficulties with language pose a significant barrier for
academic and professional success), engagement with social media (where new
forms of communication are rapidly developing), and artificial intelligence
(where machine learning and other algorithmic methods endow computers with
increasingly sophisticated human-language communication). Traditionally, basic
research on human language has taken a divide-and-conquer approach, with one
part of the research community focused on how children learn languages and the
other focused on how adults dynamically comprehend and produce language in real-
time. However, exciting new research has bridged this otherwise artificial
research divide. Neural and eye-tracking methods have revealed that infants
deploy their incomplete understanding of language in real-time, almost as
quickly as their adult expert counterparts. Likewise, adults have been found,
under specific conditions, to be highly adaptive to language, learning new
patterns of speech, new words, and even new syntax from brief exposure. This
proposal highlights this new interdisciplinary work and resulting
breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding will support a special session
entitled “Language Acquisition and Language Processing: Finding New Connections”
to be held at the 34th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing
(March 4-6, 2021), hosted at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. The
session will include presentations from six eminent researchers who bridge
language learning and processing, a poster session dedicated to this theme, and
travel awards for young student investigators. By bringing researchers studying
language acquisition to the premier conference on adult language processing, the
session will permit the cross-fertilization of ideas, spawning new important
topics of study within human language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.