* 2017570
* ADVANCE Partnership: Multi-Campus Transformation Equity Network (MCTEN)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mary Blair-Loy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 260,998.00

San Diego State University and the University of California San Diego have
partnered to improve mentorship, sponsorship, networking, and institutional and
disciplinary leadership capacity for women and other underrepresented minority
faculty in STEM. Our Multi-Campus Transformation and Equity Network (MCTEN) will
focus on transformative interventions that create and elevate a robust cross-
campus network of faculty who will cement existing change, catalyze new efforts,
and establish southern California as a regional center for diversity, inclusion
and excellence in STEM. Adopting small group, network and community-building
approaches, with a specific focus on intersectionality, MCTEN will create
lasting intra and inter institutional connections to support meaningful and
sustainable change in STEM fields, including sciences and engineering, and the
academy. In San Diego, this regional transformation is critical in order to take
full advantage of the innovation and research excellence from ethnically,
racially and gender diverse faculty, and to adequately serve the students in the
San Diego region who meet the critical STEM workforce needs of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MCTEN will bring innovative applications of
documented and effective ADVANCE interventions to a multi-campus, regional
network, using insights about organizational change drawn from small-group
theory. We will also draw from network science, using networking, network
development, and mentoring to reduce negative impacts of the lived experiences
of isolation and stress reported by women and URM faculty in STEM departments.
This partnership, which brings together Californiaâ€™s university systems in a
region with demographics that reflect national trends, will demonstrate how
ADVANCE interventions across campuses in a region can support and empower URM
women faculty and can provide conditions needed for all scholars to thrive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support to collaborations among STEM
professional societies and academic and non-academic non-profit organizations
designed to broaden the implementation of evidence-based equity strategies and
have a national or regional reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.