* 2018485
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution MicroCT System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Ali Sadegh, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2022
* USD 275,692.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides support for the
acquisition of a high-resolution X-Ray microCT imaging system to enhance
research and education at the City College of New York (CUNY). This instrument
will enable tomographic imaging and modeling that spans from a few millimeters
to sub-micrometers—enabling fundamental research in a broad range of fields at
CUNY and nearby institutions. New knowledge that will be gained from this
research could lead to major medical advances in diagnosis and
therapeutics—enhancing the quality of life for US citizens. This microCT system
will foster synergistic collaboration between faculty in engineering, science,
and medicine in the New York City area. The instrumentation will be used to
enable training for graduate, undergraduate and high school students in imaging
processing, numerical modeling, finite element analysis and research design.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This instrument will enable a wide variety of image-based
studies on the mechanical behavior of biological tissues. In addition to basic
characterization of intact and damaged tissues, the instrumentation will enable
the researchers to map subcellular markers of inflammation markers and cytokines
in response to mechanical loading and to generate images of tissues during
loading. This will advance fundamental understanding of the microstructural
deformations that occur during loading, and how this alters mechanical behavior
of these tissues. For example, the researchers will conduct potentially
transformative fundamental research on the imaging and numerical modeling of the
rupture of human fibroatheromas due to microcalcifications, multiscale imaging
and modeling of knee fatigue damage and repair, the structure-function
relationship in trabecular bone, the role of tissue damage in bone
mechanotransduction and brain damage due to blunt impacts to the
head.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.