* 2018308
* CC* Integration-Small: Science Traffic as a Service (STAAS)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Rexford, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 514,208.00

Future advances in scientific research will require computing on massive
datasets and high bandwidth streaming scientific instrument data. New
experimental research infrastructures will be required to advance the
understanding of the networks capable of supporting these increasingly demanding
science data flows. Testing advances in networking technologies and protocols
with actual high-speed science data traffic is vital to networking
experimenters, scientific instrument users, and data scientists. To address this
need, this project will develop a prototype of a decentralized computing and
networking system to create, collect and distribute a diverse collection of real
and synthetic science traffic flows to the experimental research infrastructure
user community. The proposed work will first develop and deploy the Science
Traffic as a Service (STAAS) prototype on the Network Programming Initiative
testbed connecting two US universities, and then prepare STAAS for later
nationwide deployment on the FABRIC midscale networking research infrastructure
now under development. The students exposed to research on networking testbeds
with demanding science traffic workloads will learn skills to help strengthen a
workforce prepared to advance the global-scale computing cloud application
service platforms that are increasingly central to the US economy. All
documents, software, presentations, and other artifacts created under this
project will be made publicly available at http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~jbrassil
/public/projects/staas/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key project insight is that
many science flows are already in transit at any moment on or between campuses.
Using new campus cyberinfrstucture including passive optical Test Access Points,
Network Packet Brokers, and data-plane programmable ethernet switches, STAAS
will safely tap and forward copies of these flows onto the experimental testbed,
while preserving both the timing integrity of the flows and the data privacy of
their payloads. Large scale, high bandwidth experiments will be achieved by
enlisting participation of many or all STAAS edge nodes on multiple campuses. By
introducing a service-based model, STAAS can help advance the networking
research community's transport of emerging science data, and help the operators
of scientific instruments increase the amount and quality of data collected by
their instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.