* 2018766
* CC* Compute: GP-ARGO: The Great Plains Augmented Regional Gateway to the Open Science Grid
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Daniel Andresen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 378,599.00

This project creates a regional distributed Open Science Grid (OSG) Gateway led
by the Great Plains Network (GPN) to support computational and data-intensive
research across the region through the development of specialized CI resources,
workforce training, and cross-support methodologies and agreements. The GPN
Augmented Regional Gateway to OSG’s (GP-ARGO) primary goal accelerates the
adoption and experience of advanced high-throughput computing and data resources
by developing a model for enhanced distributed computational systems, including
design, implementation, and training. This project multiplies the number of OSG
sites in the GPN region by 8, adding at least 2,048 cores dedicated to OSG use,
and giving OSG potential access to over 42,000 additional existing cores at
participating institutions. This project accomplishes the following key
objectives: 1) Improves campus awareness and adoption of advanced HTC-oriented
computing and data resources for STEM research and education activities. 2)
Increasing the number and capabilities of campus research computing and data
professionals. 3) Increasing the capabilities of campus high-throughput
computing cyberinfrastructure resources such as advanced computing systems, data
caches, and networks. 4) Enabling deployment, and operation of research and
education cyberinfrastructure to make science more efficient, trusted, and
reproducible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances both the regional
infrastructure and regional research efforts by increasing the number of local
CI resources across the region. GP-ARGO provides a distinctive model for
distributed support teams, in particular institutions that lack a critical mass
of personnel to support the key areas: OSG awareness, HTC resources, researcher
support, workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.