* 2018599
* Collaborative Research: Veto Bargaining: Delegation and Non-Coasian Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Richard Van Weelden, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 42,663.00

This award funds research on the topic of veto bargaining. Veto bargaining
concerns situations in which one agent or group can make proposals but another
must approve them. Applications can be found in many areas of the social
sciences: legislatures (e.g., U.S. Congress) propose bills that executives
(e.g., the President) can veto; criminal prosecutors bring charges that judges
and juries decide whether to convict a defendant on; CEOs and Boards need
shareholders to sign off on certain decisions; and search committees put forward
candidates but the decision of whether to hire rests elsewhere in an
organization. The central issue the research will take up concerns the
uncertainty proposers face about the preferences of those with veto power—which
proposals they are willing to accept relative to the status quo. Using game
theory, the PIs will theoretically investigate how such uncertainty affects
bargaining and the resulting outcomes. They will explore applications and
implications in some of the contexts noted above. It is hoped that the research
will contribute to both the theoretical and practical understanding of veto
bargaining, and provide some methodological insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs will adopt a framework of Proposer-Vetoer bargaining over a “spatial
dimension” of actions or policies; i.e., the agents have single-peaked
preferences. Vetoer’s preferences are her private information. The first part of
the project will take a mechanism design approach to identify Proposer-optimal
outcomes when Proposer has full commitment. This approach will be useful both
normatively and positively. A connection will be made to optimal delegation.
Among other things, the results will show that under reasonable conditions
incomplete information can dramatically corrode Proposer’s bargaining power,
while still resulting in efficient outcomes. Comparative statics will be
obtained concerning the Proposer’s risk aversion and the alignment of
preferences between Proposer and Vetoer. The second part of the research project
will study a dynamic model in which Proposer has limited commitment. That is,
he/she cannot commit to not coming back to Vetoer with a proposal in the next
period should the current proposal be rejected. The results from the first part
of the project will be used to understand how bargaining is affected by limited
commitment. A familiar intuition when players are patient is that of Coasian
dynamics: regardless of the commitment solution, Proposer’s lack of commitment
should erode his/her bargaining power and lead to Vetoer getting her ideal
outcome, perhaps modulo some minimum “outside option” payoff to Proposer. The
PIs anticipate showing that this intuition fails here, owing to single-peaked
preferences. In particular, it is anticipated that under some conditions there
will be non-Coasian dynamics, with Proposer obtaining her commitment
payoff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.