* 2018093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolution of the Extant and Fossil Colobine Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Christopher Gilbert, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 19,000.00

The colobine monkeys, a group of primates closely related to apes and humans,
are species-rich and widespread globally. Despite an abundant fossil record
demonstrating a greater ecological and geographic range in the past, their
evolution remains poorly understood. This project will first determine the
evolutionary relationships between the fossil and living colobines, then use
these newly understood relationships to test long-standing hypotheses about the
evolution of colobine habitats, diet, distribution, and diversity. Using newer
methods and including recently described fossil material will provide a much-
needed update on colobine evolution from earlier analyses and contribute
significantly to our broader understanding of primate evolution. The methods
used in this project will be evaluated for their applicability to other areas of
primate evolution as well, including early human evolution. This project will
also provide multiple opportunities for mentorship and public outreach by using
charismatic primates to discuss primate biology, human evolution, and
evolutionary theory more broadly. Outreach will continue at events hosted by New
York City public schools, CUNY colleges, and the American Museum of Natural
History and research opportunities related to this project for high school,
undergraduate, and master's students will be provided, emphasizing broadly
applicable skills in computer coding, statistical analysis, critical thinking,
and research design. All products of this project, including raw data and
computer program scripts, will be made available in public repositories to
encourage further work on these relatively under-studied primates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the evolutionary history of the
colobine monkeys, a widespread and diverse primate radiation. In contrast to the
primarily folivorous and arboreal extant colobines, fossil colobines are known
from a wider geographic range and exhibit a range of inferred substrate
preferences and ecologies. However, the evolutionary context of this diversity
is largely unknown as the relationships between the fossil and living colobines
are still poorly understood. This project will first conduct a comprehensive
phylogenetic analysis of the living and fossil colobine monkeys and subsequently
use the inferred tree(s) to explore long-held hypotheses about 1) the evolution
of substrate use, 2) the number, timing, and route of dispersals between
continents, and 3) the pattern and timing of colobine diversification in the
context of Mio-Pliocene climatic events. Fossil and extant colobines will be
scored for phylogenetic analysis and a set of functional postcranial
measurements will also be taken. Parsimony and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses
will be performed on both the morphological data only and in total-evidence
analyses incorporating molecular data. A Bayesian tip-dated tree will be
generated and used to explore changes in diversity through time, examining
possible correlations with major climatic events. Biogeographic history and the
evolution of substrate preference will be explored by mapping character state
changes and inferring ancestral states using both parsimony optimization and
Bayesian modeling. Character matrices and program codes will be made available
to allow the incorporation of this work into a broader understanding of Mio-
Pliocene catarrhine evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.