* 2018860
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Tandem Mass Spectrometer for Advancing Research and Education at the University of Maryland College Park
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Daniel Falvey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Peter Nemes from the University of
Maryland College Park and colleagues Daniel Falvey, Lyle Isaacs, Lisa Taneyhill
and Scott Juntti are acquiring a high-resolution, high-pressure liquid
chromatograph mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization capabilities (HR-
HPLC-ESI-MS). In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical
methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species
embedded in complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a
mass spectrometer where they are ionized into ions and the ions' masses are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of molecules in
complex mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid chromatograph can
separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. In the
electrospray technique a high voltage is applied to a liquid to create an
aerosol. This voltage is useful to produce ions from large molecules by avoiding
the propensity of macromolecules to fragment when ionized. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in
research and research training using this modern analytical technique. The
acquisition also provides training opportunities to many undergraduate and
graduate students as well as postdoctoral fellows at this institution. The new
capability to measure both small biological and organic molecules in a shared
Mass Spectrometry Facility has a broad impact on scientists and students in the
District of Columbia-Maryland-Virginia region through workshops as well as
curriculum modernization and collaborations with Bowie State
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass spectrometer
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially
impacts studies of metabolic effectors of embryonic development and hormone
metabolite activity in nervous system functions. The instrumentation is also
used for research on mitochondrial metabolism in the liver as well as molecular
mechanisms in neural crest and dental placode cells. In addition, the MS
provides information useful for the search of the next generation enzymatic
kinetic isotope effects and for studying binders for the valosine-containing
protein (VCP) that segregate protein molecules from large cellular structures.
The mass spectrometer is also used to inform the design of efficient syntheses
for molecular guest compounds. It is also utilized in investigations of
electrophilic nitrogen containing species and their reactivity with proteins and
nucleic acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.