* 2018886
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Science DMZ for Data-enabled Science, Engineering, and Health
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Lalitha Sankar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 494,273.00

Drawing upon its mission to enable access to discovery and scholarship in
science, engineering, and health, Arizona State University is deploying an
advanced research network employing the Science DMZ architecture. While
advancing knowledge of deploying 21st century cyberinfrastructure in a large
public research university, this project also advances how network
cyberinfrastructure supports research and education in science, engineering, and
health. This effort is being carried out by a partnership of campus
cyberinfrastructure experts to: 1) Improve campus network connectivity to enable
high speed data movement for STEM research and education activities, by enabling
friction-free access to wide area networks. 2) Ensure secure and performant data
movement for STEM research and education activities. 3) Increase STEM research
and education productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project incorporates
national best practices in network architecture, security, and federated
authentication and identity management. Replacing existing edge network
equipment and installing an optimized, tuned Data Transfer Node provides
friction-free wide area network path and streamlined research data movement. A
strict router access control list and Intrusion Detection System provide
security within the Science DMZ, and end-to-end network performance measurement
via perfSONAR guards against issues such as packet loss. Science data flows are
supported by a process incorporating user engagement, iterative technical
improvements, training, documentation, and follow-up. Network design and
implementation are guided by an external advisory board consisting of experts
from the Energy Sciences Network, Internet2, the Engagement Performance and
Operations Center (EPOC), The Quilt, and Arizona's “Sun Corridor” research
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.