* 2018182
* Atmospheric Gravity Wave Radiosonde Field Campaign for Eclipse 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Matthew Bernards, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2022
* USD 672,265.00

This 2-year project supports an effort to observe and analyze eclipse-driven
Stratospheric Gravity Waves (SGWs) using balloon-borne radiosondes during the
2020 total solar eclipse in South America on December 14, 2020. The gathering of
upper atmospheric data with high temporal resolution will allow the project team
to continue its investigations of SGWs induced by solar eclipses. The main
objective of the 2020 campaign is to identify eclipse-driven atmospheric gravity
waves in the stratosphere. The project will enable undergraduate students to
become immersed in research over the summer of 2020, participate in a two-week
field campaign in December, and perform analysis of the radiosonde data
following the field campaign. Previous undergraduate students have helped design
the project and determine the optimal spatial and temporal resolution for
balloon-borne radiosonde data collection. An intensive student training will
occur during the summer before the two-week-long event in South America. The
final weeks of the undergraduate research will focus on data analysis using
wavelet and hodograph methods. Broader impacts will also result from the
students' interactions with experts in the field during all the phases of the
project: from planning to field work to final data analysis. Such mentoring
expands research capabilities, while opening pathways for professional and
workforce development by facilitating an invaluable proposal-to-publication
experience for the undergraduates involved. Additionally, the University of
Montana's Broader Impacts Group (BIG) will provide guidance on some of the
project's public dissemination efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collection of
radiosonde data during this 2-year project would enable the project team to
investigate the physical processes governing the eclipse-induced SGWs. The
radiosonde data serve to fill in the observational gap pertaining to gravity
waves, which are a known mechanism of momentum and energy transfer to
atmospheric mean flow. The detection probability of SGWs is enhanced with
increased temporal resolution prior to the solar eclipse in addition to
increased spatial resolution using four different launch sites. Similar to the
Montana Space Grant Consortium's (MTSGC) 2019 solar eclipse campaign, a total of
25 balloons will be launched, beginning 24 hours before the totality. The 2020
solar eclipse campaign is designed to have two balloons at various altitudes
with at least one of the two balloons in the 25-35 km range every hour starting
12 hours prior to the totality. The balloon launch schedule has been
strategically designed to maximize the structure of hourly temporal resolution,
with fewer flights the day before the eclipse and increased flights the day of
and directly after the eclipse (relative to 2019). The flight frequency during
the solar eclipse is increased to every 30 minutes. In addition to high temporal
resolution observations, the 2020 solar eclipse campaign will expand the project
team's measurements spatially as well. Rather than limit measurements to a
single point along the eclipse path, the 2020 solar eclipse campaign will expand
the measurements to four sites, thus spanning the continental path of the
eclipse from the west coast of Chile to the east coast of Argentina. Each of the
four sites will implement the graphical user interface developed by MTSGC to
characterize the background atmosphere and detect atmospheric gravity waves
using two separate methods. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports
the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.