* 2018563
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Local Responses to Global Environmental Shifts During the Emergence of Hominins
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 19,897.00

Geological and paleontological research provides a deep-time perspective of past
events that can inform scientists and policymakers about the long-term
consequences of environmental patterns. Of particular interest to both
scientists and the general public is the relationship between environmental
change and hominin evolution. This doctoral dissertation project investigates
how shifts in the environment may have played a role in the origins of two major
lineages of hominins, Paranthropus and Homo. By examining how the environments
in which these early hominins lived changed leading up to the divergence of
Paranthropus and Homo, this project provides important evidence of the impact of
environment variability on a local scale, as well as insight into the
evolutionary drivers that spurred the emergence of new hominin lineages. A
critical goal of this project is to train a female graduate student in STEM and
to create opportunities for other women and students from underrepresented
groups to gain first-hand experience in conducting science through mentorship
and research. It also fosters international research collaborations and academic
linkages and public science outreach and engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
origin and divergence of the Paranthropus and Homo lineages coincides with a
period of profound environmental variability and instability at the regional and
local levels. To understand the contributing factors that may have precipitated
this major evolutionary event, it is important to determine the environmental
context in which the two new lineages emerged. However, the nature of the
relationship between global and local-scale environmental change remains poorly
resolved during this critical period of human evolution. The goal of this
project is to investigate the underlying environmental factors potentially
driving the emergence of Paranthropus and Homo by (1) using mesowear, microwear
and stable isotope analyses to reconstruct the local paleoenvironment; (2)
comparing paleoenvironmental data from other sites in the region to document
patterns of local environmental change; and (3) investigating the relationship
between environmental change and the extinction and speciation of hominins and
other mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.