* 2018627
* MRI: RADiCAL: Reconfigurable Major Research Cyberinfrastructure for Advanced Computational Data Analytics and Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* anil parwani, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 770,000.00

The analysis of high-resolution images in both two and three-dimensions is
becoming important for many scientific areas, such as in medicine, astronomy and
engineering. Discoveries in these disciplines often require analyzing millions
of images. The analysis of these images is complex and requires many steps on
powerful computers. Some of these steps require looking through lots of images
while some of these steps require deep analysis of each image. In many cases,
these analyses have to be completed quickly, i.e. in "real-time", so that
information and insights can be provided to humans as they do their work. These
kinds of operations require powerful computers consisting of many different,
heterogeneous but simple computing components. These components need to be
configured and reconfigured so that they can efficiently work together to do
these large-scale analyses. In addition, the software that controls these
computers also has to be intelligently designed so that these analyses can be
run on the right types of configurations. This project aims to acquire the
necessary computing components and assemble such a powerful computer (named
RADiCAL). Research done using RADiCAL will result in important scientific
discoveries that will make us more prosperous, improve our health, and enable us
to better understand the world and universe around us. Doing this research will
also educate many students, including those from under-represented groups, who
will become part of a highly-trained workforce capable of addressing our
nation's needs long into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of RADiCAL is in the design a novel, high-performance, next-generation,
heterogeneous, reconfigurable hardware and software stack to provide real-time
interaction, analytics, machine/deep learning (ML/DL) and computing support for
disciplines that involve massive observational and/or simulation data. RADiCAL
will be built from commodity hardware, and designed for reconfiguration and
observability. RADiCAL will enable a comprehensive research agenda on software
that will facilitate rapid and flexible construction of analytics workflows and
their scalable execution. Specific software research include: 1) a library with
support for storage and retrieval of multi-resolution, multi-dimensional
datasets, 2) scalable learning and inference modules, 3) data analytics
middleware systems, and 4) context-sensitive human-in-the-loop ML models and
libraries that encode domain expertise, coupling tightly with both lower level
layers and the hardware components to facilitate scalable analysis and
explainability. With the proposed hardware acquisition and software research,
the transformative goal will be to facilitate decision-making and discovery in
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and medicine (pathology). With respect to
broader impacts, RADiCAL will provide a unique research, testing, and training
infrastructure that will catalyze research in multiple disciplines as well as
facilitate convergent research across disciplines. The advanced imaging
applications and techniques for expert-assisted image analysis will be broadly
applicable to other human-in-the-loop systems and have the potential to advance
medicine and health. Projects that use RADiCAL will also provide unique test-
beds for valuable empirical research on human-computer interaction and software
engineering best practices. Well-established initiatives at The Ohio State
University will facilitate the recruitment of graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups for involvement in using the
cyberinfrastructure. The heterogeneous and reconfigurable research instrument
will be utilized to create sophisticated educational modules on how to co-design
computational science experiments from the science goals to the underlying
cyberinfrastructure. Tutorials and workshops will be organized at PEARC,
Supercomputing and other conferences to share the research results and
experience with the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.