* 2018575
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance GPU Cluster for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Chunguang Du, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,079.00

Graphics Processing Unit(GPU)-acceleration) has become a useful, if not
essential, tool for computational tasks in support of investigations across a
wide range of disciplines, from data science to biological sciences to physical
and social-science areas. Therefore, the addition of GPU-accelerated computing
capacity comprising a cluster of hybrid GPU/CPU compute nodes to the HPC system,
Hawk at Montclair State University provides critical support for research and
education activities, across the Institution, which share the need for this
capacity. The impact of each of these investigations is magnified by users’
access to the GPU-accelerated computing capacity provided by this System.
Moreover, by serving as a focal point for high-performance, GPU-accelerated
computing, the system stimulates and supports collaboration across disciplines
by investigators as well as their external collaborators. In the setting of the
university, a designated Hispanic-Serving Institution with a diverse student
body, PIs, as well as other major users utilize this instrument in both
undergraduate and graduate education activities that enhance the STEM education
for these students, including a significant proportion who are first-generation
students in higher education. The instrument serves to both attract the interest
of --and provide training in leading-edge computing to-- a diverse group of
students in order to inspire and prepare them to be part of the future STEM
workforce by providing `hands on’ access to GPU-accelerated HPC and the
computing tools and techniques enabled by this
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster of hybrid GPU/CPU (Computer
Processing Units) compute nodes acquired under this award are integrated to the
Hawk system. These nodes constitute a substantial and transformative expansion
of computing capacity for research and education at Montclair State, which
previously had no generally accessible GPU-accelerated HPC. The utility of the
cluster of compute nodes is significantly enhanced by leveraging the resources
of the Hawk cluster. The System is configured to be accessible to not only PIs,
but also to users across the Institution, as well as their external
collaborators and supports multiple ongoing GPU-accelerated research activities
including investigations in (1) computing and data science, (2) biology and
genomics, (3) geomorphology and land use, (4) computational mathematics, (5)
applied mathematics, (6) business analytics, and (7) linguistics. These
collaborations include the implementation of new techniques and approaches
(e.g., machine learning and deep neural networks) to both emerging and long-
standing problems in these disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.