* 2018962
* MRI: Acquisition of Flexible High-speed Super-Resolution System for Plant Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James Umen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 660,717.00

An award is made to the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center (DDPSC) to do high-
speed and super-resolution microscopy of plants to understand their interactions
with microbes and their environment. The DDPSC mission is to improve the human
condition through plant science: by feeding the hungry and improving human
health; preserving and renewing the environment; and enhancing the St. Louis
region as a world center for plant science. The investment in advanced
microscopy at the DDPSC greatly benefit its plant research projects and provides
novel plant focused applications for the greater scientific community. The
super-resolution microscope will be leveraged for training scientists at all
ranks up to principal investigators. Three graduate/undergraduate courses at
Saint Louis University and Washington University in Saint Louis will include
super-resolution microscopy in their syllabus. Tomorrow’s scientists will be
trained through active participation in the DDPSC NSF-Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Program, teaching a twice-yearly advanced fluorescence
imaging short course, recruitment of high school students for imaging projects
and participation in a regional internship program for high school students
called Students and Teachers As Research Scientists (STARS). Additionally, the
highly successful DDPSC Education and Outreach program will host workshops for
teachers and provide interactive mentoring that connect our scientists with
nearby schools including St. Charles Community College and Harris Stowe
University, a Historically Black College and University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, a remarkable surge in new discoveries on how cells work have been
forthcoming, benefiting from the rapid development of genetically encoded
fluorescent sensors and other designer probes. Additionally, new imaging
technologies and protocols have arisen, leading to a revolution in how a cells
and tissues can be explored. DDPSC acquisition of a high-speed super-resolution
microscope will have an immediate impact on twenty-three funded research
projects NSF (12), DOE (4), DARPA (1) USDA (2), private (3), NIH (1)
representing 13 PIs at the Danforth Center and local region including Washington
University of Saint Louis (WUSTL), Saint Louis University (SLU) and Kansas State
University (KSU). The super-resolution microscope will enable advancements in
diverse projects which investigate plant development, microbes, plant-microbe
interactions, heat/stress responses in plants and algae, fundamentals of plant
and algal cell growth and division, cytoskeletal dynamics, the plant cell wall,
nuclear domain structure and dynamics, RNA localization, and protein
localization in plant or algal tissues. Results from the research will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and at scientific
meetings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.