* 2018999
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Resolution Visualization Instrumentation to Support Collaborative, Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Alex Mayer, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Many complex problems cannot be addressed easily from the confines of individual
disciplines because they require participation of many experts, each viewing the
problem from their distinctive disciplinary perspective, and collaborations
around shared data and knowledge. When interdisciplinary efforts involve massive
amounts of different types of data, an invaluable approach to understand and
analyze data is data visualization. The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) is
acquiring high resolution, collaborative visualization instrumentation that will
be housed in the newly constructed Interdisciplinary Research Building. The
instrumentation will be a vital resource for UTEP’s established efforts in
convergence research across science and engineering, e.g., through the NSF-
funded CREST CyberShARE Center of Excellence and “Innovation through
Institutional Integration” initiative. The research impacted by the acquired
instrumentation will contribute to NSF’s Big 10 ideas in quantum computing, data
revolution, convergence research, and INCLUDES. The expected outcome is
increased research productivity resulting from insights afforded by the
integration and manipulation of visualizations and examination of multiple
perspectives. As such, the visualization instrumentation can contribute to
advancement of our nation’s research capabilities in quantum computing and data
analytics, as well as areas that are particularly relevant to border regions and
in topical areas relevant to a region with a large under-served population
(e.g., health and the environment, energy-water issues, and border security),
and other areas such as cybersecurity and national defense. The instrumentation
will also elevate the education and training of student researchers, in
particular Latinx students who comprise 80% of UTEP’s student population, in
areas of national need. Research students and those involved in training and
associated coursework will graduate with domain expertise and knowledge in
interpreting, managing, and visualizing data; experience in working in
interdisciplinary teams; and an ability to use state-of-the-art visualization
methods to advance discovery and generate new knowledge. PI Gates directs the
NSF-funded Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI), the only
INCLUDES Alliance focused on achieving parity in representation of Hispanics in
computing. The Alliance will be instrumental in disseminating and involving
other HSIs in education and research training efforts and facilitating
partnerships to build research capacity. The visualization instrumentation also
will be an important asset for the community, in particular those impacted by
UTEP’s research, and for outreach efforts in exciting middle- and high-school
students about studying STEM through engagement in visualization activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive research instrumentation is composed of
integrated subsystems and a visualization wall composed of ultra-high-definition
displays with an overall resolution of 124 megapixels that will enable viewing
data at unprecedented levels of detail, and, as a result, will support analysis
and discovery of new insights from various types of data (structured and
unstructured, heterogeneous, and data with varying levels of quality). The
windowing subsystem will allow researchers to input and analyze multiple
datasets running simultaneously and provide the ability to compare datasets
side-by-side in real time while a video conferencing subsystem will support
collaboration with remote stakeholders, policymakers, other academics, and
political leaders. The instrumentation will create the infrastructure that
bridges data, computation, and visualization to grow collaborations across the
university and externally. In particular, the infrastructure will provide
researchers with the ability to communicate disparate perspectives of
information and knowledge; analyze large, integrated data sets; manipulate
multi-dimensional models of phenomena (e.g., geological structures, molecules,
and advanced material engineering); view simulation models that holistically
combine both social and natural system components; view data and models that are
useful and usable by stakeholders who may or may not be technically savvy; and
support a purposeful participatory research process that facilitates
collaborative reasoning among researchers and stakeholders, enabling convergence
from different perspectives. With UTEP’s expertise in machine learning, semantic
technologies, visualization, team science, and data analytics, researchers will
have access to technologies and the requisite training needed to accelerate
advances in their research. Indeed, diverse team efforts result in greater
scientific impact, innovation, productivity, and reach because of the ability of
members to draw on each other’s expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.