* 2018061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Effect of Certified Nurse Midwife Scope-of-Practice Laws on Health Costs, Prices, and Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Gautam Gowrisankaran, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2021
* USD 24,355.00

This research project will study the effects of changes in scope of practice
(SOP) laws on hospital cost, price of health services, and the quality of health
care. Specifically, this research studies whether changing SOP laws to allow
Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs) to provide obstetrics care without the
supervision of medical doctors (MDs) reduce the hospital cost of giving birth
without reducing the quality of care and if this cost savings are passed on to
patients by charging lower prices. The research will also study the mechanisms
through which allowing CNMs more independence lead to cost savings in the
provision of birth services reduces cost. The researchers will use hospital data
from seven states that recently have changed SOP laws. This research project
studies an important economic issue that has important policy implications. The
research results will provide guidance on how to decrease or slow the growth
rate of health care cost. This can help establish the U.S. as the global leader
in healthcare cost reforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
leverages quasi-random variation in the strictness of SOP laws across states and
time to estimate the effect of relaxing these laws on hospital cost, service
quality, and pass-through of cost savings to patients. Using generalized
difference-in-difference and event-study methods, the study will: (i) identify
the causal impact of SOP laws on costs; (ii) estimate whether these savings are
passed on to consumers via reductions in price or increases in quality; (iii)
examine how market structure mediates these effects; and (iv) identify causal
mechanisms for the effects of SOP laws. This approach will be able to estimate
the causal effect of relaxing SOP laws because it adjusts for fixed differences
across states that change their laws and those that do not. The effect is
unlikely to be confounded by differential trends in the outcome of interest
because political processes drive the timing of SOP law changes and these
changes are unrelated to trends in the outcomes of interest. Finally, states
adopt new SOP laws at different times, making it unlikely that there are other
simultaneous shocks that would confound the effect of the policy. The project’s
detailed discharge-level data will enable it to calculate more precise measures
of cost and resource use. Finally, the detailed data can help estimate the
relative importance of different causal mechanisms. The results of this research
can help establish the U.S. as the global leader in healthcare cost
reforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.