* 2018532
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Re-Envisioning Culture: Addressing Black Student Retention in Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Walter Gassmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Despite decades of intervention efforts, Black students continue to be
underrepresented in undergraduate biology education perhaps due to a persisting
mismatch between the culture (e.g., communicated norms, expectations, values,
and beliefs) practiced in undergraduate biology education and Black students’
expressed identity and cultural beliefs and values. This possible mismatch poses
challenges for U.S. advancements through STEM research and the STEM enterprise,
specifically in the sciences, as biology-based and biology-informed graduate
programs and professional careers continue to lack diversity and inclusive
structures. Currently, no specific network exists that specifically studies the
culture of undergraduate biology education and its role in supporting the
continued advancement of Black students in biology. This incubator RCN-UBE
project, “Re-Envisioning Culture” builds a network comprised of diverse
individuals from higher education (e.g., administrators, faculty, staff,
students), science industry, and Black cultural spaces, to address the
challenges of retaining and supporting the continued participation of Black
students in the Biological Sciences with a specific focus on the culture of
undergraduate biology education and Black student identity and culture.
Incorporating Black students’ identity, culture, and experience in the design
and implementation of undergraduate biology education increases the possibility
of attracting and retaining through professional careers, more Black students in
biology; a mission that would enhance the diversity of biology-based and
biology-informed careers, as well as the inclusion of scientific innovations
that advance the financial and social positioning of the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through hosting an in-person retreat, and two small group
virtual meetings, the Re-Envisioning Culture network will: explore and identify
the culture(s) of undergraduate biology education across institutional types;
examine the influence of these cultures on Black students’ retention; identify
and target aspects of undergraduate biology education that foster challenges for
Black students’ retention; and, propose possible interventions, strategies, and
research studies that will prompt changes to the structure of undergraduate
biology education in efforts to enhance its support of Black students. Outcomes
from the Re-Envisioning Culture network will provide insight into how to support
undergraduate biology retention efforts for all students in the United States.
These outcomes will illuminate challenges that prevent retention and provide a
potential blueprint of ways to make undergraduate biology education more
inclusive and attentive to the needs and experiences of the diverse student
body. All materials generated can be utilized to transform and enhance teaching
and mentoring practices in undergraduate biology education in ways that
intentionally account for students’ identity, culture, and experiences. The
information and materials developed will be curated and made publicly available
through a virtual platform that contains a repository of resources and how to
participate in network events. Written reports for academic and lay audiences
will be generated. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.