* 2018626
* MRI: Acquisition of a Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscope for Research in Advanced Materials, Energy, and Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Edward Duke, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,280,731.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to acquire a dual-beam focused
ion beam integrated with scanning electron microscope (FIB-SEM) to support
research and education at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology and in
the surrounding region. The system combines nanoscale materials patterning and
processing with high-resolution imaging and analytical capabilities. The system
will enable high resolution characterization, manipulation, and nanofabrication
of metals, ceramics, and polymers. The system will provide an immediate and
significant impact to research activities at the host institution and in the
region. The instrumentation will also support training programs and will impact
regional economic development by supporting local small enterprises. It will be
integrated into outreach activities to broaden participation in STEM by students
from underrepresented groups. Operation and maintenance of the system will be
managed by the Engineering and Mining Experiment Station. EMES is a multi-user
facility that serves universities and tribal colleges in South Dakota as well as
regional enterprises, and state, tribal, and federal
governments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FIB-SEM
will enable numerous new materials research capabilities that will support an
exciting era of research growth in South Dakota. Coupled with energy dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy and electron backscatter diffraction detectors, the system
will permit high resolution chemical and crystallographic analysis of advanced
materials. The FIB capability will also enable tomographic imaging and analysis
of metals, ceramics, polymers, and biological materials (e.g., 3D imaging of
multi-enzyme complexes that mediate microbial cell attachment for efficient
biomass degradation). More than 35 faculty from SD’s three research institutions
(SDSMT, South Dakota State University, and the University of South Dakota),
multiple primarily undergraduate universities (e.g., Black Hills State
University), and two tribal colleges (Oglala Lakota College, Sinte Gleska
University) are expected to use the system for research and educational
activities. The FIB-SEM will also impact seven active institutional and state-
wide research centers/laboratories, the majority of which are focused in the
area of advanced materials and manufacturing. The new equipment will complement
previous MRI-funded equipment acquisitions that together will comprise a growing
state-of-the-art materials characterization multi-user facility (EMES) that will
positively impact SDSMT’s ability to competitively recruit talented faculty and
students from underrepresented groups in STEM. The FIB-SEM will support capstone
engineering design projects and will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses at SDSMT, impacting 290 students on an annual basis.
Further, a new course will be introduced to train students on the theory and
application of FIB-SEM for advanced materials characterization. The FIB-SEM will
be integrated into graduate and undergraduate research training programs,
including two NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site programs and
a recently funded NSF National Research Traineeship program. Regarding the
former, the system will support a research project that involves cultural and
scientific analysis of Native American (NA) artifacts, conducted as part of a
REU program to facilitate engagement and training of NA students in STEM
research. The FIB-SEM will also be integrated into ongoing STEM outreach
programs intended to engage SD’s large NA population (including K-12
students/teachers and tribal college faculty and students) to increase awareness
and access of the FIB-SEM for this underserved population. Finally, the system
will support multiple regional tech-based start-up
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.