* 2018313
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope Equipped with Triboscope Nanoindentation and NanoIR Spectroscopy Capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Gregory Dillon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2021
* USD 412,315.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
Atomic Force Microscope with a triboscope for new material discoveries and
microstructural characterization. The instrumentation will support fundamental
research by a multidisciplinary group of researchers at Penn State Erie and
foster collaborations with nearby institutions. It will enhance undergraduate
involvement in the frontiers of material research and K-12 outreach activities
to promote STEM recruitment, particularly among women, minorities and the
economically disadvantaged.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fundamental research will be
conducted in the areas of fiber composites, advanced polymeric materials and the
characterization of solar cell efficiencies. A potentially transformative aspect
of this work is the coupled testing modalities-- nanoindentation and IR
spectroscopy--that can provide much-needed insights on material response when
subjected to multiphysical conditions. The instrumentation will enable the
researchers to determine mechanical properties such as hardness and elastic
modulus using specialized rigid test probes at the micro and nanometer scales.
The NanoIR spectroscopy provides topographical images of the sample surface and
characterizes the chemical composition of materials with high spatial
resolution. This enables advances in fundamental understanding of interfacial
chemical composition, interfacial uniformity, morphology and properties of
transition layer and resin permeability at a sub nanometer resolution. Local
characterization of microstructural properties (NanoIR), coupled with local
mechanical properties (Triboscope), allows the researchers to link
microstructural properties to stochastic material behavior at a larger
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.