* 2018344
* MRI: SEM for Geological, Environmental and Materials Science Research and Teaching at the University of St. Thomas
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jennifer McGuire, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 234,023.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports acquisition of
a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with backscattered electron
detector and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) to support research and
research training at St. Thomas University (UST) in Saint Paul, MN, a non-Ph.D.
granting institution. The instrument allows for micron scale textural and
compositional imaging of geological, synthetic and biological materials and will
support faculty and undergraduate research across multiple departments at UST
including Geology, Biology and Engineering. The investigators will engage
undergraduates through experiential learning in methods of electron microscopy
and plan recruitment of underrepresented students through the UST Minneapolis-
based community college, the Dougherty Family College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SEM will serve faculty and student interdisciplinary research spanning geology,
environmental science, biology, materials science, and engineering. Specific
research applications will include: 1) characterization of the chemistry and
textures of Miocene lacustrine microbialites as possible analogues for
discovering stratigraphic evidence of previous life on Mars or evidence of early
Earth microbial activity; 2) studies of hydrocarbon impacted soil minerals to
better understand how metals mobilize in shallow aquifers; 3) characterization
of taconite mineral aerosols liberated during iron ore mining in Minnesota; and
4) studies of 3D-printed elastomer composite materials that deform under
magnetic fields, with potential uses in robotic musculature, drug delivery,
biomedical implants, and a host of other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.