* 2018606
* MRI: Development of a Shared Mobile Merged-Beams Photoionization Endstation at the University of Montana
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* David Macaluso, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 901,160.00

Merged-beams photoionization instruments combine beams of ions and photons to
study the interaction of light and matter. They are one of science’s most
effective tools for studying such interactions on an atomic scale – allowing us
to peer inside atoms with unparalleled detail. For decades the United States has
led the world in merged-beams science, but the recent decommissioning of our
nation's premier instrument at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory has dropped
the US behind Germany, France, and Japan in this critical area of research
infrastructure. This program intends to restore the United States to global
leadership by producing a next-generation merged-beams instrument capable of
studying light-matter interactions across an exceptionally broad energy range, a
capability no other instrument of its kind can match. This novel capability will
be used to provide critical data to innumerable research fields ranging from
clean energy production to stellar astrophysics to studies into the origins of
life. This instrument will also be the most significant research tool of its
kind in the Montana University System and will play a critical role in the
education and training of generations of student scientists who otherwise lack
access to advanced scientific research and
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the information we gather about
our Universe is carried to us by photons that have interacted with ions. Our
ability to decode this information is based on our understanding of these
interactions, and this understanding depends largely on our ability to study
photo-ion interactions in the laboratory. Of the few instruments capable of such
measurements, merged-beams instruments at synchrotron facilities are
particularly powerful for several well-known reasons, including precisely
tunable energies with high energy resolution, high signal output, and the
ability to determine absolute photoionization cross sections. However, the size
and complexity of traditional merged-beams instruments necessitate their
permanent installation on a single, dedicated beamline which dramatically
restricts the energies they can explore. With this award, the proposers will
miniaturize the merged-beams apparatus into a novel “roll-up” endstation that
can be transported to and used at any synchrotron. This flexibility will allow
it to be deployed on numerous synchrotron beamlines that collectively produce
photons spanning the electromagnetic spectrum. This energy adaptability will
dramatically increase the number and variety of programs that will benefit from
the instrument as it will be capable of measurements from the far infrared to
hard x-rays. This development represents a transformative expansion of merged-
beams science and of laboratory astrophysics in the United States that will be a
vital resource to the community now and well into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by MPS/AST, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and OD/OIA MRI
allotments to AST and Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.