* 2018750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics and Public Policy: Employer Preference for Applicants based on Geographic Location - A Resume Audit
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Brian Kovak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 38,996.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is significant and persistent heterogeneity
in unemployment rates and labor earnings across labor markets in the US,
contributing to overall economic inequality. Developments since the 1990s
indicate that migration has declined even as job postings through websites
expanded access to and awareness of employment opportunities beyond a worker’s
location of origin. This project explores the geographic aspects of online job
postings by exploring access to job opportunities for job seekers who are local
and non-local. The research investigates employer preference for job applicants
by considering whether applicants reside close by the job site or farther away.
The project conducts a correspondence experiment that randomly assigns the
resumes of fictitious candidates with different geographical locations to
employers who are actively seeking employees. The project examines employer
callback rates by considering the distance of candidates from job locations to
understand differential employer preference for employees’ location of origin.
The project further constructs a descriptive and mathematical theory for why
employers may prefer local workers over non-local
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Residents of depressed local labor markets often
incur welfare costs associated with remaining in these areas, and migration in
favor of expected income gains may serve as an important mechanism for
equalization across regions. This research project investigates labor market
opportunities in relation to the geographic origin of job applicants. The
project employs a resume audit study to understand employers’ hiring preferences
in relation to spatial factors by randomly assigning fictitious applicants to
job postings, by reflecting varying locations of residence, level of education,
and gender of applicants. The project develops a theoretical model that
rationalizes potential mechanisms for why employers engage in place-based
discrimination and prefer local applicants. By embedding these mechanisms in the
resume audit research design, the project explores heterogeneous effects of
applicant location on employer hiring preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.