* 2018266
* The Long-run and Multi-generational Effects of Housing and Neighborhood Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Eric Chyn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 394,366.00

The federal government spends more than 40 billion dollars every year on
different housing programs and&lt;br/&gt;policies designed to improve the
housing and neighborhood environments by low-income families. Much of this
effort is directed towards families living in concentrated poverty. Recent
research shows that neighborhood conditions during childhood play an important
role in determining later-life outcomes of low-income children. Yet, there is
little rigorous evidence on which types of housing and neighborhood policies and
interventions are effective in improving long-run and intergenerational economic
and social&lt;br/&gt;outcomes for low-income families. This project uses long
and linked administrative data and experimental methods to study the long-term
and multi-generational effectiveness of different housing and neighborhood
policies targeted toward low income families. The results of this research
project will provide evidence on the type of housing interventions that are
effective in improving the livings standards of poor households as well as study
the multi-generational effects of such housing policies. In addition, it will
provide guidance on crafting and implementing the most effective housing
policies that have long-term positive benefits across generations. In so doing,
the research project could also help establish the US as a global leader in how
to provide efficient housing for the poor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, consists of three studies, investigates the long-term effectiveness of
various public housing programs in improving the living standards of
beneficiaries across generations. The first study uses a randomized housing
assistance wait-list to evaluate two of the largest federal low-income housing
programs: public housing and housing vouchers. The second study leverages newly
linked administrative data to re-examine one of the earliest housing mobility
programs to assess the very long-run effects of housing mobility interventions.
The third study examines the multi-generational effects of three place-based
policies targeted to disadvantaged areas. These studies bring together rigorous
research designs and linked longitudinal administrative data on outcomes such as
earnings, employment, college attendance, financial strain, health, and
mortality to provide new evidence on the effects of a range of housing and
neighborhood policies on the economic opportunities and well-being of low-income
families in the U.S. The results will inform optimal design of federal housing
and neighborhood policies. More broadly, this work will enhance social science
knowledge by investigating how and why some housing and neighborhood policies
create long-run economic opportunity for the children and adults, and others do
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.