* 2018547
* MRI: Acquisition of a Quadrupole/Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer with Ion Mobility Separations for Faculty and Student Research in the Susquehanna Valley
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Douglas Collins, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 391,544.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Bucknell University is acquiring a high-
pressure liquid-chromatograph ion mobility, quadrupole mass spectrometer (HPLC-
IM-Q-TOF) to support Professor Douglas Collins and colleagues Moria Chambers and
Lou Tom from Susquehanna University. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one
of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities
of chemical species embedded in complex samples. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are made into ions and the
ions' masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows the structure
of molecules in complex mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass
spectrometer's analyzer. The ion mobility (IM) component provides a method that
separates gas phase ions based on their interactions with a gas depending on
their masses. Initially, the ions are quickly separated and then they are
introduced into the mass analyzer. This complex instrument is useful to analyze
samples from the human body (proteomics and metabolomics). The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by enabling diverse students to gain
familiarity with this modern analytical technique. The HPLC-IM-Q-TOF is also
used in outreach activities involving students from Susquehanna
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
exploration of supramolecular host-guest chemistry and mechanistic studies of
porous and the formation of crystalline covalent organic frameworks (COF). The
instrumentation is used for controlling peptide secondary structure through
metal interactions. In addition, it provides information to understand
multiphase chemistry of complex organic films. The mass spectrometer is used to
explore the effect of third hand smoke on indoor surfaces and for the study of
photodegradation of pharmaceuticals. This instrument is also used in the
identification of antimicrobials in fireflies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.