* 2018919
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Enhancing SIUC Campus Cyberinfrastructure to Accelerate Data-Driven Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Ning Yang, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,923.00

This project implements a high-performance research and education network
architecture over the existing campus cyberinfrastructure (CI) at Southern
Illinois University Carbondale. The project solves the performance bottleneck of
the current campus core network and establishes new infrastructures enabling
high-throughput data transfer with peer institutions and on-campus private
wireless broadband service. The updated CI enables efficient and high-throughput
data movement needed by fast-growing data-intensive research and education
applications across broad academic domains on campus including Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Physics, Engineering, Plant Biology, Statistics, Computer Science,
etc. The project builds upon a strong partnership among campus information
technology experts, networking faculties, and domain researchers. It also
provides an exceptional opportunity to train the CI workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three tasks: 1) enhance the campus
core network by adding redundancy across 9 core locations with new routers and
10 Gbps links. The updates add the capacity and redundancy needed to offer
reliable and high-performance network service to the whole campus; 2) establish
a Science DMZ and the associated network performance monitoring framework, which
enables researchers to obtain and share data with external hosts a high speed;
and 3) establish a private LTE network dedicated to research and education over
the 3.65 GHz CBRS spectrum. Five data-intensive science and education
applications are prototyped to demonstrate the new CI capabilities and workflows
enabled by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.