* 2018198
* Broadening Institutional Participation in the NSF Advanced Technological Education Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2025
* David Brown, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 3,610,655.00

&lt;p&gt;The National Science Foundations' Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program has supported many U.S. community colleges to collaborate with
industry in developing educational programs for the nation's skilled technical
workforce. This project aims to broaden the diversity of institutions supported
by the ATE program. Specifically, the project aims to catalyze submissions of
ATE proposals from 45 two-year institutions that have not previously or not
recently received ATE funding. The project will mentor and support the colleges
to generate ideas for projects and to develop the infrastructure, knowledge, and
expertise that are needed to submit high-quality proposals to ATE and to other
NSF funding programs. By providing access to well-paying careers as skilled
technicians, growth of community college STEM programs can help increase social
mobility, as well as advance diversity and inclusion in the nation's STEM
enterprise.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This project aims to encourage the participating
community and technical colleges to submit proposals to the ATE program, as a
source of funding to innovate and grow STEM programs in advanced technological
areas. In this effort, the project will engage the college Presidents and Boards
of Trustees, to leverage their influence on the efforts to pursue ATE funding.
The project will support capacity building at each participating college,
assisting the college to develop the infrastructure needed to submit proposals
to NSF and to manage NSF awards. The project team will work with local faculty
and staff to help them identify growth opportunities within their institutions
and region, and to prepare proposals to support these opportunities. Through its
activities, the project team expects to support innovation and growth in
technology areas that might otherwise be neglected, thus supporting existing and
emerging industry needs for a skilled technical workforce. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.&lt;/p&gt;