* 2018067
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Magnetic Property Measurement System for Research and Education in the Paso del Norte Region
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dino Villagran, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 511,819.00

This project will acquire a modern multi-purpose Superconducting QUantum
Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometer with closed cycle cryogen-free
operation with unprecedented sensitivity. Currently, no measurement equipment
with comparable capability is available to researchers in the Paso del Norte
region. The proposed acquisition of this equipment will fill a critical void in
the research infrastructure of El Paso, serving as a shared resource for
measurement needs of many users. The instrument will be vital to shortening the
scientific discovery process and technology development. Advanced magnetic,
electronic, and optical methods developed using this instrument will further
enhance the research infrastructure to provide valuable new capabilities for
scientists and engineers working in three different predominantly Hispanic
Serving Institutes, namely, UTEP, New Mexico State University (NMSU), and New
Mexico Highlands University (NMHU). Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in the research projects will gain hands-on experience in advanced
measurement techniques on a platform widely used in research and development
laboratories around the world. The principal investigators will leverage the
established partnerships with community outreach programs at UTEP, NMSU, and
NMHU to involve high school and Hispanic students in research and educational
activities. The availability of this instrument will help attract excellent
researchers to the universities in the Paso del Norte
region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SQUID magnetometer will enable
groundbreaking and transformative research and training opportunities on a broad
range of material systems, bringing regional capabilities that do not currently
exist within the vicinity of several hundred miles in the Paso del Norte region.
The SQUID magnetometer will be able to characterize the magnetic properties of
minute quantities of magnetic material over a temperature range from 1.8 K to
1000 K, magnetic fields up to 7 Tesla, external light source (180-1100 nm),
pressure range of 0 to 1.3 GPa, and provide new capabilities for measuring
physical properties as a function of temperature, magnetic field, pressure,
illumination, and sample orientation. In addition to superior sensitivity, the
ability to operate this instrument without the loss of liquid helium renders it
a high-throughput, low-cost facility that stands to dramatically amplify long-
term regional scientific output. The instrument will support diverse research
activities including the following: (a) studying the magnetic properties of van
der Waals solids upon in-situ photoexcitation and pressure, (b) characterizing
unprecedented uranium endohedral fullerenes and rare earth compounds with open
shell structures to probe their electronic and magnetic properties, (c)
elucidating the electronic structure and fascinating magnetic characteristics of
Ru-based systems, (d) developing magnetic and multiferroic materials for next
generation thermal applications, (e) investigating the magnetic and
superconducting properties of nanocomposite thin films, (f) examining magnetic
organic frameworks that necessitate in-situ photoexcitation, (g) exploring the
aspects of paleorock magnetism that needs susceptibility and alternating current
options, and (h) investigating high temperature magnetoelectric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.