* 2018497
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph-High Resolution Mass Spectrometer to Characterize Organic Molecules of Environmental and Health Significance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Teng Zeng, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 529,345.00

Naturally occurring and synthetic organic molecules play multifaceted roles in
the ecosystem and human health. Comprehensive characterization of these organic
molecules help advance our scientific understanding of various environmental and
health challenges that impact society. This project supports the acquisition of
a state-of-the-art liquid chromatograph-high resolution mass spectrometer (LC-
HRMS) at Syracuse University (SU). This instrument will enhance research and
training on the measurement of organic molecules in diverse samples and enable
SU investigators and researchers in central New York to tackle multidisciplinary
research questions at the interface of environment and health. This instrument
will also strengthen SU’s curriculum and research training programs and broaden
participation of students from underrepresented groups in scientific inquiries
to foster diversity and inclusion in collaborative research and creative work at
SU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a liquid chromatograph-high resolution
mass spectrometer (LC-HRMS) will bring to Syracuse University (SU) a next-
generation analytical tool to support a broad array of mass spectrometry
applications ranging from contaminant screening and molecular fingerprinting to
structural and quantitative proteomics. This instrument will fill a crucial gap
in organic analytical facilities at SU and accelerate the pace of many ongoing
and planned research projects in priority areas of national interest, such as
water quality and treatment, biogeochemistry, indoor environmental quality,
chemical biology, and bioinspired materials. This instrument will present new
opportunities for SU faculty and students to develop novel screening and
discovery workflows and to engage in new interdisciplinary collaborations with
researchers spanning multiple disciplines and multiple institutions from central
New York and beyond. This instrument will also expose SU students to cutting-
edge mass spectrometry methods via new active-learning course modules and
research training programs and equip them with analytical skills and scientific
thinking needed to further their education. The long-term vision for operating
this instrument as a shared user facility is to pursue leading-edge research and
enhance SU’s core education mission by providing new analytical capabilities and
technical expertise to SU and regional communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.