* 2018355
* MRI: Acquisition of a versatile, integrative AUV system to support cross-disciplinary research and education in coastal and urban waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cecilia McHugh, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 576,427.00

An autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) is a mobile, deployable technology that
enables detailed water column and benthic surveys at high-resolution spatial and
temporal scales. This project supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art,
versatile, light-weight system, the REMUS 100 AUV (Hydroid, Inc.), to conduct
novel, interdisciplinary research, education, and training activities focused on
urban, coastal ecosystems. This sophisticated instrument will be based at the
City University of New York (CUNY) and facilitate numerous partnerships across
campuses, faculty, institutes, and citizen science research efforts to study the
oceanographic processes of NY, NJ, and CT estuaries. Furthermore, integrating
this technology within student programs will have considerable educational
impact. CUNY is the nation's largest urban university with some of the countryâ€™s
most ethnically, culturally, and socially diverse campuses, including both
Minority and Hispanic Serving Institutions. Thus, the AUV will substantially
enhance public engagement and the participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM research and education. Students (undergraduate and graduate), postdocs,
and other researchers will receive training and experience that expands future
employment opportunities and competitiveness while broadening the understanding
of ecosystem processes along urbanized coasts, feedbacks associated with global
change, and improve coastal hazard preparedness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
populated NY and surrounding coastal ecosystems provide abundant natural and
economic resources (shellfish/finfish, tourism, commerce). Yet, urbanization
combined with low elevation makes the region vulnerable to global and
anthropogenic stressors such as climate change, sea level rise, intense storms,
and eutrophication. To prepare for these challenges, it is essential to refine
the understanding and predictive capabilities of associated biogeochemical,
geological, and physical features and processes at fine spatial and temporal
scales. The AUV will enhance studies of the drivers, severity, and duration of
hypoxia and algal blooms, fate and transport of pollutants and contaminants,
sediment movement and benthic habitat, linkages between water optical
characteristics and remote sensing results, and related questions. The REMUS 100
AUV is ideal for the NY regional coast because it is modular, small, easy to
deploy, and designed specifically for shallow, estuarine waters. It enables
detailed spatial coverage of concurrent water quality, sea floor texture, and
optical evaluations which will uniquely enrich data with new observations at
refined scales (beyond discrete water mass sampling) to catalyze novel,
interdisciplinary connections (e.g., sediment transport and pollutant
distribution; remote sensing and water mass sampling). Repeated surveys will
allow researchers to develop, validate, and apply numerical, biogeochemical, and
hydrodynamic data-based models to explain and predict processes and
environmental hazards, thereby increasing coastal ecosystem and community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.