* 2018246
* An Experimental Evaluation of a Matching Market Mechanism
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Damon Jones, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 428,247.00

Over the last three decades, insights from market design have had a tremendous
impact on&lt;br/&gt;matching markets without prices. Economists have helped re-
design the mechanisms for&lt;br/&gt;matching new doctors to hospitals, for
assigning students to schools in a number of large school&lt;br/&gt;districts,
and for optimally matching kidney donors to recipients. Despite the apparent
success of&lt;br/&gt;market design in these markets, there is remarkably little
empirical evidence of the impact of&lt;br/&gt;these reforms on market and match
outcomes. This project will provide the most credible&lt;br/&gt;evidence to date
of the impact of matching using a common market design mechanism on
match&lt;br/&gt;outcomes in the context of matching Army officers to positions.
Each year, over ten thousand&lt;br/&gt;officers apply for transfers to new units
within the military. This project will measure the impact&lt;br/&gt;of using a
common market design algorithm or the status quo mechanism on match
outcomes,&lt;br/&gt;like officers’ retention and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, over ten thousand officers apply
for transfers to new units within the military.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, this
officer to unit matching is implemented manually by the US Army’s
Human&lt;br/&gt;Resources Command (HRC). This project uses a randomized
controlled trial to measure the&lt;br/&gt;impact of replacing the status quo
assignment process with the deferred acceptance algorithm on&lt;br/&gt;match
outcomes, like officers’ retention and performance. Specifically, disjoint
markets, defined&lt;br/&gt;by officers’ rank and specialization (e.g. Captains
in engineering) were randomly assigned to&lt;br/&gt;determine matches using
either the deferred acceptance algorithm or the status quo
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;This will provide the first evidence from a randomized
controlled trial about the impact of a&lt;br/&gt;market design intervention on
match and market outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.