* 2018494
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Enhance Research and Training at Skidmore College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Steven Frey, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 326,712.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Skidmore College is acquiring a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with an automatic sample
changer to support Professor Steven Frey and colleagues Raymond Giguere, Juan
Navea, Aurelia Ball and Anna Brezny. This spectrometer allows research in a
variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of
significant economic importance, as well as permitting study of biologically
relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this
institution and at nearby State University of New York Adirondack Community
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of an NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the
characterization of synthesized manganese(II) complexes used as mimics for
superoxide dismutase. The instrumentation is also used for characterizing and
modulating the small protein homology 3 (SH3) domain binding pathway biophysics.
In addition, it benefits the development of methodology for mechanistic studies
in organic electrochemistry and for exploring organic synthesis focusing on
intramolecular cycloadditions. The spectrometer is also used for studying the
role of pH in the aqueous photochemistry of atmospherically-relevant
photosensitizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.