* 2018984
* MRI: Acquisition of a Closed-Loop PPMS Enhanced for Multidisciplinary Research and Education at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gabriela Petculescu, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 362,772.00

The acquisition of a Physical Property Measurement System provides a multi-user
platform for multidisciplinary materials research at the University of Louisiana
at Lafayette. The work made possible by this unique and robust instrument
enables on-site multidisciplinary research in materials that will be
transformative for the region’s research and educational capacity. The
instrumentation will be used for fundamental studies; new-materials design;
natural and man-made materials characterization; and energy-harvesting materials
development. This instrument acquisition enhances several existing research
programs, provides additional projects for doctoral students in the new Earth
and Energy Science program at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, and
creates the base for summer research sessions for underexposed, underrepresented
high school students from the local region. The activities are envisioned to
make a marked impact in the development of a technologically well-trained and
inclusive workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a DynaCool Physical
Property Measurement System provides a multi-user platform for multidisciplinary
materials research at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. The instrument
employs closed-loop gas circulation with low-noise non-moving-part technology,
with an open architecture that allows for its capabilities to be enhanced with
non-standard probes. The platform’s set of adaptable tools is to be used for
fundamental studies; new-materials design; natural and man-made materials
characterization; energy-storage/harvesting materials development; as well as
hypothesis validation. The probes acquired or developed in-house for the
cryostat provide measurements of magnetic, elastic, electric, and thermal
properties for a wide range of solids. The temperature and magnetic-field
dependence of the measured properties are used to uncover and understand lattice
dynamics, lattice-electron-moment coupling, or energy interplay within the
material studied. Specific activities planned are in the areas of (1) exotic
phenomena in magnetism; (2) novel energy-efficient logic and data-storage
technologies; (3) origin and decomposition of magnetic signals in rocks; (4)
metal additive-manufacturing (AM) qualification and model validation; (5)
magnetoresistance tuning in thin films; (6) systematic data collection for
geological surveys and new AM-materials databases; (7) magnetoelastic coupling
in magnetically-frustrated thermoelectrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.