* 2018807
* MRI: Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) for Multi-disciplinary Research and Student Training at UH
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kenna Rubin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 624,649.00

This award supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art Thermal Ionization
Mass Spectrometer (TIMS) for isotopic measurements applicable to a wide range of
cutting-edge research projects in the Geosciences. The instrument will be
integrated into the existing Isotope Lab of the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa
(UHM). An interdisciplinary group of scientists, ranging from students to senior
researchers affiliated with UHM and other organizations nationwide and
internationally, will use the TIMS for ground-breaking research in Earth and
Ocean sciences, such as volcanic processes and sealevel rise. The modern
technology of the TIMS will allow our users to make measurements at up to an
order of magnitude better precision, while significantly reducing the sample
material needed, and dramatically increasing the research applications that can
be addressed. This instrument will be used to train the next generation of
isotope researchers, continuing a long tradition of successfully educating
students and post-doctoral scholars at UHM. The PIs actively participate in
department efforts to increase STEM participation by underrepresented groups,
offering isotope research training to undergraduates in REU
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modern TIMS will fundamentally transform the
capabilities for isotope research at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. This
instrument will feature two major new types of technology: (1) a suite of
Faraday current amplifiers that allow for the precise and accurate measurement
of small ion beams, and (2) multiple ion counting (MIC) capability. Together
these new features will enable exciting new research opportunities by: (1)
significantly reducing sample sizes, (2) providing the highest achievable
precision for Faraday detector isotopic measurements at a wide range of sample
sizes, and (3) improving temporal resolution (due to smaller sample sizes and
better counting statistics) for U-series isotopic measurements using MIC instead
of inefficient peak jumping on a single ion counter. The instrument will be used
to measure Sr-Nd-Pb radiogenic isotope ratios, Cd stable isotope ratios, and
ratios of the short-lived isotopes of the U decay series. These isotopic systems
will be used to perform cutting-edge research into the magmatic processes and
the internal structure of volcanoes, the composition, structure, and dynamics of
the Earth’s crust and mantle, the chronology of significant events through
recent human and geological history, such as volcanic eruptions and coral
archives of sea level change, and the interaction between ocean water masses and
groundwater pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.