* 2018167
* MRI: Acquisition of an SEM instrumented to conduct in-operando observations of materials performance under external stimuli
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Singer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2023
* USD 673,711.00

With this award funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Case
Western Reserve University will acquire a variable pressure Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM). The instrument features detectors and stages integrated with
external stimuli that will enable in-operando studies of the evolution of
materials, devices, and micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS). This instrument
will enhance the research and teaching capabilities across CWRU, and provide a
unique resource to the surrounding research community. This instrument will be
located in a general user facility, with training and service work managed by
highly qualified staff. Users from across Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, and
the School of Medicine can explore the fundamental materials science necessary
to understand and improve devices ranging from batteries to high-temperature
sensors and actuators to thin-film solar cells. The proposed instrument will
enhance the student learning experience by giving students access to
contemporary imaging techniques useful for research and development across all
material systems. In particular, the variable pressure chamber of the proposed
instrument reduces the sample preparation needed to characterize insulators,
thus allowing undergraduate students to focus on the learning objective of the
laboratory course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment provides a method to
directly observe dynamic mechanisms for the development of models of behaviors
and advance our scientific understanding in a broad range of materials research
problems. Such unprecedented experiments will lead to new fundamental insights
for the development and testing of mechanistically-informed theories, and from
them, new design rules and guidelines for rational engineering of materials and
devices. In particular, it will enable mechanisms of interface evolution in
optoelectronic devices; electrochemical reactions; and microstructural evolution
under elevated-temperature conditions in material systems for energy generation.
The capability to image insulator material without conductive coating provides a
new opportunity to the CWRU materials research community, to explore mechanisms
of material synthesis and microstructural evolution that are not currently
possible with existing SEM equipment. In particular, understanding how the
interfaces of layered and architectured polymer materials control lifetime
performance for optoelectronic and energy storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.