* 2018422
* MRI: Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscope Digital Camera
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Ranjit Koodali, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 139,860.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs as well as the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The University of South Dakota is
acquiring a digital camera for a transmission electron microscope (TEM) to
support Professor James Hoefelmeyer and colleagues Ranjit Koodali, Chaoyang
Jiang, Grigoriy Sereda and Aravind Baride. In general, a TEM sends a beam of
electrons through a thin layer of material. The electron beam interacts with the
substance to produce a visual image, similar to a microscope. The images are
recorded by a camera and they are important for research on the chemical
properties of materials. The images reveal details of the structure, such as
size and shape of a nanoparticle or a protein. This information helps
researchers understand the material's properties and improve them. The
acquisition enhances the training of undergraduates in research. This instrument
is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students at this institution and nearby universities
such as South Dakota State University, Nebraska Indian Community College (NICC,
in South Sioux City, Macy and Santee, NE) and Red Cloud Indian
School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award significantly increases the capabilities
and gives a new life to a heavily used transmission electron microscope. The
award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially
impacts studies controlling and characterizing plasmonic nanomaterials for
surface enhanced Raman scattering and anti-counterfeiting applications. The
instrumentation is also used for studying photocatalytic degradation of aqueous
pollutants using nanoporous carbon materials and investigating lanthanide-doped
NaYF4 (sodium ytrium tetrafluoride) upconversion nanocrystals for anti-
counterfeiting applications. In addition, it provides information for exploring
the use of solar fuels catalysis, fuel cells, and lithium ion batteries. The
instrumentation is also used to identify antimicrobial coatings prepared by
functionalized multilayered microparticles of
graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.