* 2018201
* MRI: Acquisition of inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer for research and education uses in water, energy, and environmental sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Lixin Jin, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 119,365.00

This award will provide The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) with an
inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer, an instrument capable
of producing data on the relative abundance of chemical elements in many types
of samples. The instrument and the data produced will support a range of on-
going and planned projects ranging from study of the nature and origin of saline
groundwater, the origin and sourcing of dust, the cycling of nutrients in soils,
and the quality of water treated through desalination and other methods to
improve water quality. The instrument will also be used as a training tool for
students from a broad range of backgrounds to investigate research questions in
the Paso del Norte region and surrounding areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from
this grant will be used to acquire an inductively coupled plasma-optical
emission spectrometer, with add-ons to allow for measurement in the far
ultraviolet (UV) allowing for the analysis of halogens. The instrument will be
used to identify and quantify the elemental composition of: 1) water samples; 2)
soil and rock leachates; and 3) digestions of non-liquid biological and
geological materials. The instrument will enable and expand diverse research and
training in Earth, biological, and environmental sciences and civil engineering,
as well as workforce training and scholastic development at The University of
Texas at El Paso. The instrument (Horiba Ultima Expert) and nitrogen generator
(Peak Scientific NG5000A) are ideal for elemental quantification in liquid
samples from a broad range of matrixes, including the analysis of elements in
very saline solutions corresponding to brines (up to and exceeding 300,000 mg/L
total dissolved solids) which are found in sedimentary basins in the region. The
new instrument will be used to produce data for studies on: 1) aqueous
geochemistry in arid and saline systems; 2) dryland element cycling; and 3)
evaluation and testing of brackish and saline water treatment methods. Access to
such an instrument will advance continuing research on soil, water, and air
quality in light of evolving agricultural, climatic, and land-use conditions.
Given relative simplicity of sample operation and robust design of inductively
coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometers, instrument acquisition will allow
for direct-use experience and data utilization in student projects and
coursework at both the graduate and undergraduate level. The instrument will be
integrated in undergraduate research provides an exceptional training and
experiences for students at UTEP, a Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.