* 2018520
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-Free Physical Property Measurement System for Research and Education at Ohio University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Eric Stinaff, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 422,783.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) –an automated multi-
functional instrument for electrical, magnetic, and optical measurements on
semiconductors, superconductors, organic thin films, and low dimensional
materials. This instrument supports rapidly expanding research activity in the
field of nano-science, including 2D materials as well as flexible electronics
and device engineering at Ohio University. Furthermore, the training and
education afforded by this equipment has very significant societal implications
and is expected to make significant contributions toward the development of a
technically-educated workforce in the Appalachian corner of the State of Ohio.
The cross-cutting nature of this equipment reinforces research and education
endeavors locally and fosters new research directions in several areas of basic
science and applied nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI award
supports the acquisition of a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement
System (PPMS) – an open architecture and automated multi-functional instrument
for electrical, magnetic, and optical measurements The broad spectrum of
research projects directly impacted by the PPMS includes the growth and
characterization of i) novel nanomaterials and composites, ii) established and
emerging 2D materials and heterostructures, iii) printed and deposited thin
films of polymers and composites, iv) magnetic nanoparticles, v) superconducting
materials and structures, and vi) carbon-based composite materials. These
projects sustain unique and advanced research programs in south-eastern Ohio by
enabling the exploration of new materials and physical effects. By doing so, the
projects make possible progress toward developing low-cost materials, with
engineered properties, that could enable a range of novel device technologies
critical to modern electronics and consumer
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.