* 2018184
* MRI: Acquisition of a Movement Tracking System to Explore Embodiment and Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Betsy Sanders, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 267,970.00

A multidisciplinary research team will acquire a motion capture system capable
of precisely tracking human body movements while simultaneously recording brain
activity and eye movements. The equipment will provide detailed insight into the
nervous system’s role in planning and generating movements, as well as how the
human mind perceives its own body. Scientists with expertise spanning
psychology, neuroscience, computer science, rehabilitation engineering, and
linguistics will use the system to answer a range of foundational research
questions focusing on how cognitive processes are dynamically linked with motor
action. The research will drive fundamental advances in low-cost virtual reality
technologies, neurorehabilitation approaches for patients with motor deficits,
and assistive frameworks for supporting age-related changes in attention. The
equipment will also support cross-disciplinary educational and training
opportunities for K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, as well as work in
social cognition biases, human-robot interaction, workplace prejudice, and
interactive art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 36-camera motion capture system with
64-channel wireless EEG and wireless eye tracking will provide detailed
measurements of the moving body, including joint trajectories, motor path
efficiencies, and timing information. The movement information is synchronized
with brain activity recordings captured with a non-invasive wearable headcap
using wireless electroencephalography (EEG) technology. EEG measures changes in
electrical activity across the skull which indicate changes in brain activity
levels. Planned research studies involve untethered movements to enable
exploration of the concept of embodiment, which is the process by which a person
develops a sense of self over an object. The researchers will explore embodiment
of prosthetic limbs by amputees and embodiment of virtual bodies by users of
virtual reality systems. Precise tracking of finger and mouth movements will
enable the study of gestures during speech, and how they relate to the concept
of embodiment, with an emphasis on how gestured speech changes with age-related
declines in hearing and attention. The work will also describe how problems with
embodiment lead to phantom limb pain, a pain syndrome experienced by a majority
of people with amputations. The research enabled by this equipment will
transform scientists’ understanding of how the brain and body interact to
generate smooth and effective movements. Long-term impacts will fuel
technological advances in human-computer interfaces, neurorehabilitation
techniques, attentional-deficiency countermeasures, and virtual reality
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.