* 2018173
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH IN DRMS Collective Response to Scarcity: How the Resource Environment Shapes Social Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Kariyushi Rao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 39,191.00

The success or failure of an organization hinges on its ability to effectively
process information. Effective information processing requires people to acquire
information themselves and to communicate with one another. The communication
patterns that emerge from people’s choices about when, and with whom, to
communicate have direct consequences for the speed at which information moves
around an organization, and the validity of that information. These processes
and factors are especially important for organizations responding to causal
shocks or crises in their resource environments (e.g., financial actors facing
the 2008 Housing Market Crash, all citizens facing the COVID-19
Pandemic).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
Grant (DDRIG) explores the communication networks that emerge among people
reacting to changes in their resource environment. We apply an experimental
method plus agent-based modeling to zero-in on the causal relationship between
resource availability and communication network structure. Our overarching
hypothesis is that when resources become increasingly scarce, people connect
with fewer communication partners, and increase their rate of communication with
each partner. Thus, social networks will shrink in size and become more densely
connected in response to resource scarcity. The reverse pattern of communication
occurs in times of abundance. We also assess the adaptive efficacy of these
collective communication strategies in response to resource shocks to draw
conclusions that will be helpful in designing and managing organizational
responses to crises. The results of this investigation will help us understand,
and anticipate, the way environmental shocks – like an economic recession or
pandemic – affect an organization’s ability to effectively manage
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.