* 2018008
* MRI: Development of Layered Quantum Materials Synthesis Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* David Goldhaber-Gordon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 637,898.00

Engineering electronic materials with atomic precision will enable construction
of tailored quantum devices exhibiting unique electronic, magnetic and optical
properties, with the potential to impact fields ranging from quantum information
science to next-generation computing and clean energy technologies. Atomically
precise vertical structures can be formed by stacking different atomically-thin
materials with diverse characteristics. The properties of individual layers, and
their emergent interactions, show great promise for fundamental science and
future technologies. To date, this process has been explored at the artisanal
scale and has generated a wealth of scientific discoveries. However, the
scalable construction of such heterostructures has remained a challenge, with
individual stacks often built up though painstakingly manual processes with
significant interfacial contamination. This project overcomes these challenges
and enables scalable production of atomically-resolved heterostructures by
developing an automated robotic platform to assemble layer materials under
ultra-high vacuum conditions, resulting in a tool for production of materials
with unprecedented complexity and interfacial cleanliness. Once developed, this
system will be housed adjacent to the Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, where
it will serve as a shared tool for Stanford researchers across a diverse
interdisciplinary community. Additionally, this project will enhance
undergraduate and graduate education through advanced coursework and research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports development of a novel
instrument to automate the fabrication of designer quantum materials in the form
of layered van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures. Existing processes which
exclusively utilize exfoliated materials are limited by the stochastic nature of
the samples, resulting in low throughput and geometric constraints on the
resulting heterostructure. In contrast, this project utilizes both exfoliated
and chemical vapor deposition (CVD)/molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)-grown source
materials for enhanced throughput and improved sample size. The instrument
employs interconnected ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chambers to maintain atomically
pristine surfaces, and uses precision nanopositioning stages, microstructured
adhesive effectors, an optical microscope, and computer vision algorithms to
enable user-friendly, high-throughput fabrication and deposition onto arbitrary
substrates. The UHV sample preparation chamber and vacuum suitcase facilitate
inert sample processing, enabling study of air-sensitive 2D materials.
Integrated in-situ UHV-CVD growth of large area, single-crystal graphene and hBN
provide access to pristine samples which are critical to the investigation of
vdW heterostructures with controlled rotational alignment. This instrument
enables the study of diverse topics in condensed matter physics and materials
science, including engineered strongly correlated phases in twisted many-layer
structures, emergent topological superconductivity at heterointerfaces, and
precisely localized studies of single-defect quantum devices. The five-year
development project for this instrument enables a diverse team of Stanford
researchers to explore these phenomena, and provides a nucleation point for
collaboration across academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.