* 2018510
* MRI:  The Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer to Enhance Research and Training at South Carolina Undergraduate Institutions in the Upstate
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jason Rawlings, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 319,745.00

An award is made to Furman University to support the acquisition of a flow
cytometer to enhance research and training in the South Carolina Upstate. Flow
cytometry is a powerful tool for the simultaneous analysis of multiple
biological and/or chemical targets within cells or similarly sized objects. It
possesses the speed, sensitivity, and robustness to analyze rare populations
within large, heterogeneous samples, making it a critical analytical tool that
will be used in faculty-led, student-centered research in the Biology,
Chemistry, and Neuroscience programs at Furman, a research-active Primarily
Undergraduate Institution (PUI). In addition, faculty and student research
efforts at other regional PUIs will benefit from access to this equipment.
Acquisition of the flow cytometer will enable the high-impact engagement of at
least 50 students and faculty across the three participating institutions each
year. Through multiple active NSF summer research programs, additional faculty
and students from regional PUIs, HBCUs, two-year colleges, and first generation-
serving institutions will directly benefit from access to the instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty-led research programs serve as the cornerstone of
Furmanâ€™s vision of engaged learning for undergraduates in the sciences.
Acquisition of the flow cytometer will enable diverse research including (1)
activation-induced chromatin decondensation in cells of the lymphocyte lineage;
(2) polydiacetylene liposomes as sensors and imaging agents; (3) effects of
reactive oxygen species fungi; (4) the development of novel PI3K inhibitors; (5)
sex differences in the effects of high fat diet; (6) RNA binding proteins; and
(7) stem cells biology. Faculty are committed to dissemination of their findings
in presentations at national conferences and publications that include
undergraduate co-authors in respected peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.