* 2018357
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Histological and elemental markers of reproductive physiology in mineralized hard tissues
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Timothy Bromage, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 30,773.00

The human pattern of growth, development, reproduction and aging is unusual
compared to that of our closest living primate relatives and distinctive among
primates as a whole. Humans have exceptionally long lifespans, closely spaced
births, an extended period of juvenile dependence and support in raising
offspring by post-reproductive females. These unique life history traits have
been linked to social (shared infant care) and cognitive (e.g. innovativeness)
traits observed in modern humans. This doctoral dissertation research project
will use state-of-the-art microscopy and chemical methods to advance current
knowledge about how modern human life history evolved, by analyzing biological
‘histories’ in the fossilized remains of our extinct relatives. The study
findings may inform clinical research on hard tissue diseases associated with
age, reproduction and/or metabolic conditions. This project will involve the
training of minority undergraduate students at NYU in the processes of lab work
and data collection. The outcomes of this research will be presented to a wider
audience through museum outreach activities and international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use cutting-edge
technologies to investigate changes in bone and teeth related to reproductive
physiology. Bones and teeth record physiologically impactful events affecting
the organism in the form of altered growth-layers. The investigator will
generate histological thin sections to examine these growth layers using both
optical and electron microscopy. In addition, complete elemental analysis of the
growth layers will be carried out and a library of “elemental fingerprints” of
the various types of events (pregnancy, menopause, sexual maturity, as well as
illnesses and other physiological stressors) will be constructed. Finally, since
the fossil remains of our extinct relatives cannot be physically sectioned for
preservation reasons, the project will utilize extremely high-energy and high-
resolution microtomography (phase-contrast synchrotron radiation computed micro-
tomography) to gain access to the internal structure of teeth in a non-
destructive way. The methods developed in this project will lay the groundwork
for future application to the hominin fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.