* 2018869
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Long-Run Effects of School Desegregation on Political and Social Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jorg Spenkuch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 103,032.00

Busing was one of the two main ways through which public schools were
desegregated in the post-Civil Rights era. While the effects of busing on
educational outcomes have been studied, not much is known about the long term
effects of busing on political ideology and social interactions. This research
project will use historical data combined with a large survey data to study the
long-run effects of busing on political, ideology, and racial attitudes of those
who actually experienced busing. This study uses data from the “Louisville
Experiment” in which a lottery system was used to assign some white students to
be bused to minority schools for two years while others were bused for one year
with others not being bused at al. The researchers use this variation is busing
assignment across different cohorts and between groups of students to study the
effects of busing on political attitudes. This research results will provide a
broader understanding of the effects of busing and its unintended effects
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project combines
archival data, a large survey data, and a difference-in-difference estimation
strategy to estimate the causal impact of being bused on political preferences
forty-five years later using a natural experiment from the mid-1970s in
Louisville, KY. The “Louisville Experiment” assigned students to be bused at
different ages based on the first letter of their last name. For the initial
cohorts of whites, this resulted in some students being assigned to two years of
busing while others received only one year or no busing. Using this variation
across cohorts and between groups of students with different last names, the
research project will estimate the long-run causal impact of busing on political
preferences and attitudes. Specifically, the PIs use difference-in-difference
methods to estimate the causal effects of busing on partisanship, voter turn-
out, and political donations. The research will also investigate the effects of
busing on racial attitudes and support for income support programs. The results
of this research will provide a better understanding of the long-term broader
impacts of integration programs. It could inform policies to improve racial
integration and probably improve social harmony.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.