* 2018319
* MRI: Acquisition of a near Ambient Pressure X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Apparatus for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 542,486.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Central Florida is
acquiring an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with ambient temperature
capabilities to support Professor William Kaden and colleagues Sudipta Seal,
Laurene Tetard, Xiaofeng Feng and Fudong Liu. This spectrometer operates at near
ambient pressure unlike a conventional XPS which studies samples in a high
vacuum. This enables characterization of materials involving all three phases of
matter (solid, liquid, gas) in pressures as high as several tenths of an
atmosphere. This capability greatly expands the classes of materials which can
be investigated. An example is a project to improve a catalyst surface employed
in hydrogenation reactions used to convert a feedstock into a more valuable
product. Basically, XPS spectra are produced by irradiating the specimen with
X-rays with sufficient energy to eject electrons. The kinetic energy of the
electrons is measured. This provides information on the binding energy of the
electron. These data can be related to the chemical elements in the sample and
effects from their bonding environment. Such experiments assist characterization
of the surface of the materials under study and can lead to improvement in their
properties. The instrument is employed in research projects undertaken by
undergraduate and graduate students preparing them for the modern workplace. It
is incorporated into several programs in place to train and recruit
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research enabled is directed
at investigating gas-solid, liquid-solid, and gas-liquid interfaces under
environmental conditions relevant for characterizations in situ (in the same
place the phenomenon is occurring without isolating it from other systems or
altering the original conditions of the test). The XPS is employed to
dynamically identify surface interactions in heterogeneously catalyzed reactions
as they occur commonly referred to as operando conditions. The instrumentation
is used to characterize liquid-gas interfaces to help understand wet-chemical
processes on resultant catalytic properties. In addition, it aids in the
characterization of liquid-solid interfaces under varied conditions. The
spectrometer is also utilized to investigate delicate biological samples which
otherwise would be destroyed if the most common XPS technique that employs
ultrahigh vacuum is used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.