* 2018623
* Finance, Risk-Taking and Growth: Evidence from New U.S. Firm-Level Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 266,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are
vital contributors to an economy. These companies are not listed, have less than
500 employees and account for more than 90 percent of all the U.S. employer
firms. Despite their importance, there is limited knowledge about financing and
capital structure of these firms. SMEs are considered to be dependent on bank
loans for their largest source of financing based on survey data but there is
limited knowledge on financing channels of these firms from administrative data.
As SMEs are subject to different financial constraints than public firms,
financing and investment decisions of these firms have important implications
for economic growth and investment at the aggregate level. This research
provides a coherent roadmap for advancing the development of firm-level data
sets involving private and public firms’ real and financial outcomes. The
project will use new data to bring evidence on firm-level financial constraints
and implications of these for aggregate economic outcomes. The project has
broader impact in understanding the role of SMEs in the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on econometric analyses of
firm dynamics, financial frictions and growth. These types of analyses are
important since models of financial frictions with firm heterogeneity are
increasingly being embedded into full scale dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium models that inform monetary policy. Empirical evidence is lacking on
such models due to unavailability of financial data on small private firms. The
models rely on full firm size distribution and lack of data on small firms’
financing patterns hinders taking these models to the data. Small firms are
important for the aggregate outcomes. This project advances the knowledge in
this area by linking granular firm level data on public and private firms and by
exploring the implications of financing and investment decisions on economic
outcomes for a large set of firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.