* 2018172
* I-Corps:  Antimicrobial technologies for treatment of urban storm, industrial, and HVAC waters
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Gregory O'Mullan, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of environmentally friendly antimicrobial porous media. Current
methods of controlling microbes, especially bacterial levels in industrial
process waters such as HVAC and e-coating of vehicles, result in significant
dispersal of chemical biocides and low rates of water recycling. Another area of
concern is stormwater where large surges of flow are commonly not treated. As a
result, recreational waterways can become impaired and beaches closed due to
microbial contamination. Development of methods consuming minimal chemicals and
energy can potentially improve industrial process efficiency, resulting in
significant savings due to lower water and biocide consumption, with the further
benefit of reducing the exposure of workers and the downstream environment to
these toxic chemicals. In stormwater applications, the inexpensive media can be
coupled to existing sediment removal systems where gravity enables
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores translation of a
high-permeability durable porous media where biocides are affixed rather than
released, enabling significant reductions in microbial loads. A novel technology
can incorporate biocides into marine coatings, and, through chemical
modification, at the surface of plastics. Such materials may significantly
reduce microbial concentrations through lysing of bacteria present in water
streams during passage through the media. The treatment occurs rapidly, with
only seconds of exposure to the media required, while high levels of
antimicrobial performance remain even after large volumes (e.g., tens of
thousands of pore-volumes) of water are flushed through the
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.