* 2018776
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope with integrated EBSD, EDS, and CL
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Hongtao Shi, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 439,132.00

An integrated Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with multiple sensor capability
and a carbon coater for sample preparation will be acquired at Sonoma State
University (SSU). This SEM system will 1) increase the quality and diversity of
data that will be collected and analyzed, 2) increase speed of data collection
facilitating the facultyâ€™s ability to establish collaborative relationships, 3)
support existing curricular infrastructure and training of the next generation
of scientists using modern technology and data acquisition techniques, 4)
increase student diversity within the STEM disciplines, 5) facilitate and
maintain industry partnerships and internship opportunities for students, and 6)
foster an academically diverse user-base for electron microscopy at SSU. The
proposed SEM and associated detectors have the potential to significantly impact
15 courses at SSU and approximately 500 student per year. In addition to the
classroom environment, many of our science majors become involved in independent
research as a capstone experience, and many of those students utilize the SEM
facilities as part of their research. SSU is committed to educating persons of
all backgrounds and is dedicated to increasing gender and ethnic diversity in
the sciences. SSU is a federally recognized Hispanic-Serving Institution with an
undergraduate population that is 33% Hispanic. This population is historically
underrepresented in the STEM disciplines; however, having access to hands-on
research opportunities with state-of-the-art equipment has proven to be an
effective technique for recruiting underrepresented populations into
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the proposed SEM microanalysis
system will greatly increase the quality and scope of the research agendas of
the five investigators from the Geology, Physics, and Chemistry Departments, as
well as faculty members from other departments at SSU (e.g., Biology,
Anthropology, Geography, and Engineering Sciences). Specific research questions
facilitated by this instrument include: 1) the long-term history of fault
systems, 2) mechanisms of mountain building, 3) plate tectonic reconstructions,
4) self-assembly of nano-materials, 5) nano-sensor development, and 6)
investigation into the properties of magnetic systems exhibiting spin
frustration, which can be used to create all-magnetic computer architectures.
This instrument expands the type of scientific questions that we can address and
facilitates cross-disciplinary research within the university and with our
collaborating institutions. The current system at SSU cannot be upgraded and has
become unreliable/non-functioning in the past few years; it is frequently out of
commission during repairs and no longer produces the quality of data necessary
for conducting research. In addition to standard secondary electron imaging
capabilities, Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectrometry (EDS), Electron Backscatter
Diffraction (EBSD), and Cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging capabilities are
critical for SSU faculty research activities. Our research needs outstrip this
SEM system because we need: 1) a faster, more sensitive SEM/EBSD system that can
automate data acquisition schemes for large-area mapping, 2) an SEM/EDS system
with increased resolution to resolve elemental distributions of nano-structures,
3) an integrated CL detector for imaging zoning in crystals associated with
detrital zircon geochronology analyses, 4) a larger chamber for the analysis of
geological materials, 5) integrated safety features to avoid sample-instrument
collisions when training novice users, 6) an upgradable system that integrates
with the continually evolving hardware and software industry and 7) to increase
reliability for more dependable integration into curricular and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.