* 2018414
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer to Support Research from Fundamental Chemistry to Functional Materials and Biomedical Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Duy Hua, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 279,998.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs as well as the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Kansas State University is acquiring a
single crystal X-ray diffractometer to support Professor Christer Aakeroy and
colleagues Duy Hua and Stefan Bossmann. In general, an X-ray diffractometer
allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure
of a molecule, including bond distances and angles. A diffractometer also
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The research may impact many areas, including
organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry as
well other departments at this institution. The science enabled by this
instrument has the potential to impact society through the development of new
materials to address environmental pollution and new catalysts to improve the
synthesis of commodity and industrial chemicals. In addition, the
instrumentation provides direct research experience to local students and serves
as a resource to Kansas Wesleyan University and the University of Kansas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray diffractometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. The science enabled by this
instrument provides relevant societal benefits through the determination of
structures of small molecules with biomedical implications and starting
materials for the conversion of modifiable-metal-organic frameworks into
biomimetic catalytically functional materials. The instrumentation is used to
investigate chalcogen bonds and explore regiochemistry of carbon-hydrogen bond
oxidation of acyclic alkanes. In addition, researchers benefit from the ability
to examine small-molecule and nutrient and contaminant transformations in soil.
The diffractometer is also used to understand molecular mechanisms of dye-
decolorizing peroxidases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.