* 2018714
* RAPID:  Assessing Thermal and Chemical Response of Hot-springs to Puerto Rico’s Continuing 2020 Seismic Sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Kenneth Hughes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,845.00

The temperature and discharge of the Coamo hot springs in Puerto Rico have
rapidly changed in response to ongoing seismic activity. Groundwater systems are
often affected by earthquakes as networks of fractures can be opened, closed, or
rearranged during ground motion. Understanding any links between seismic
activity and changes to groundwater is increasingly important for managing water
resources, wastewater storage/injection, and assessing flooding hazards. This
project will support 2-3 undergraduate students and one graduate student to
continuously monitor the site and collect daily water samples for chemical
analyses. These students will also be provided the opportunity to present their
findings at a national conference. The results of this study, combined with
information about the local geology, will also be used to create educational
outreach materials to be provided to the public at the hot springs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a combined dataset of seismic
records, temperature, water chemistry, and discharge to better understand the
hydrologic changes to the Coamo hot springs in response to an ongoing seismic
sequence on a nearby but separate fault system. To do this, the PIs will
generate a year-long continuous dataset of temperature, discharge, and water
chemistry (cations, anions, trace metals, δD, and δ18O) of the hot springs
during the ongoing seismic sequence. Temperature measurements will be recorded
every minute, water samples will be collected daily, and discharge will be
measured daily. These data will be used with contemporaneous seismic data to
explore both the short- and long-term hydrologic response to seismic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.