* 2018001
* Insufficient Sleep and Dietary Choices: An Ecologically Valid Examination of the Decision Foundations of Eating Behaviors when Sleep Restricted.
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Sean Drummond, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2023
* USD 406,628.00

The dual problems of insufficient sleep and obesity in the U.S. both now effect
more than one-third of all adults. Unhealthy dietary choices, obesity, and poor
sleep often occur together, but it is difficult to understand the intricacies of
these connections from naturally occurring data. Such data are typically present
with many other confounding factors such that determining whether poor sleep
impacts dietary choice or vice versa is a challenge. This project is aimed at
improving our understanding of the impact of insufficient sleep on dietary
choice. To do this, we will experimentally manipulate the level of sleep
experienced in one’s home environment in a sample of young adults. A key benefit
of this study is that we will be able to more confidently determine causation
from sleep levels to dietary choices and decision making because the
experimental environment varies participant sleep levels in a controlled manner.
Also, the fact that participants undergo the sleep treatment in their home
environment means their altered sleep levels are done at a level and in an
environment that closely mimics real life. For example, sleep restriction is not
total sleep deprivation in our study, but rather we induce chronic partial sleep
restriction to the insufficient-sleep levels experienced by a large portion of
the U.S. population. This helps ensure better transferability of our results to
the real-world. The results learned from this project will serve public interest
in furthering our understanding of the links between sleep and dietary choice,
and they can help inform interventions designed to improve well-being in the key
areas of sleep health and dietary choice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insufficient
sleep and poor dietary habits are serious societal concerns that impact tens of
millions of adults (not to mention adolescents) across the globe. In the U.S.
alone, 35% of adults reported short sleep duration of &lt; 7 hrs/night (2014
data), and over 39% of U.S. adults were considered obese (2015-2016 data).
Recent research has shown that poor sleep habits often coexist with unhealthy
dietary choices, but it is often difficult in field data to identify causal
links or determine the underlying mechanisms between sleep and dietary choices.
The goal of this project is to systematically examine how sleep restriction
affects choices of young adults in decision tasks relevant to dietary choice,
such as information selection, impulse control, and present-bias. We will do
this using a 3-week validated at-home sleep restriction protocol for sleep level
manipulation within which each participant will undergo a full week of well-
rested (WR) and a full week of sleep restricted (SR) sleep levels, thus allowing
us to compare each participant’s behavior when SR to that same participant’s
baseline WR behaviors and food choices. Additionally, participants will keep
daily food records that will allow analysis of objective outcomes from actual
dietary choices, and decision making assessments following each sleep treatment
week will provide data in key building block task domains in the face of SR. The
unique protocol will generate data on SR and dietary choice highly relevant to a
large segment of the population. The tasks selected will produce simple outcome
measures that allow testing of key hypotheses and will help identify underlying
causal mechanisms responsible for unhealthy dietary choice when sleep
restricted. This project is uniquely interdisciplinary (behavioral economics,
cognitive neuroscience/psychology, and sleep psychology), which will serve the
interests of advancing knowledge across different
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.