* 2018806
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer as a Regional Resource for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Charles Garner, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 251,990.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Memphis is acquiring a
single crystal X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper source to support
Professors Xuan Zhao, Charles Garner, Timothy Brewster, Kensha Clark, as well as
other colleagues. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry, biochemistry and other engineering fields at this
institution. In addition, the diffractometer has broad impact on teaching and
training, outreach activities, and undergraduate research at the University of
Memphis as well as regional partners from primarily undergraduate institutions
(PUIs) such as those from Arkansas State University, University of Central
Arkansas and Rhodes College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray
diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The
science enabled by this instrument provides relevant societal benefits through
the development of catalysts with redox-active ligands for activation of small
molecules such as hydrogen and carbon dioxide which improve the synthesis of
commodity and industrial chemicals. The instrumentation is also used for the
characterization of transition metal-based frustrated Lewis pairs for activation
and catalytic transformations involving small molecules like methane, and in the
exploration of fundamental properties of binuclear metal complexes used for
electron-transfer and cooperative catalysis reactions. In addition, it benefits
preparation of catalysts for alkene hydrogenation reactions, and the structural
characterization of catalytic intermediates during hydrogen production. The
diffractometer is also used to characterize the structural conformations of
biologically active molecules, and for studying host-guest chemistry of cyclic
oligo-lactic acid with metal ions of biological
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.