* 2018704
* Collaborative Research: Individual and Team Behavior in Indefinitely Repeated Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* John Kagel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 240,871.00

This award funds research using lab experiments to test economic theories about
how decision makers interact when the end date of the interactions is uncertain.
General Motors competing with Ford and Chrysler is an example of an indefinitely
repeated game. “Game” is the technical term in the economics literature for
these repeated interactions. This research studies behavior of both individuals
and teams of individuals. Most research in this area - theoretical, empirical,
and experimental - studies individuals. However, interactions outside the
laboratory often involve groups of individuals in a team. Past research shows
that economic behavior of individuals can be quite different from the economic
behavior of teams. For example, individuals generally follow through on promises
to cooperate in short term economic interactions, improving economic welfare.
However, teams often act in a self-beneficial manner, necessitating legal
penalties to improve welfare. This project will help us understand the
differences between teams and individuals in repeated economic interactions. The
research method will allow teams to coordinate their actions through written or
verbal communication. The research team will analyze these communications as
well as actions chose during the experiment. Analyzing communications will
provide new insights into what motivates behavior and can identify elements of
behavior that had not previously been considered. The results of the project
will help managers, policymakers, and citizens understand the effects of working
in teams rather than as individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of
particular goals for the new research. Game theorists distinguish between
perfect and imperfect monitoring. With perfect monitoring, agents can tell what
others have done with certainty, but with imperfect monitoring, they are not
certain what others have done. The investigators will compare teams with
individuals in indefinitely repeated prisoner dilemma (IRPD) games with
imperfect monitoring. They are particularly interested in contrasting the
effects of team play between perfect and imperfect monitoring, and using the
team discussions to help understand how they think about changes in their
opponent’s action given that they cannot distinguish between a deliberate choice
and random noise, which is inherent in a number of economic interactions. A
second project will compare play in IRPD games where continuation probabilities
vary across stage games to the standard case with fixed expected end to the
interactions. It is clear that discount rates vary over time outside the lab,
changing the dynamic incentives agents face. Will subjects account for the
change in dynamic incentives and will these changes go beyond what can be
explained by the changing dynamic incentives? Previous results suggest that
cooperation may emerge for continuation probabilities that normally produce
little cooperation. A third project will explore the use of machine learning
algorithms to gain greater insights into behavior from the team discussions.
There is a growing literature on modern text analysis that may add substantially
to what we learn from the team discussions. A fourth project will compare
outcomes between individuals and teams in public good games with both monetary
punishment and sanctioning of others choices (nonmonetary punishment). The goal
here is to determine whether differences between teams and individuals observed
in similar settings extend to public good provision for both monetary and non-
monetary punishment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.