* 2018936
* CC* Compute: Compute Cluster for Computational Sciences at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center â€“ New Orleans (LSUHSC-NO)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Carmen Canavier, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,458.00

This project at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans
(LSUHSC-NO) constructs a scalable 26-node high-performance computing cluster
(HPC) named Tigerfish. Tigerfish provides LSUHSC-NO researchers with
uninterrupted, local access to HPC resources to enable and accelerate their
biomedical research. The project provides training to new and existing HPC users
to ease their transition to utilizing both Tigerfish and other nationally
available HPC resources to meet increasing computational needs of their
research. Tigerfish supports research and education within multiple disciplines
at LSUHSC-NO including Bioinformatics, Biostatistics, Computational Biology,
Genetics, Computational Genomics, Microbiology, Neurology, and Proteomics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader impacts for the community
including training the next generation of researchers as a part of the Tiger
Scholars program which provides high-school students with the opportunity to be
exposed to the capabilities of HPC in research. Tigerfish is available as a
computing resource supporting a high school, undergraduate, and
postbaccalaureate student summer research program that provides summer research
experiences to students coming to study at LSUHSC-NO from various parts of the
country. Tigerfish provides an essential platform for our outreach to regional
historically black colleges and universities which lack their own HPC resources
for intensive computing. The recently launched Bioinformatics and Genomics
program is able to access Tigerfish as an essential resource for their highly
intensive computational needs and serves as a resource for the newly established
MS Biomedical Sciences-Bioinformatics Track program. Finally, Tigerfish
resources are shared with Open Science Grid for LSUHSC-NO to play its part in
making HPC more accessible nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.