* 2018127
* I-Corps:  Optimization-driven high-density air traffic management software for large-scale drone operations
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Yanchao Liu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
technology to make the low-altitude airspace more accessible for commercial
drone delivery operations while ensuring a high level of operational safety and
efficiency. Large-scale, organized deployment of delivery drones can unlock
substantial efficiency gain in transportation systems in terms of reduced road
congestion, reduced CO2 emission; in addition, it would offer health and
convenience benefits to senior citizens, the ill, and mobility-challenged
members of society. However, existing drone delivery practices are limited in
scope, scale, and operating conditions due to inefficient air traffic management
(ATM) paradigms. This project aims to discover a viable business model for
translating technological innovations in unmanned ATM into an operable, city-
scale, fully automated drone delivery system. The proposed system would allow
safe use of the low-altitude airspace at an unprecedented density and
efficiency, generating enormous savings for last-mile deliveries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the development of a suite
of novel optimization-driven algorithms in the areas of motion-planning, dynamic
vehicle routing, communication and risk minimization to provide real-time ATM
and trajectory control for a cooperative fleet of drones navigating a shared
airspace. Existing ATM methods leave excessive separation margins due to human-
level response time and control dexterity. In contrast, the proposed new system
is optimized for high-density air traffic conditions, offering the capability to
generate real-time adjustments to 4D flight trajectories, tolerating a smaller
separation margin, and overseeing safe execution of control commands across the
fleet. In a plug-and-play fashion, the proposed system will turn a collection of
heterogeneous multicopter drones into an organized and intelligent fleet. The
competitive advantage lies in the fusion of the state-of-the-art operations
research (OR) models and algorithms onto drone platforms via commoditized cloud
computing, IoT and communication infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.