* 2018315
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for using stable isotopes to study complex ecological systems
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Andrew Burton, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 327,067.00

An award is made to Michigan Technological University to obtain an isotope ratio
mass spectrometer for the analysis of stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen,
oxygen, sulfur and hydrogen in environmental samples. Faculty and staff will use
the instrument to trace these elements in studies of aquatic and terrestrial
ecosystem processes. It is important for science students to have hands-on
experience with essential analytical tools, and through this purchase, students
in a wide variety of fields at Michigan Tech will be able to incorporate the use
of isotopes into their own research. The team at Michigan Tech will fully
integrate isotopic research into classroom education in upper-level ecosystem
science courses to prepare future scientists who are fully capable of using
advanced techniques to investigate environmental issues and their potential
solutions. The state-of-the-science instrument also will aid in attracting the
best possible graduate students and candidates for faculty positions in ecology
and environmental science, both of which are areas of study known to attract
diverse populations into STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument
will triple the types of elemental isotopic analyses that can be provided to
Michigan Tech students and researchers and their colleagues, fostering
collaborations among ecosystem scientists, biologists, hydrologists, chemists
and geologists. Researchers will use isotopic analyses for diverse purposes
including: assessing origins of migratory species such as birds, bats and
butterflies; separating recent versus older sources of greenhouse gas fluxes
from wetlands to identify possible feedbacks to the climate system;
understanding the contributions of stormflow and groundwater to streamflow to
help predict the potential for future flooding as storm intensities increase;
separating contributions of aquatic and terrestrial vegetation to the diets of
wild species; and assessing impacts of recent and past droughts on forest
productivity through analysis of tree rings and foliage and determining the soil
depths from which different plant species can access water. Results from these
studies and other research performed with the instrument will be widely
disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.