* 2018923
* GEOVOL: A NEW STATISTICAL MODEL FOR GEOPOLITICAL RISK
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Robert Engle, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2022
* USD 244,689.00

This proposal develops a new statistical measure of geopolitical risk called
GEOVOL, which will have broad implications for understanding, measuring, and
hedging geopolitical risk. GEOVOL will involve multiple factors and data sets, a
deeper set of measures of geopolitical risks can be presented. By examining
shocks that move all markets, this measure focuses on material news. Society has
become used to news stories that appear to have massive implications, but do not
move the markets. The spread of the coronavirus provided an extraordinary shock
to virtually all financial markets in 2020. Similar to Brexit election and 9-11
Bombings, these can be interpreted as truly geopolitical events which were
essentially unpredictable. This research will help to understand the
distribution and impact of such events. In addition to developing the
statistical model, this research will also collect and store data on
geopolitical risk. By posting daily estimates of GEOVOL on the V-LAB web site,
investors world-wide will be able to see the extent of this geopolitical risk.
The web site will also incorporate several popular measures that have been
developed by other research teams. This presentation will help firms and
individuals everywhere to make better decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GEOVOL measure is based on the insight that geopolitical risk is an innovation
to the idiosyncratic volatility of financial assets in all countries, sectors,
factors and asset classes. The proposal utilizes a statistical model, developed
by Susana Martins and Robert Engle, extending a conventional framework: a set of
risk factors generate contemporaneous correlation among financial assets.
Volatilities of these assets net of factors are predictable and the innovation
to these volatilities are the squared standardized residuals. These standardized
residuals will be cross-sectionally uncorrelated but their squares can be and
turn out to be correlated. A day with a geopolitical shock will be a day when
most of the squared standardized residuals are above average. The common factor
GEOVOL and factor loading can be estimated consistently as the number of assets
and time series become large. The proposal requests support to 1) complete a
paper documenting the analysis of the global equity market data, 2) take this
model and put it into V-LAB where estimates are updated daily and published on
the internet, 3) extend the model to adjust for different time zones, 4) apply
the model to commodities, currencies and cross asset class data, 5) examine the
portfolio implications by back-testing the risk reductions that come from the
theory and 6) extend the theory to include multi- factor models. This model is a
major advance in understanding multivariate volatility models and how
idiosyncratic volatilities of different assets and countries become
correlated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.