* 2018579
* MRI: Acquisition of a Physical Property Measurement System to Study Quantum, Magnetic and Functional Materials and Quantum Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kim Lewis, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,735.00

The Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program and the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) together with the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) directorate provide support for the acquisition of a cryogen-free
Physical Property Measurement System DynaCool (PPMSD) instrument at Howard
University. This acquisition supports Howard University researchers'
participation in the National Quantum Initiative and the Materials Genome
Initiative. The PPMSD provides a state-of-the-art resource to support students
and researchers in cutting-edge quantum and materials science research. The
PPMSD enhances the active learning experience at the undergraduate and graduate
levels in science and engineering departments. Students receive training in
magnetic, electrical transport, and heat capacity measurements, experimental
data analysis, scientific writing, and presentation skills, which enhances their
competitiveness with prospective employers in academia and industry. This, in
turn, attracts the next generation of science and engineering students from
underrepresented groups who can acquire the requisite skills and then go on to
be leaders in their respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPMSD provides
the ability to perform variable temperature and magnetic field dependent
magnetic, electrical transport, and heat capacity studies relating to quantum
materials, magnetic materials, functional materials, and quantum devices. The
PPMSD provides advanced research capabilities to undertake several basic and
applied research projects that enhance understanding of: (1) the effects of
dimensional crossover in mesoscale spin glass dynamics and the role it plays on
cooperative phase transitions; (2) the relationships between magnetic and
structural entropies, and the performance of magnetocaloric materials; (3) the
relationships between electronic transport and magnetic properties in porphyrin
molecular junctions; (4) the effects of adatom doping on magnetic,
spectroscopic, and transport properties of two-dimensional materials, such as
graphene; (5) magnetic and spin transport properties of single molecular magnets
covalently bonded between the two ferromagnetic electrodes of a magnetic tunnel
junction; and (6) the study of electrical and magnetic properties of recovered
high-pressure phases of novel carbon-based clathrate
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.