* 2018286
* MRI: Acquisition of a TPX3Cam for High-Rate Coincidence Velocity Map Imaging
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marcos Dantus, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 126,974.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation award funds the acquisition of a hybrid silicon pixel detector
and integrated electronics, known as a TPX3Cam, for use by a collaboration of
five institutions: Augustana University, the University of Mary Washington, the
University of Virginia, Michigan State University, and Kansas State University.
Researchers in the collaboration share a common interest in using the TPX3Cam to
enable sophisticated experiments that probe the interactions of molecules with
intense, ultrashort laser pulses. Observing and controlling atoms and molecules
at their native timescales has long been a grand challenge in atomic, molecular,
and chemical physics. Moreover, as hybrid silicon pixel detectors emerge into
wider use, the development of protocols and methods for processing the
information from the detector can accelerate the spread of this tool into other
areas of science, medicine, and engineering. Notably, the collective use of the
TPX3Cam will foster collaborations between Augustana University and the
University of Mary Washington, schools that primarily serve undergraduate
student populations, and the three large research universities in the
collaboration. These efforts will expose undergraduate students to forefront
experimental facilities and research efforts and thereby continue to motivate
the pursuit of STEM-related education and eventually help produce a highly-
skilled workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The TPX3Cam will be used to make correlated measurements
of multiple particles and thus the reconstruction of molecular dynamics. When
coupled with ultrafast laser sources, the experiments will probe the ionization
and structural evolution of polyatomic molecules, which are examples of complex
quantum systems. Since hybrid pixel detectors operate in a fundamentally
different manner than other charged particle detectors, the TPX3Cam instrument
will extend these illuminating measurements to situations not easily accessed
with standard delay-line anode technology. Examples to be conducted with this
new instrumentation include strong field ionization and coherent control of
molecules. Strong field ionization (SFI) of molecules results in complex
dynamics involving coupled electronic and nuclear motion, often entails
correlated electron dynamics, and is used as a probe for molecular structure and
dynamics. SFI also enables attosecond science by creating the electron wave
packet that subsequently is driven to recollide with its parent atom or
molecule, resulting in an attosecond burst of light. Thus, there are numerous
basic and application-driven reasons for SFI studies. Strong-field processes in
polyatomic molecules are at the forefront of the decades-long pursuit of
coherently controlled chemical reactions. Strong-field coherent control methods
using shaped ultrafast laser pulses are a general approach to influencing
chemical dynamics since they can exploit dynamic Stark shifts and multiphoton
processes to alter energy flow. These strong-field control methods can be
improved by targeting very specific control outcomes that exploit the unique
detection capabilities of the TPX3Cam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.