* 2018854
* Collaborative Research: Direct Lending in the U.S. Middle Market
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Tetiana Davydiuk, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 267,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The tightening of regulation in the U.S. banking sector
following the Financial Crisis of 2008 contributed to a surge of alternative
nonbank lenders and, in particular, business development companies (BDCs). This
sector has expanded rapidly over the last two decades. This project will
construct an extensive database and conduct the first systematic analysis of the
BDC sector. The project will focus on these new lenders and provide insights
into an important yet understudied segment of the U.S. economy - the middle
market, which accounts for a third of private-sector employment. Specifically,
the project will investigate the impact of nonbank lending on middle-market
firms and economic growth. Overall, the project will have important policy
implications for the role of financial intermediation in the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By constructing a novel database, this project
will advance the body of knowledge on nonbank lending. First, the project will
investigate the causes of the BDC sector growth and analyze their role in
financing middle-market firms. The granularity of the dataset will additionally
allow to characterize the borrowers targeted and lending solutions offered.
Second, the project will use the location information of BDC portfolio companies
to estimate the real effects of these direct lenders on middle-market firms and,
more broadly, on local economic growth. Third, the project will investigate how
access to capital markets affects investment activities of direct lenders.
Finally, since BDCs provide funding to firms without relying on deposit
insurance, they put forward a new lending model that may offer an improvement to
the current deposit-based banking system. To understand the effects of this
alternative lending mechanism, the project will develop a quantitative framework
to conduct a welfare analysis of transitioning to a new lending
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.