* 2018802
* MRI: Acquisition of a Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption/ionization Time-of-flight Mass Spectrometer to Enhance Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Stephen Bergmeier, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 315,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Ohio University is acquiring a matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization, time-of-flight, mass spectrometer (MALDI-
TOF-MS) equipped with direct analysis in real time (DART) sources to support
Professor Stephen Bergmeier and colleagues Eric Masson, Justin Holub, Amir
Farnoud and Jessica White. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species in complex samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal
for producing intact ions of peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates,
synthetic polymers, and other similarly sized species) with a detection mode
that offers an excellent balance between sensitivity and accuracy across a wide
mass range. This highly sensitive technique allows identification and
determination of the structure of molecules. The acquisition strengthens the
research infrastructure at the university and region. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students with this modern analytical
technique. The MALDI-TOF-MS is also used in outreach activities involving
students from Appalachian Ohio and faculty from a number of liberal arts
colleges in southeast Ohio including: Marietta College, Shawnee State University
and the University of Rio Grande.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the characterization of synthesized organic and medicinal
compounds. The instrumentation is used for developing peptide-based ligands that
modulate therapeutically-relevant signal transduction pathways in cells. In
addition, it benefits the exploration of supramolecular chemistry using
macrocycles of the curcubit[n]uril family and the use of inorganic compounds as
photochemotherapeutics and their interactions with DNA. The mass spectrometer is
used to understand mechanisms through which nanomaterials disrupt the plasma
membrane and for measuring and imaging chemicals on solid surfaces. The MALDI
spectrometer is also employed in studies of phenol-soluble modulins which have
potential uses as antibiotics, and in screening synthetic or natural polymers,
metal complexes, bacterial strains, complex carbohydrates and synthetic
inorganic compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.