* 2018249
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive and nonadaptive mechanisms of phenotypic evolution in response to urbanization
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Bradley Cosentino, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 12/31/2024
* USD 426,452.00

Over half of the world’s population lives in cities, and urban areas are among
the fastest growing ecosystems on Earth. Urbanization causes dramatic
environmental change, from the conversion of natural areas to buildings and
roads, to increased air, water, light, and noise pollution. Urbanization often
reduces biodiversity, but it can also affect the way organisms evolve. Organisms
that thrive in cities commonly differ in their morphology, behavior, and
physiology from populations of the same species in rural areas. How do these
differences arise? This project’s focus is one of the most common and visible
animals in cities in the United States and abroad: gray squirrels. Gray
squirrels provide an ideal model system for exploring the different ways
urbanization affects evolution. Gray squirrels have two common coat colors –
gray and melanic – that are determined by a single gene. The melanic form used
to be common in much of the northeastern United States, but today it is abundant
primarily in cities. Why did melanic squirrels decline in rural forests but
persist in cities? Results from this project will shed light on fundamental
questions about how urbanization affects the way organisms evolve, that is, the
degree to which evolutionary change in cities and surrounding rural areas is due
to natural selection, chance, or a combination of both. The project will engage
thousands of citizen scientists and students in recording observations of
squirrel coat colors and collectively measuring in their backyards how evolution
is shaped by urbanization. The research will address longstanding questions
about urban evolution specifically and evolutionary biology more generally and
help guide efforts to enhance biodiversity and human well-being in
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will integrate demographic and genomic
approaches across 10 replicate cities to understand how melanism evolved in
response to urbanization. First, spatial variation in melanism will be
characterized in each city to test whether melanism consistently declines from
the urban core into rural forests. Second, genomic tools will be used to
investigate the degree to which changes in melanism from urban to rural areas
are driven by adaptive natural selection versus nonadaptive processes, including
chance introductions and dispersal through the urban environment. Third,
experiments will be conducted to understand the causes of natural selection,
testing the idea that urbanization alters vulnerability of different morphs to
different sources of mortality in cities and rural forests. Citizen scientists
will be engaged in an online experiment to measure the visibility of each morph
in urban and rural environments, and predation rates on the morphs will be
compared in each environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.