* 2018351
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Evolutionary Significance of Skeletal Variation in Homo naledi
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Steven Churchill, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 51,414.00

The recent discovery of the hominin species Homo naledi has introduced new
complexity and new questions about human evolution. In this doctoral
dissertation project, the investigator will use 3D scanning technology to
quantify skeletal variation across a number of H. naledi individuals and situate
the results in a broader comparative primate context. Beyond providing an
evolutionary context for the variation in H. naledi, this project will highlight
the relationship between genetic and skeletal variation at multiple scales,
which may be used to identify related individuals within bioarchaeological,
forensic, and paleoanthropological assemblages. The research will generate
hundreds of 3D models of three primate species, which will be made available to
the public, creating new educational materials that can be 3D printed and used
for lesson plans and outreach. Additionally, through close collaborations with
local and international universities, undergraduates with interests in 3D
imaging will continue to engage in independent research projects using these
scans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is not known whether the recently discovered H.
naledi individuals represent part of a small, isolated population or a larger,
geographically diverse species that may have interacted with modern humans. In
this project, the variation between H. naledi individuals will be quantified
using 3D geometric morphometric assessment of five postcranial elements.
Comparative modern human and chimpanzee samples containing individuals of known
and unknown biological relationships will be used as baselines to explore
variation at multiple scales. To this end, this project has three objectives: 1)
to test the hypothesis that there is a positive relationship between genetic and
morphological distance at and below the population level in modern humans and
chimpanzees; 2) to quantify the variation within H. naledi and compare it to the
variation calculated for modern humans and chimpanzees; and 3) to contextualize
this variation by determining the extent to which H. naledi resembles biological
relatives. A number of evolutionary scenarios concerning population isolation
and relative size will be evaluated to determine which scenario most likely
produced the variation seen in H. naledi. In so doing, this project will shed
light on H. nalediâ€™s evolutionary history and the possibility of interaction
between H. naledi and modern humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.