* 2018048
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: What Does Innovation Tell Us about Market Concentration?
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Kai-Jie Wu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 52,146.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the role of firm innovation
in explaining the recent trend of increasing market concentration in the U.S.
economy. It measures innovation input and output at the firm-level using
research and development (R&amp;D) surveys together with data on production-side
activities. Using this detailed data, the project documents the concentration of
innovation activity and its evolution over time, where the concentration
innovation is measured as the relation between firm size and R&amp;D inputs and
research productivity. The project further investigates the impact of innovation
concentration on the aggregate economy by distinguishing between two types of
innovation---internal and external innovation. The former measures firms’
quality improvements of their own products, and the latter measures firms’
attempts to gain market share from other firms’ product lines. The project then
studies the impact of innovation concentration on aggregate growth and social
welfare for each type of innovation through the lens of an R&amp;D-based growth
model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project measures firm-level R&amp;D
productivity by the input-output ratio for each type of innovation. To
distinguish between internal and external innovation, the project leverages
unique information on product innovation from the R&amp;D surveys together with
data on product-level sales. Innovation concentration is then estimated by
projecting R&amp;D variables on measures of firm size while controlling for firm
characteristics. The measured patterns of firm-level innovation are used to
differentiate between competing R&amp;D based theories of rising market
concentration. The project further estimates the impact of currently experienced
concentration on aggregate growth and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.