* 2018299
* CC* Team: Research Innovation with Scientists and Engineers (RISE)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jenni Evans, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,396,556.00

The pace of scientific discovery and the dissemination of scientific knowledge
are increasingly being driven by computation through modeling, data science, and
digital communication platforms. Not all researchers are equally positioned to
leverage this computational revolution due to having inadequate expertise in
their groups or insufficient funding to hire computational experts into full
time positions. Penn State is working to ensure that researchers and educators
across the 24-campus Penn State system have access to the cutting-edge
cyberinfrastructure and computational expertise that they need to conduct the
highest quality research and education. Penn State's approach is to build a team
of cyberinfrastructure facilitators who are shared across investigators and who
consult on projects at various scales to bring shared knowledge and the best-
practices of modern computational techniques and tools to the broadest possible
Penn State community. These facilitators, known as the "Research Innovation with
Scientists and Engineers" (RISE) team, are experts in databases, visualization,
code optimization, application development, web services, and cloud computing.
They have broad knowledge of research cyberinfrastructure and are able to
architect, design, and develop new cyberinfrastructure. They will also have deep
knowledge of various scientific domains and will enable computational discovery.
Investing in such a team will pay substantial dividends through increased
productivity of faculty, more efficient use of research and education funding,
and ultimately new discoveries across a broad swath of scientific domains
including Physics, Astronomy, Bioinformatics, Chemistry, Energy, and Climate
Modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds a cyber-team for Research
Innovation with Scientists and Engineers (RISE) who will partner with campus-
level CI experts, domain scientists, research groups, and educators to drive new
approaches that support scientific discovery across the state-wide Pennsylvania
State University system including 24 campuses serving more than 100,000
students. The RISE team will directly facilitate the usage and creation of
research cyberinfrastructure across domains including Astronomy, Biology,
Chemistry, Meteorology, Physics and more through consulting and providing direct
services to faculty. The RISE team will partner with the Open Science Grid to
establish Penn State as an OSG site, develop replica-exchange molecular dynamics
software, apply machine learning to molecular biophysics, build digital signal
processing software for radio astronomy, collaborate on feature development and
testing with HTCondor, onboard new climate modeling tools and software in a
sustainable and maintainable ecosystem, develop a gene sequencing management
platform, deploy and maintain infrastructure to support real-time gravitational
wave analysis with LIGO, and build a science gateway for stellar astrophysics
simulations. Through the RISE team's shared knowledge, they will elevate the
productivity of researchers who use and develop cyberinfrastructure allowing
them to accomplish far more than they could in isolation. In order to broaden
participation, the investigators will develop a seed grant program whereby
faculty can apply to receive extended engagement with the RISE team where
members would be embedded into research groups. RISE members will also regularly
conduct training workshops and seminars in response to the needs of faculty
across all Penn State campuses. Participation broadening and coordination
activities will involve regular travel among the branch campuses by RISE team
members and project investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.