* 2018150
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Speed Camera for a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Michael Rust, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 53,290.00

This NSF Major Research Instrumentation award will support the acquisition of a
Phantom VEO 640L high-speed camera which is a critical research instrument
toward cutting-edge research and education across campus at Western New England
University (WNE), particularly within the departments of Mechanical Engineering
and Biomedical Engineering. The speed, resolution, and memory of this camera
will enable researchers at WNE to conduct pioneering research in the areas of
energy-thermo-fluids, material science, and biomedical engineering. WNE is a
primarily undergraduate institution, with a high proportion of first-generation,
minority, and non-traditional students. This project will provide research
experiences to undergraduates and will open doors for additional research
opportunities thereafter, especially for women and minorities. The proposed
equipment will enhance WNE's engineering curriculum as undergraduate research
activities are integrated in senior design projects. In addition, it will
provide research training opportunities for students who will be involved in the
proposed research activities. Moreover, the proposed work will increase
partnership between academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-speed
camera will be used to advance knowledge in transport phenomena in proton
exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells, shear stress distribution of a mechanical
pulsating jet, nanomanufacturing of silica-coated nanoparticles, and diagnostic
tests for neglected infectious disease. The studies on PEM fuel cells transport
phenomena will include; (i) liquid water droplet deformation and removal on the
surface of the gas diffusion layer and under the influence of acoustic pressure
waves, (ii) variation of liquid-gas two-phase flow pressure drop in PEM fuel
cell flow channel during emergence and growth of liquid water droplets, (iii)
deformation of liquid water droplet under mechanical vibrations in PEM fuel
cells, and (iv) destabilized capillary-scale two-phase flow in microchannels.
All of these phenomena occur in orders of milliseconds and therefore, studying
them will require high-speed imaging. The shear stress distribution of a
mechanical pulsating jet will be investigated by measuring the spatial and
temporal shear stress distribution on a flat surface at various Reynolds
numbers, stand-off distances, pulsating frequencies and nozzle exit speeds. The
findings will be used to further improve the performance of the impinging jet
for various applications and to validate numerous numerical studies on this
topic. The high-speed camera will also be used to study the capillary fluid
instabilities during Nanomanfucaturing of silica-coated nanoparticles using
Electrospraying, which holds great promise to solve the long-standing
scalability issue in manufacturing of advanced structured nanomaterials. In the
Department of Biomedical Engineering, microfluidic flows will be studied to
achieve enhanced sample preparation performance in diagnostic tests for
neglected infectious diseases. The results obtained in this study can be a
transformational factor for this particular application as well as across a
number of point-of-care microfluidic platforms for use in low-resource
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.