* 2018387
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Consequences of Welfare Reform: A Case Study in Michigan
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Motaz Al-Chanati, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 24,300.00

This research will study the effects of losing access to welfare (cash
assistance) by taking advantage of a unique welfare reform policy in Michigan
that swiftly and unexpectedly removed eligibility from tens of thousands of
families from the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. This
project will gather detailed administrative data from the Michigan Department of
Health and Human Services (MDHHS) on welfare recipients and their families and
link it to a large credit bureau data for the investigation. The focus in this
research is how losing assistance affect employment, education, health, and
other socioeconomic outcomes. The empirical evidence on the effects of direct
assistance on socioeconomic, educational, and health outcomes remain
inconclusive. The results of this research will provide more data-driven
evidence on the effects of direct cash assistance on several outcomes, an
important subject in the face of calls for similar reforms to other social
welfare programs, such as SNAP. This research has direct policy relevance, as it
provides inputs into policies to improve social support programs. The results of
this research project could also help establish the US as the global leader in
policies to support poor families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sudden and
arbitrary nature of the 2011 Michigan TANF policy change provides a natural
experiment to identify the causal effects of losing cash welfare. This proposal
uses three strategies to investigate the causal effects of this policy change.
First, the new rules affected counties to varying degrees, so the PI will use a
difference-in-difference regression to study the broad labor-market consequences
of this policy change. Second, the policy imposed a kinked relationship between
the months accumulated on TANF and the months remaining. Using a regression kink
design, the researchers will test for a similar kink in the outcomes. Finally,
the policy had differential effects based on the age of the family’s youngest
child at 2011, which provides another source of variation for causal inference.
This project contributes directly to the labor economics literature; in
particular to research studying the relationship between government assistance
and labor supply. The results of this research provide two key contributions to
the field---reassessment of cash assistance using new evidence and under a new
(more recent) setting, and this paper looks at the effects of losing – as
opposed to gaining – assistance. The results of this research project could help
establish the US as the global leader in policies to support poor
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.