* 2018594
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared High-Performance Computing System for  Cyber-Enabled System Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Anupam Sharma, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

This instrument, a new high-performance computing (HPC) platform, aims to
accelerate knowledge discovery by supporting the research of 32 investigators
from 15 departments. Building upon an institutional focus on simulation- and
data-driven science, it will enable significant advances in two types of
research, foundational and translational, and support training and development.
Leveraging the HPC cluster, investigators in computer science, engineering,
statistics, agriculture, and biology will conduct research on cyber-enabled
systems design, thermal flows in the built environment, the design of materials,
and phenotyping methods for plant and animal agriculture. This HPC cluster will
enhance existing collaborative efforts and enable building new ones, support
advanced student training in computational modeling and algorithm development,
and allow sustained workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This HPC system
for Cyber-Enabled System Design includes a mix of computing nodes and nodes with
general-purpose graphics processing units (GPGPUs), with sufficient memory, disk
storage and parallel input/output capability to support cutting-edge research.
The instrument will enable: (a) foundational data science advances with a focus
on algorithms for system design under uncertainty, for cyber-physical data
assimilation, and analysis of complex flow and material systems, (b) translation
research in three thematic areas: energy, materials and manufacturing, and
precision agriculture, with a focus on “materials by design”, smart power grid,
quieter aircraft and wind turbines, and precision animal science, and (c) HPC
training for undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students, to prepare a
globally engaged, HPC aware workforce. Research using this computer system has
the potential to improve food production, energy usage and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.