* 2018270
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Teaching Logical Reasoning Skills in Undergraduate Biology Courses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Oscar Fernandez, Pima County Community College District- NORTHWEST CAMPUS
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 75,000.00

Logical thinking and reasoning skills are critical for student success in
college STEM courses. However, explicit instruction and assessment of logical
reasoning are generally not a part of introductory science classes. This project
will address this disconnect by creating a broad and diverse network of
educators and researchers, the aim of which will be to develop a robust set of
print and digital course materials for helping students in introductory biology
courses build these skills. The creation of high-quality resources that improve
a vital educational pathway at a foundational stage will result in a better
prepared and more diverse STEM-educated workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
members of the network created by this project will collaborate to develop and
disseminate the logical reasoning resources and instructional materials. To that
end, network members will first develop common definitions of critical thinking
and logical reasoning that are informed by existing frameworks from the American
Philosophical Society and other sources. Drawing on the framework of inoculation
theory, the network will then design curricular materials that train students to
recognize logical reasoning errors (e.g., common logical fallacies) and
distortions or manipulations of scientific thinking (e.g., unfalsifiable
pseudoscience). The materials developed will be disseminated at network-led
workshops and implemented in college-level biology courses nationwide in
partnership with organizations affiliated with network members and through
cultivating collaborations with the broader community of STEM educators. Project
products will bolster undergraduate biology education by furnishing high-quality
resources that will equip students with the rigorous logical reasoning skills
they need to succeed in STEM careers. This project is being jointly funded by
the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure,
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in "Vision
and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.