* 2018821
* MRI: Acquisition of gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Andrea Roberts, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 105,878.00

Funds from the Major Research Instrumentation program will support the
acquisition of a high resolution Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer (GC/MS) at
Wesleyan University. The GC/MS will be used to study organic residues from
ancient contexts, and to model environmental variation and degradation of the
organic compounds found in such residues. GC/MS is used to separate, identify,
and quantify the individual compounds within a complex organic mixture, and high
quality instrumentation is necessary to identify the trace quantities remaining
in ancient samples. These compounds can be used to identify the source plant or
blend of organic ingredients used to make an ancient perfume, medicine, spiced
wine, or other organic commodity. The GC/MS will also be used to generate
comprehensive profiles ( chemical “fingerprints”) of modern plants, and identify
intermediate compounds produced when organics degrade. The chemical reference
data produced by the investigators will be contributed to publicly accessible
data libraries such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and
may be of use to manufacturing and cosmetic/pharmaceutical industries concerned
with organic product safety, as well as forensic and environmental scientists.
The data obtained will also be used to populate the first open-access database
of ancient organic results for the archaeological community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and refine the potential of
organic residue analysis as a methodology to study ancient economy and
environment. It will investigate ecological variation by collecting and
chemically profiling specimens of the same plant species across a range of
microclimates. By studying variation among plants which ancient authors
identified as having variable properties, the project will investigate the
impact of local ecologies, for example by determining how climate variation
might cause plants to express different quantities of medicinally-active
ingredients. These findings may have implications for modern biopharmaceutical
development. The project will also model how certain organic materials degrade
over time. Finally, the GC/MS will be core to Wesleyan’s Advanced Integrated
Laboratory course, where students carry out contract research projects for
faculty labs while developing skill sets specifically required for work in
industry and leading research labs. The integration of the GC/MS into courses
planned across Wesleyan’s humanities and social science curriculum will draw new
constituencies into STEM, facilitate cross-disciplinary research, and provide
students with skills-based scientific training that will be directly applicable
to future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.