* 2018658
* MRI: Development of Grand-Scale Atmospheric Imaging Apparatus (GAIA) for Field Characterization of Atmospheric Flows and Particle Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lei Feng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,016,526.00

Understanding the flow and transport of particles (e.g., snow, sand, pollens,
etc.) in atmospheric environments is critical for applications related to wind
energy, meteorology (e.g., snow settling), geomorphology (e.g., desert
migration), oceanography (e.g., spray generation), agriculture (e.g., pollen
dispersal), public health (e.g., airborne disease transmission), etc. These
processes involve flows over a broad range of spatial and temporal scales and
complex atmospheric phenomena which are impossible to be fully reproduced in the
laboratory. Conventional field measurements (e.g. meteorological tower, LiDAR,
Sodar and Radar) of these processes do not have sufficient resolutions to probe
into their detailed underlying physics. To bridge this gap, with a team of flow
physicists, computer scientists, and engineers, the proposal aims to develop a
Grand-scale Atmospheric Imaging Apparatus (GAIA), a stand-alone and imaging-
based field measuring system, able to quantify atmospheric flows and particle
transport over large sample regions with unprecedented spatiotemporal
resolution. Though collaboration with 11 university, national labs and
industries across the globe, GAIA will enable fundamental and applied research
across engineering, geoscience and computer science, and will support a number
of existing educational programs involving underrepresented groups and
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a Grand-
scale Atmospheric Imaging Apparatus (GAIA), envisioned as a field instrument
conducting particle image/tracking velocimetry (PIV/PTV) by exploiting particles
(e.g., snow, sand, pollen, droplets, etc.) naturally present in the atmosphere
to investigate both flow (using them as tracers) and the transport of the
particles themselves depending on their inertial properties with respect to the
flow. The development of GAIA innovates every single component of conventional
PIV/PTV including both the hardware and processing software to address key
challenges in conducting high-resolution flow imaging under harsh field
conditions. Specifically, GAIA involves multi-mode and multi configuration Lego
design and mechanical automation for the hardware and an integration of PIV/PTV
concept with state-of-the-art machine learning multiview 3D scene reconstruction
for data processing. Such innovation enables GAIA to conduct high-resolution
imaging of flow and particle transport across a broad range of scales with
sample volumes up to orders of magnitude larger than those of conventional
PIV/PTVs. In addition, GAIA incorporates several unique sensors (e.g., digital
inline holography) for in situ characterization of meteorological conditions and
particle properties (e.g. shape, concentration, etc.) with unprecedented
details. The GAIA will be tested under different field conditions in conjunction
with cutting-edge 3D Doppler scanning LiDARs. Such integration enables the
first-ever measurements of atmospheric flow and particle transport from sub-
meter to kilometer scales, providing benchmark datasets not only for the
fundamental study of atmospheric flow and particle transport, but also for
learning-based motion reconstruction in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.