* 2018087
* Diversifying geochemistry – travel support for students from under-represented constituencies to attend the Goldschmidt Conference; 2020-2022
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Roberta Rudnick, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 55,200.00

The Geosciences is among the least diverse of the STEM fields in terms of
participation of people from underrepresented ethnic groups (defined by the US
government as African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, Native Hawai’ians
and Pacific Islanders, Native Alaskans). In addition, studies have shown that
undergraduate students who are the first in their generation to attend college
are much less likely than their multi-college generation cohorts to pursue
research and advanced degrees. Because it is well-documented that having
heterogeneous teams working on a problem brings greater innovation, it is
important to expand participation in geoscience research and broaden diversity
in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The V.M. Goldschmidt Conference is the
premier international meeting for geochemistry. This annual Conference
alternates between European venues (organized by the European Association of
Geochemistry) and venues in North America, Asia, or Australia (organized by the
Geochemical Society). In order to increase the diversity of geochemists, the
funding from this project will support the participation of students from
underrepresented groups to attend the Goldschmidt Conference so that they may
learn about the most recent advances in the field, meet future mentors and
employers, and present their own research. The NSF funding will be matched by
funds from the Geochemical Society in order to support the following
demographics: 1) students who are members of underrepresented ethnic groups, 2)
students matriculating in colleges and universities that do not offer doctorate
programs and where their advisors and unlikely to have grant funding to support
the student’s conference attendance, 3) undergraduate students at any
institution of higher education who are the first in their generation to attend
college. Outcomes of the program will be tracked from year to year in order to
determine any effects it may have had on achieving greater diversity within
geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.