* 2018432
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: A Science DMZ For Quantitative Biology and Precision Agriculture
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Brian O'Shea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 483,122.00

Moore’s Law has ushered in a scientific data revolution. This is particularly
acute in the life sciences, where the devices used to collect data and the
theoretical tools used to generate models have benefited tremendously from the
advent of inexpensive digital sensors and general-purpose graphics processing
units, which have led to an explosive increase in the volume of high-quality
data. Sharing large amounts of this data for analysis by other researchers will
result in tremendous benefits to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a Science DMZ at Michigan
State University, which will facilitate MSU researchers’ ability to share huge
volumes of data with the external research community at very high bandwidth. The
project supports the networking hardware and software necessary to implement up
to 100Gbps network connections used for sharing data already stored at MSU’s
High Performance Computing System and on the NSF-funded MI-OSIRIS file system.
The project uses data provided by four research groups on campus as a testbed,
making cryo-electron microscopy images, hyperspectral imaging of crops using
drones, three-dimensional volumetric images of plants generated via X-ray
computed tomography, and a databank of biomolecular simulation data available to
other researchers and the public. This project enhances the impact of MSU
scientists and leverages prior NSF scientific and cyberinfrastructure
investments. In addition, it involves the participation of students in the
deployment and usage of the science DMZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.