* 2018399
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Teaching at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Anthony Lagalante, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 377,595.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Villanova University is acquiring a triple
quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (triple Q-TOF-MS) equipped with a
liquid chromatograph to support Professor Anthony Lagalante, Kevin Minbiole,
Daniel Kraut, Jacob Elmer and Aimee Eggler and other colleagues. In general,
mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex samples. An
instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before
they reach the mass spectrometer. In a quadrupole mass spectrometer, there are
four cylindrical rods parallel to each other, that serve as the mass analyzer
(the component of the instrument responsible for selecting sample ions based on
their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)). Ions are separated in a quadrupole based on
the stability of their trajectories in oscillating electric fields that are
applied to the rods. In this instrument, this capability is coupled to a time-
of-flight component (TOF) in which the mass-to-charge ratio of an ion is
determined by the way in which ions are accelerated by an electric field of
known strength. The velocity of the ion depends on the mass-to-charge ratio
(heavier ions of the same charge reach lower speeds). The time that the ions
take to reach a detector at a known distance is measured. This time depends on
the velocity of the ion, and therefore is a measure of its mass-to-charge ratio.
From this ratio and known experimental parameters, the ion can be characterized.
The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and
regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving diverse
students with this modern analytical technique. It is also used in partnerships
with nearby primarily undergraduate institutions and a Historically Black
College and University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass spectrometer
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially
impacts the development of methods of paint pigment analysis for art
conservation and authentication and for testing the effectiveness of systemic
insecticide imidacloprid and its metabolites on the hemlock woolly adelgid
insect pest and the impact of these compounds on native pollinators. The
instrumentation is also used for understanding the process of protein
degradation and identifying molecular determinants of the proteasome's ability
to unfold proteins, and for elucidating host cell response to gene therapy and
improving transgene expression by inhibiting or circumventing host cell
defenses. In addition, it benefits the development of earthworm hemoglobin as a
possible blood substitute and the identification of medicinally-relevant organic
small molecules from natural products. The mass spectrometer is also used to
characterize the mechanistic and temporal process of the transcriptional
activation factor known as Nrf2/ARE (a transcription factor that binds to
antioxidant response element and coordinately activates a battery of
detoxifying/defensive genes) which protects cells from oxidative stress-induced
cell death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.