* 2018545
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Developing a Faculty Network in a Biodiversity Hotspot: the Research Experiences in Southern California For Undergraduate Ecologists Network
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Nina Karnovsky, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2022
* USD 71,011.00

Ecology is inherently multidisciplinary and often requires inquiry over long
periods and across large spatial scales. Although engaging undergraduates in
authentic ecological research is a critical component in the training of
professional ecologists, most undergraduate research, particularly at primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs), is limited in time and spatial scales. In
addition, research is often carried out with a student being "siloed" in the
faculty mentor's lab and thus isolated from his/her/their research peers. To
address these issues and to provide more research opportunities for students,
the project team aims to develop the Research Experiences in Southern California
for Undergraduate Ecologists Network (RESCUE-net). By bringing faculty from
across the region together, RESCUE-net will also catalyze new research
collaborations and allow participating faculty to share expertise and resources.
Collaborations will focus on preserving the California Floristic Province, a
biodiversity hotspot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the formation of
RESCUE-net, a network of faculty in southern California dedicated to developing
opportunities to attract and train diverse students for the conservation
workforce and improve student learning while enhancing the scope of faculty
research programs at PUIs and building a community of researchers who identify
as teacher-scholars. In a series of meetings and workshops, the members of
RESCUE-net will work together to identify 1) barriers to providing authentic,
collaborative research experiences to a diverse group of undergraduates; and 2)
concrete ways the network can enhance undergraduate research at PUIs and bring
that research into the classroom. Using this information, RESCUE-net will
develop a framework that enables more undergraduates to conduct student-centered
research projects that address the many environmental challenges facing the
California Floristic Province.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.