* 2018116
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Diversifying and integrating marine education at field stations along a latitudinal gradient
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Mark Denny, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2022
* USD 74,445.00

Hands-on learning at field stations is transformative and has positive outcomes
on student's knowledge and long-term engagement with science. Abstract concepts
are brought to life in the field because the natural world stimulates students’
curiosity, encourages active participation, and builds team camaraderie. For
these reasons and more, the recommendations for implementing change in
undergraduate biology education (e.g., ‘integrating core concepts’, ‘focus on
student-centered learning’; AAAS 2011) are exemplified by field coursework and
research. Despite their proven benefits, opportunities for fieldwork in
undergraduate biology education are waning. This is alarming in light of rapidly
increasing human impacts on ecosystems, and the growing disconnect between
people and nature. To address this ‘nature deficit’, the Diversify and Integrate
Marine Education at Stations (DIMES) network will engage scientists and learners
at marine stations along the west coast of the North America to create a unified
curriculum that documents change in biodiversity while combining fieldwork and
computational literacy in undergraduate education. By connecting participants
from a variety of academic institutions, the DIMES network will diversify the
undergraduate audience served by marine stations. By integrating a field
curriculum across western North America, educators will engage students with
pressing scientific questions in an age of rapid biological change. This network
will leverage the existing undergraduate teaching at participating marine
laboratories and expand their reach to new students who lack access to
experiential learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field courses share a common
philosophy centered on local natural history and experiential learning, but this
knowledge is rarely placed within a broader context in an explicit, quantitative
manner – a shortcoming in an era of global human impacts. The proposed unified
field curriculum will integrate the traditional place-based approach within a
biogeographic framework by developing innovative modules that combine data
across the network to address questions at larger spatial and temporal scales.
By linking explicitly environmental change, biogeography, and natural history,
the DIMES network will maintain the relevance of curricula offered at these
stations and export the modules to other institutions. Moreover, the network
will develop a partnership of educators from diverse institutions that span R1
to community college, and that vary in their shore access, to expand the reach
of marine stations beyond their walls. This network of instructors will develop
curricula and assessment tools that can be implemented in classrooms with
varying levels of field time, with the goal of identifying mechanisms to
minimize the hypothesized learning gap between students with and without shore
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.