* 2018846
* CC* Compute: Accelerating Advances in Science and Engineering at The University of Alabama Through HPC Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* David Dixon, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,995.00

This project augments the University of Alabama’s (UA) computing infrastructure
to support the increase in computational science and engineering needed to study
diverse, interesting problems including: reliable computational chemistry
predictions, properties of engineered materials, applied mathematics for image
analysis and signal processing, bioinformatics of complex cellular systems, and
hydrological simulations. The new high-performance computing (HPC)
infrastructure removes bottlenecks in local UA resources caused by an increasing
number of users and increasingly larger computational solutions to more
realistic problems. This infrastructure enables UA researchers to make
scientific and engineering advances not possible with previous UA HPC machines.
To provide broader impacts, the infrastructure is also available to regional
institutions of higher education, including HBCUs and private institutions who
lack adequate HPC access, and to similar institutions across the nation through
the Open Science Grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project augments the UA HPC
system by (1) doubling computing capacity, (2) adding two large-memory nodes for
large-scale data analysis and mining, (3) adding ten GPUs for massively data-
parallel computations, (4) significantly increasing storage node bandwidth, and
(5) shifting from a “condo” model to a general use, shared model. This
infrastructure provides compelling new research and educational opportunities
for students, staff, and faculty at UA and other regional and national
institutions (including HBCUs and private institutions). In terms of broader
impacts, the infrastructure allows undergraduate students to perform state-of-
the-art computational research, thereby attracting more diverse STEM
participants. The infrastructure provides a platform for educating the next
generation of computational and computer scientists in cutting-edge HPC
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.