* 2018501
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Pradip Mascharak, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 324,241.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of California Santa Cruz is
acquiring a single crystal X-ray diffractometer to support Professor Scott
Oliver and colleagues: Pradip Mascharak, Scott Lokey, John MacMillan and Timothy
Johnstone. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighbors. The studies described here
impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as
well as research and research training of undergraduate students in chemistry
and biochemistry at this institution as well other departments. The science
enabled by this instrument has the potential to impact society at this Hispanic-
Serving Institution (HSI) through the development of new materials to address
environmental pollution and energy production, and new catalysts to improve the
synthesis of commodity and industrial chemicals. In addition, the
instrumentation provides direct research experience for students in programs
like the Minority Access to Research Careers Program and ACCESS, an academic
bridge program for community college students who want to pursue careers in
research science. The university allows nearby 2-year community colleges and
4-year post-secondary institutions that are also HSIs to have access to this
instrumentation free of charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray
diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The
science enabled by this instrument provides relevant societal benefits through
the development of new materials to address environmental pollution and energy
production, and new catalysts to improve the synthesis of commodity and
industrial chemicals. The instrumentation is used for studying main-group
bioinorganic chemistry and compounds that may have the potential for use in the
delivery of medicines. In addition, the instrument acquisition benefits
exploration of marine natural products with the potential to discover possible
therapeutic targets and therapeutics. The diffractometer is also used to
characterize high-pressure and variable-temperature mineral
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.