* 2018188
* MRI: Acquisition of A High-sensitivity Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education at the University of Texas at Dallas
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jie Zheng, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 243,087.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Texas Dallas is acquiring
an ultra-performance, electrospray ionization, mass spectrometer (UP-ESI-MS) to
support Professor Jie Zheng and colleagues Jeremiah Gassensmith, Xianming Dai,
Sheena D'Arcy and Yanping Qin. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the
key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species in complex samples. In the electrospray technique a high
voltage is applied to a liquid to create an aerosol. This is useful to produce
ions from large molecules by avoiding the propensity of macromolecules to
fragment when ionized. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure
at the university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse students with this modern analytical technique. It is also
used in outreach activities involving students and faculty from the University
of Texas at Arlington, the University of North Texas, and other activities
involving local high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the discovery of atomically precise gold nanoclusters that
can be used to unravel nano-bio interactions in the sub-nanometer regime and the
optimization of wetting and adhesion in surface-chemistry. The instrumentation
is also used for developing methodology for the synthesis and assembly of
symmetric aromatic building blocks and for developing bottom-up proteomics for
self-assembling, self-healing electronics. In addition, it benefits studies of
non-covalent transition metal-protein complexes and the development of activity-
based imaging and proteomic tools for biological sulfurylation. The mass
spectrometer is also used to develop bottom-up and top-down hydrogen-deuterium
exchange of protein complexes and to design small organic molecules to inhibit
protein-protein interactions. The ESI spectrometer is also employed in studies
developing methodologies for selective carbon–hydrogen bond functionalization of
aromatic and aliphatic molecules and for characterizing synthesized natural
product derivatives which could eventually improve manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.