* 2018862
* MRI: Development of a Fiber-Linked Mobile Telescope Facility for the CHARA Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Theo ten Brummelaar, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,505,889.00

Most stars are so distant that even the largest telescopes show them as no more
than dots. To see the stars close up would require conventional telescopes that
are too large and too expensive to construct. Instead, astronomers use a
collection of smaller and distributed telescopes. These work together like a
single telescope as large as the separation of the components. One of the best
of these is the CHARA Array located at Mount Wilson Observatory in California.
The CHARA Array has six telescopes arranged in pairs in fixed locations along
three arms. Each telescope sends starlight through long aluminum tubes into a
central laboratory for analysis. Each telescope pair is sensitive to a specific
size and direction of an object in the sky. Thus, the CHARA Array works best for
a size range that is related to the fixed telescope locations. Other sites are
needed at larger and smaller separations to study smaller and larger stars. This
program will enable these new sites by adding a mobile telescope to the Array.
The movable telescope will send starlight through fiber optic cables instead of
a bulky tube. This system of seven telescopes will let astronomers make detailed
maps of stellar surfaces. This will help place our own Sun within the context of
stellar mass, age, and magnetic activity. It will also help train young
scientists in the technologies needed to explore outer
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgia State University's Center for High Angular
Resolution Astronomy (CHARA) operates an optical/near-infrared interferometric
array at Mt Wilson Observatory in California. The CHARA Array has six 1 m
aperture telescopes in a Y-shaped configuration providing 15 baselines from 34
to 331 meters. With the number and size of its telescopes, the length of its
baselines, and the range of wavelength covered by its beam combiners, the CHARA
Array is a uniquely powerful facility for milliarcsecond imaging. The goal of
this proposal is to develop a new instrument that will expand the spatial
dynamic range of the CHARA Array by a factor of ten. The CHARA Michelson Array
Pathfinder (CMAP) instrument will be a mobile telescope connected to the Array
telescopes through a novel application of fiber optics technology. By placing
the mobile telescope close to the pair of telescopes with the smallest baseline,
the CMAP instrument will allow us to map the surfaces of large stars, and moving
the mobile telescope to distant locations will provide the means to measure
details of small stars. This exploration of stars using fiber optics for
interferometry will provide the means to map stellar surfaces in unprecedented
detail. The CMAP instrument will help train young scientists in the technologies
needed for future interferometers on Earth and in
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.