* 2018939
* RCN-UBE: The Undergraduate Network for Increasing Diversity of Ecologists (UNIDE)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Maria Miriti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,432.00

Minorities are underrepresented in ecology and environmental sciences despite
efforts to broaden participation. Although ethnic and racial minorities (Asians,
African-Americans, Latinx, Native Americans, and people of multi-racial
backgrounds) represent 29% of the Science and Engineering workforce,
representation in environmental fields, broadly defined, is only 16%. Most
interventions to broaden participation emphasize fixing skill deficits by
providing additional coursework and research opportunities. However, research on
teaching and scientific communication show these efforts can fail because they
do not address cultural and social barriers that contribute to isolation and
marginalization and thereby reduce student retention. Cultural competence
theory, which has been applied in medical contexts, provides a promising
framework to address barriers to broaden recruitment and retention in ecology
specifically and STEM more broadly. This project aims to identify culturally
value-laden concepts that are foundational in ecology; to develop evidence-based
strategies to improve inclusion; to assess the relative impact of color-blind
compared to “identity-safe” teaching interventions at the university level; and
to develop and promote pedagogy that promotes social-belonging in support of
greater inclusiveness in ecology and environmental education. The results of
this project will contribute to developing the “cultural wealth” that is
required to empower educators and practitioners to engage across cultures
independent of individual background. This knowledge can improve education and
disciplinary practice and improve recruitment and retention of underrepresented
students; because recognizing sociocultural biases can open new avenues for
scientific investigation, it also can improve ecological knowledge. Because
cultural competence applies to many disciplines, the activities of this network
can be translated to other STEM disciplines that endeavor to increase diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Undergraduate Network for Increasing Diversity of
Ecologists will promote collaboration among ecologists, educators and social
scientists to engage distinct stakeholders including underrepresented students
and practitioners, those who work with underrepresented students, those who are
invested in pedagogical development, and those who practice in ecology and
environmental sciences. The objectives are to co-develop and assess inclusive,
culturally sensitive teaching tools that are based on evidence-based pedagogical
models, and to foster broad interest and participation in ecology and
environmental science. The network will hold five annual workshops to build the
network, identify implicit socio-cultural biases in ecology, identify
alternative perspectives held by minorities, develop and test teaching practices
that take diverse perspectives into account, and disseminate findings and
teaching tools to the broad community of ecologists and environmental
practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.