* 2018884
* RCN-UBE: Engaging Educators in Developing and Using Molecular Case Studies at the Interface of Biology and Chemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Shuchismita Dutta, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Exploring the three-dimensional shapes and interactions of proteins, DNA, and
RNA can provide insights into their biological functions. By visualizing the
atomic structures of these biomolecules, mapping information from bioinformatics
resources on them, and applying biological and chemical knowledge, one can
predict a molecule's behavior under different conditions and even design new
molecules with unique properties and functions. One way to introduce
undergraduate students to such explorations is through case studies. As part of
the incubator award on which this project is based, several molecular case
studies were developed and pilot tested and are available on the Molecular
CaseNet website. These cases help the biology students who use them identify and
discuss chemical interactions underlying biological processes/cellular events
and help chemistry students consider the biological contexts of chemical
reactions. This project will expand this collection by training groups of
undergraduate educators to develop and implement new molecular case studies that
explore structure-function relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN-UBE
project will focus on growing Molecular CaseNet into a vibrant community of
educators and scholars. This objective will be accomplished by recruiting and
training biology and chemistry faculty to develop and implement new molecular
case studies at the interface of biology and chemistry by
usinghttps://www.ejacket.nsf.gov/ej/showReviewAnalysisList.do authentic
molecular structure research data, open access biological databases, and
mainstream bioinformatics tools. Doing so will enable educators who have limited
prior experience with structure/function to gain confidence in teaching their
disciplinary content in molecular detail. Observations and measurements made
during the project will help uncover challenges in discussing
biological/chemical phenomenon at the atomic level in introductory courses. They
will be used to assess changes in educator knowledge, experience, and confidence
that result from implementing the cases. In turn, these insights will be used to
guide future development of necessary scaffolds for exploring molecular
structures and linked bioinformatics resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.