* 2018063
* Understanding Norm Clusters and Their Dynamics in the Transition to Renewable Energy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Elke Weber, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 497,024.00

This project seeks to understand how people's worldviews and actions are
impacted by the beliefs and actions of others. It examines this question in an
important context for our nation's security, health, and natural environment:
support for renewable energy and offshore wind. It measures people’s perceptions
of a broad range of beliefs and actions they hold of others and examines how
these beliefs cluster together and create a social reality about what is normal
that shapes one's own opinion about energy policy and technology. The studies
also examine what happens to this cluster of beliefs as external events modify
one of the beliefs. Not only is the domain selected, offshore wind support,
better understood by this work, but the ways that people are impacted by others'
actions and beliefs are clarified broadly. Given that interventions for many
social problems in health, education, environmentalism, security and other
domains seek to harness how we are influenced by others in order to create
positive social change, this deeper understanding of how social influence can
inform and improve these interventions can help benefit addressing many
contemporary social problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
understand social norms as a clustered network of connected social perceptions.
Theoretical and applied research on social norm perceptions or interventions
often only study or utilize one norm at a time. Social norms, however do not
exist in isolation. Instead, norms co-exist in a network of other descriptive or
normative beliefs, forming clusters. This research clarifies how perceptions of
social norms are connected and the causal relationship of those connections,
pursuing the following questions: How are networks of social norm perceptions
organized? Do norm clusters have a hierarchical structure, and do higher-order
beliefs dictate more specific lower-order beliefs? What happens when one of
these norms gets modified, either by an experimental manipulation or by some
naturally occurring change(s) in the environment? Does such a change in the
perception of a norm only influence beliefs or behaviors directly connected to
it or does its effect spread throughout the norm's cluster as activation does in
a semantic network? The team explores how these diagnosed characteristics of
norm clusters can be used to shift individual behavior or belief. In a series of
studies over 2 years, the scholars examine perceptions of norms surrounding the
topic of offshore wind energy and relevant policy support. Using online survey
experiments and a combination of convenience samples, representative samples and
longitudinal data, the team assesses the structure of norm clusters, which
normative and descriptive beliefs are more related to others, and investigates
how manipulating one norm in a cluster can affect the perception of norms it is
connected to. These insights are used to compare multiple norm intervention
techniques to see which is most successful at increasing understanding. Rather
than simply intervening on a single norm, understanding the norm cluster for
offshore wind allows the team to better understand the most fruitful place to
intervene and reveals multiple points for leverage on this issue, so the team
may identify a cleaner, more sustainable, and economically viable energy system.
Beyond offshore wind, social norm interventions are used across a variety of
domains. This research provides a methodology and theoretical framework for
applied researchers that would enable them to understand how and where to best
intervene in a norms cluster to enhance understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.