* 2018744
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer for undergraduate research and teaching in chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Hill, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 340,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Occidental College is acquiring a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with a automatic sample
changer to support Professors Jeffrey Cannon, Michael Hill, Andrew Udit, Raul
Navarro, Emmanuelle Despagnet-Ayoub and other colleagues. This spectrometer
allows research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical
reactions of significant economic importance, as well as permitting study of
biologically relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate students in chemistry and
biochemistry at this college and other nearby institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the exploration of
synthetic methods for carbon-carbon bond formation and the studies of
electrocatalytic carbon-hydrogen bond oxidation at metal-oxo-coated carbon
electrodes. The instrumentation is also used for exploring projects varying from
energy storage to polymer synthesis. In addition, it benefits investigations of
arene dearomatization reactions for natural product synthesis. The spectrometer
is also utilized in studies of sulfated ligands displayed on polyvalent
bacteriophage for heparin-like anticoagulant activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.