* 2018774
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (HRMS) for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching in the Southeast Region of Georgia
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mitch Weiland, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 383,398.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Georgia Southern University (GSU) is
acquiring a high-resolution, high-pressure, liquid chromatograph, quadrupole,
time-of-flight mass spectrometer (HR-HPLC-Q-TOF-MS) to support Professor
Nathaniel Shank and colleagues Mitch Weiland, Shainaz Landge, Gary Guillet and
Kai Shen from Savannah State University (SSU). In general, mass spectrometry
(MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize
small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex samples. In a typical
experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized
and the ions' masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows the
structure of molecules in complex mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a
liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. In the time-of-flight (TOF) method of mass spectrometry, the
mass-to-charge ratio of an ion is determined by the way ions are accelerated by
an electric field of known strength. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse groups of students in research and research
training using this modern analytical technique. It also provides training
opportunities to many undergraduate students at these institution and serves as
a resource for students to get hands-on exposure to advanced instrumentation
resulting in a higher quality of education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
the mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. The instrument will be used for the development of peptide nucleic acid
probes and the profiling Sigma-1 receptor metabolites which regulates calcium
signaling in chaperone proteins. The instrumentation is used for characterizing
air-sensitive transition metal complexes and developing ruthenium catalysts. In
addition, it is used to identify oligonucleotide-protein conjugates. The mass
spectrometer is utilized to analyze triazole based chemosensors and logic gates,
as well as interface degradation. Finally, it is also utilized to characterize
protein mimics and to identify chalcone analogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.