* 2018997
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identifying Plastic Responses in Human Skeletal Tissues through a Sensitive Developmental Windows Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* James Watson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 30,633.00

Environmental factors exert considerable influence over processes of growth and
development, and stress experienced in early life can have long-term
consequences for health and mortality risk. It is therefore critical to
understand when individuals are most vulnerable to stress exposures. Sensitive
developmental windows (SDW) are periods in early life when energy needs are
high, and developing tissues exhibit greater plasticity in response to stress.
This doctoral dissertation project will examine evidence of plasticity in the
human skeletal system using a SDW framework, in order to better understand how
the timing of stress exposures in early life influence patterns of disease
susceptibility and mortality risk over the lifespan. The intellectual impacts of
this project will be the production of a novel framework in which to more
clearly define the relationship between early life environments, biology, and
health outcomes across the lifespan. Insights derived from this project about
the lifetime impacts of developmental stress may inform research in human
development and public health. The project will also facilitate training of
undergraduate and graduate students in non-destructive methods of skeletal
analysis that are broadly applicable across modern, historical, and
archaeological contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve
existing methods of identifying and interpreting evidence of plasticity in the
skeletal system by examining a set of asymmetries in skeletal elements that
capture an extended period of early child development. Evidence for plasticity
will be measured through the SDW framework by calculating asymmetry indices in
three skeletal samples that represent human populations engaged in different
modes of subsistence, social organization, and diet (early farmers, prehistoric
agriculturalists, and historic preindustrialists). These asymmetry indices will
be compared across populations and assessed using childhood mortality rates,
age-at-death and adult stature as covariates, so that the impact of plasticity
on mortality risk over the lifespan can be evaluated. The methodology employed
in this project involves non-destructive analysis of skeletal elements,
providing an accessible approach to examining
plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.