* 2018051
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: El Poder de la Familia: Understanding the role of familism on Latino environmentalism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Jonathon Schuldt, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 33,629.00

Latinos are the fastest growing racial-ethnic minority group in the United
States, and along with other communities of color, they continue to be
disproportionately burdened by environmental hazards. While research has
repeatedly found that Latinos report greater environmental concern, perceptions
of risk, and support for environmental policy than Whites, few studies have
examined the mechanisms that drive Latino environmentalism. This research
expands our understanding of Latino environmentalism by examining how family
values (i.e. familism), which play a central role in Latino culture, relate to
environmental risk perceptions and engagement among Latinos. This project not
only advances our scientific knowledge of how marginalized racial-ethnic groups
in the U.S. perceive and respond to environmental problems, but it also informs
the education and outreach efforts of environmental organizations that aim to
reduce the heightened risks that Latinos and other communities or color face as
a result of environmental problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed methods
approach, the scholars develop and empirically test a theoretical framework for
how Latino familism values are related to Latino environmentalism. First, the
research uses a grounded theory approach to conduct interviews with self-
identified Latinos living in select cities and regions of the U.S. with large
Latino populations. Participants are asked open-ended questions about a range of
topics including 1) the environmental issues/problems that concern them, 2) ways
to address these environmental problems, 3) the similarity of the views and
actions of participants and their family members, and 4) additional aspects of
participantsâ€™ families, communities, and relationships. Through an iterative
process of interviewing, coding, and memo-writing, the research develops a
theoretical framework that explains how Latino familism values relate to Latino
environmentalism. These interview findings then inform the design of a larger
experimental survey that examines the effects of familism and other values on
the environmental outcomes of Latinos and Non-Latinos living in the U.S.
Together, these studies provide crucial insights for future research and
practice by improving our understanding of what elements of familism are related
to various environmental outcomes, how the relationship between familism and
environmentalism may change across different Latino populations, and how to
improve environmental outreach and education within Latino
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.