* 2018196
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-nuclear 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer Equipped with an Autosampler to Support Undergraduate Research at a Hispanic Serving/Minority Serving Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Kimberley Cousins, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 351,157.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. California State University San Bernardino
(UEC at CSUSB) is acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometer equipped with an automatic sample changer to support Dr. Jeremy
Mallari and colleagues Drs. Kimberley Cousins, Douglas Smith and Jason Burke.
This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
permitting the study of biologically relevant species. In general, NMR
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution and nearby
institutions and community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the development of ferroelectric and piezoelectric systems.
The instrumentation is also aimed at supporting activities related to the
extraction of lithium from seawater. In addition, it benefits the development of
chemical tools to investigate malaria protease biology. The spectrometer is also
to be used to investigate chalcone isomerase
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.