* 2018748
* MRI: Acquisition of a Zeiss LSM 900 with Airyscan 2 for Research and Education at Northern Illinois University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Elizabeth Gaillard, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 252,548.00

An award is made to Northern Illinois University (NIU) to acquire a Confocal
Laser Scanning Microscope (CLSM). Acquisition of the CLSM boosts NIU’s imaging
technology in line with modern standards and beyond to support existing NIU
faculty-driven research and also creating a vibrant learning environment with
new training opportunities in advanced imaging technologies for undergraduate
and graduate students. Successful educational experiences will help encourage,
motivate, and nurture the next generation of STEM scientists to become
productive researchers and citizens who possess modern microscopy knowledge and
skills. In the area of outreach, the CLSM will enable NIU to extend its
resources to open educational, career and research opportunities to those who
traditionally lack them to help close the gap between disadvantaged and
advantaged students. In these ways, the acquisition of the CLSM contributes to
STEM outreach by broadening opportunities and expanding participation of groups
and organizations in the northern Illinois area that are underrepresented in
STEM disciplines and strengthens NIU’s position in STEM research and education.
Sharing knowledge with external partners, such as the community, implements
translation of results into new models that can ultimately impact society, the
economy, the environment and all human health. Additionally, the CLSM
acquisition immediately results in improved recruitment of faculty and students,
reinforced faculty and student retention, increased institutional commitment and
accelerated and increased capacity for innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
CLSM supports a wide array of research missions in several science disciplines
(including but not limited to biology, chemistry, physics, psychology and
engineering) and strengthens the research programs of a diverse group of at
least 23 investigators (1 PI, 4 co-PI and 19 CLSM users) aimed towards revealing
life processes. Research projects enhanced by the CLSM investigate biochemical
and cellular interactions, neurobiology, developmental biology, microbiology,
host-parasite interactions, nanoparticles/nanotechnology, lipid composition
required for transporter functions, contributions of stress on vascular flow and
detector development. Research projects will use the special features and
cutting-edge imaging capabilities of the CLSM (super-resolution imaging, live-
cell imaging accomplished by high sensitivity and faster scan speeds with high
signal-to-noise ratio, spectral flexibility to detect more than 2 fluorophores,
super resolution imaging and co-localization techniques (FRET). The model
systems used by the various research groups include various cultured human cell
lines, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Drosophila melanogaster and other
insects, various species of corals, a range of microorganisms and an array of
chemical and mechanical systems. Results from the research will be disseminated
in peer-reviewed publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.