* 2018053
* UPGRADE OF ELECTRON MICROPROBE SX-100 AT OREGON STATE UNIVERSITY IN THE COLLEGE OF EARTH, OCEAN, AND ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 236,283.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities program award
supports upgrade of an aging 2004 CAMECA SX-100 electron microprobe. The Oregon
State University (OSU) Electron Microprobe (EMP) Laboratory is an open
analytical facility and is used for research across a broad spectrum of
sciences, and for undergraduate and graduate student research and education. The
award is also jointly supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences Marine Geology
and Geophysics Program. The electron microprobe is a research tool capable of
determining microspatially resolved chemical compositions of solid materials
that help researchers address a wide variety of scientific and engineering
problems. These include problems in the fields of geology, metallurgy, solid
state physics, mechanical and chemical engineering, electronics, biology, and
physical chemistry. The laboratory has formed an important component of the OSU
research infrastructure and underpins the research activities of a diverse user
base, including geoscientists, engineers, biologists, material scientists and
environmental scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upgrade of the EMP will provide
indispensable services to the entire OSU community, to other academic
institutions, state and federal agencies, and to a large number of industry
collaborators and partners both nationally and internationally. Upgrade of the
OSU electron microprobe is necessary for several reasons: 1) the current
equipment is now over 15 years old and is experiencing reduced performance and
intermittent problems with electronic components, spectrometers and vacuum
systems; 2) a full-functioning machine will allow faculty and students to meet
current demands for electron microprobe analyses at OSU, providing increased
user access, and improving and increasing hands-on laboratory experiences for
graduate and undergraduate students; and 3) upgrading the EMP our electron
microprobe will provide an important impetus for future research activities
including studies of magma genesis, differentiation and volcanic hazards,
paleontological investigations of Neoproterozoic and early Paleozoic animal
fossilization processes, and studies of the thermal and impact history of
asteroid materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.