* 2018234
* Non Parametric Gravity: Quantifying Firm Heterogeneity and Measuring Its Macroeconomic Implications
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Konstantinos Arkolakis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international trade field has been transformed
by the study of individual firms. The correlation between observable firm
attributes, such as firm productivity, and international trade performance led
to a reevaluation of international trade framework and a vivid debate about the
importance of firm heterogeneity for various macroeconomic outcomes, such as the
gains from trade and the trade growth after a trade liberalization. This project
constitutes a major endeavor to quantify firm heterogeneity and measure its
macroeconomic implications. It envisions developing a theoretical and empirical
framework in order to answer three key questions at the center of the analysis
of firm performance in international trade and its macroeconomic impact. How
does firm heterogeneity affect the predictions of trade models for the removal
of trade barriers? How can one estimate the importance of various sources of
firm heterogeneity in order to improve the model predictions? Finally, how can
these estimates used to provide a more credible evaluation of the model's policy
implications? Ultimately the project will improve the credibility of
quantitative models used for policy evaluations related to trade to trade cost
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore firm
heterogeneity in trade and on estimation of trade models. The research will
incorporate nonparametric and semiparametric estimation tools developed in the
fields of Econometrics and Industrial Organization in order to relax the
restrictive parametric forms that quantitative trade models have imposed on the
distribution of firm fundamentals. The research builds on three projects. The
first project uses developed tools to improve the credibility of quantitative
models used for policy evaluations by allowing them to capture non-linear
elasticities of firm-level exports at the sector-level. The second project will
combine micro-data on the individual behavior of firms with the baseline
framework to quantify additional margins through which firm heterogeneity can
affect aggregate outcomes and estimate individual firm demand. The project will
ultimately develop new applied general equilibrium models that incorporate firm
heterogeneity which can be used for predictions of trade policy going
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.