* 2018254
* MRI: Acquisition of Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT2 3D Lithography System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Durdu Guney, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2021
* USD 396,632.00

A table is a flat surface (2D), while a hill has some vertical topology (2.5D),
however most objects we interact with and that make up all living things are
three dimensional (3D). These 3D objects often include overhangs, embedded
structures, voids; therefore making them very complex to replicate. Until now
nano/microfabrication has been stuck in a 2D realm. To fabricate a 2.5D, or 3D,
structure one has to use a layer-by-layer process. This can be done at a scale
10,000 times smaller than a human hair (100 µm), but there are several
limitations. Layer-by-layer processing is very slow due to the precision
required to align each layer and all the repetitive steps. The current systems
are very expensive and are not designed to make these 3D structures. The
Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT2 (Nanoscribe) now allows users to produce a
true 3D structure with sub-micron resolution (0.15 µm in the x-y direction and 1
µm in z direction). The Major Research Instrument program of the National
Science Foundation enables the acquisition of the system. The Nanoscribe
supports users from many departments in research and education. The research
includes, but is not limited to, 3D printing, photovoltaics, optoelectronics,
biomedical engineering for smart adhesives and tissue growth, and advancements
in photonic structures. The Nanoscribe is also available to external users and
collaborators, mainly in the upper Midwest. The Nanoscribe will also be used as
a hands-on teaching tool for undergraduate and graduate students in the areas of
3D printing, nanofabrication, and biomedical engineering; being such a recent
development, students are going to get exposure to a state-of-the-art system for
3D fabrication. Furthermore, the Nanoscribe will be incorporated into K-12
programs to help engage with women and minority students that are thinking, or
undecided, about going into a STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nanoscribe
system allows for the fabrication of nanostructures in a range of media. These
include UV activated polymers, hydrogels, using the polymer as a negative for
electroplating, using the polymer as source of carbon for carbonization using an
inert environment and high temperature, and custom blends where the polymer is
used as the binder for a filler medium like carbon nanotubes. The Nanoscribe
supports several areas of research supported by several Federal agencies (NSF,
NIH, DOD), and others. At Michigan Tech the Nanoscribe mainly supports research
in 1) Advancement of 3D printing at smaller-size scales and incorporating these
into open-source technical development environments, 2) Improving photovoltaic
cells through reduced optical losses with plasmonic structures, 3) Metamaterials
to be used in a range of applications – super-resolution imaging, compact
antennas, quantum computing, and communications, 4) Topological and singular
photonics, 5) Improvement of smart adhesives through complex 3D submicron
structures, and 6) Conductive nanomaterials fabricated from a blend of carbon
nanotubes and polymers to be initially studied at the fundamental level and then
used in tissue engineering. By having it available in the Michigan Tech shared
Microfabrication Facility, the Nanoscribe will be available to all researchers
in the region and across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.