* 2018280
* MRI: Acquisition of a Purpose-Built Deep Learning Compute System to Advance Fundamental Research and Education at Penn State
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Douglas Cowen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2023
* USD 317,939.00

Successful application of deep learning to complex research problems often
hinges on access to highly specialized computational hardware. This award will
provide funds to purchase a system comprised of four highly effective, purpose-
built deep learning nodes to be used for a wide array of deep learning
applications. An additional purchase of two state-of-the-art, purpose-built deep
learning nodes for high-dimensional, memory-hungry and/or data-rich applications
is also enabled. The four “staging” nodes will permit development and testing
prior to deployment on the two state-of-the-art nodes. The full six-node system
will be used by members of the Deep Learning for Statistics, Astrophysics,
Geoscience, Engineering, Meteorology and Atmospheric Science, Physical Sciences
and Psychology (DL-SAGEMAPP) team and the broader community at the Pennsylvania
State University. The team will provide access to the hardware to roughly 300
advanced undergraduate and graduate students each year, for use in courses in
multiple departments that either focus on machine learning and artificial
intelligence or include those topics in their curricula. The team will also host
an annual multi-day hands-on workshop in deep learning. The workshop will
welcome all students in the DL-SAGEMAPP team’s research areas but will advertise
most heavily to students from underrepresented groups. Team members will also
contribute deep learning sessions to one or more of the annual workshops for
K-12 teachers held by Penn State’s Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, with
the potential to convey deep learning ideas to grade-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to create a cutting-edge, shared
resource that supports a diverse set of researchers, allowing them to transform
problems that are currently impractical or impossible to solve with existing
computational resources into proverbial “low-hanging fruit.” The DL-SAGEMAPP
team will harness the power of deep learning to tackle some of the most
challenging problems in their respective areas of research. With purpose-built
hardware and popular open software, the team will apply deep learning
methodologies to problems with high dimensionality, high data volume, and/or
requiring very complex network topologies; problems that would take too long to
run or would be too large to fit in on-board memory for most standard hardware
configurations. This team aims to boost the search for multimessenger
astrophysical signals by improving the sensitivity and response time of flagship
high-energy neutrino, gravitational wave, and wide-field survey observatories.
The team will apply deep learning to the simulation and analysis of satellite
and aerial data, leading to greater predictive power for impending volcanic
activity and the build-up of sea ice in the Arctic, and greater acuity with
cloud-shrouded ground targets. Deep learning techniques will be used to increase
the accuracy of flood forecasting, improve the accuracy and turnaround time of
molecular-level simulations, delve more deeply into the process of protein
synthesis by mRNA, tackle the analysis of increasingly large data volumes from
brain-implanted electrodes, and sharpen researchers’ understanding of the human
visual system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.