* 2018074
* CC* Integration-Large: An 'On-the-fly' Deeply Programmable End-to-end Network-Centric Platform for Edge-to-Core Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Ewa Deelman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2025
* USD 955,823.00

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (also known as drones) are becoming popular in the sky.
Their application reaches from hobby drones for leisurely activities to life-
critical drones for organ transport to commercial applications such as air
taxis. The safe, efficient, and economic operation of such drones poses a
variety of challenges that have to be addressed by the science community. For
example, drones need very detailed, close to the ground weather information for
safe operations, and data processing and energy consumption of drones need to be
intelligently handled. This project will provide tools that will allow
researchers and drone application developers to address operational drone
challenges by using advanced computer and network
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an architecture and
tools that will enable scientists to include edge computing devices in their
computational workflows. This capability is critical for low latency and ultra-
low latency applications like drone video analytics and route planning for
drones. The proposed work will include four major tasks. First, cutting edge
network and compute infrastructure will be integrated into the overall
architecture to make them available as part of scientific workflows. Second, in-
network processing at the network edge and core will be made available through
new programming abstractions. Third, enhanced end-to-end monitoring capabilities
will be offered. Finally, the architecture will leverage the Pegasus Workflow
Management System to integrate in-network and edge processing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing best practices and tools that
enable the use of advanced cyberinfrastructure for scientific workflows will
have a broad impact on society in the long term. The science drivers that will
be supported by this project have the potential to increase the safety and
efficiency of drone applications, an area that will grow in significance in the
foreseeable future. The project team will enable access to a rich set of
resources for researchers and educators from a diverse set of institutions
(historically black colleges and universities (HBCU), community colleges,
women’s colleges) to further democratize research. In addition, collaboration
with the NSF REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) Site in Consumer
Networking will promote participation of under-served/under-represented students
in project activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about the project will
be available at http://www.flynet-ci.org to provide information on overall
project activities, outreach activities, publications, tools and software, and
the project’s team members. The project website will be preserved for at least
three years after the project ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.