* 2018611
* MRI: Development of an Instrument for Student and Faculty Research on Multimodal Environmental Observations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Todd Crowl, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,610,307.00

Focusing on ecological research in the dynamic Everglades Ecosystem, this
Instrument provides a platform to aggregate and compare many environmental data
sets. It also evaluates the effect of algorithms on ecological model outputs.
The instrument leverages experiences and regional access to pilot studies on the
Florida Everglades. The expected outcomes are likely to constitute a significant
advance in state-of-the-art, novel discoveries in the fields of computing and
ecology. By developing a better understanding of spatial and temporal synergies
in ecosystem dynamics, scientists will be able to predict complex ecosystem
responses and guide risk assessment, planning, and solution development. The
enabled research will produce evidence-based science, useful in land-management
decisions. The Instrument is a pilot, expandable to other regions and to the
national or global scale. All software and FIU-produced data will be open-
sourced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Instrument supports research that requires
the integration of large multimodal heterogeneous datasets to address the
challenges with current data-driven ecosystems research and instruments,
including scaling of different data; generic global models and algorithms;
calibration; and exponentially-growing acquisition of remotely sensed data.
Specific enabled research activities involve multi-dimensional fuzzy logic on
spatiotemporal data; multimodal image analysis; and machine learning. The system
comprises a data repository, a Multimodal Ecosystem Data Aggregator, and
analytical and visualization tools. Existing large repositories of global
datasets do not readily allow the incorporation of vast amounts of
multidimensional, historical locally-acquired datasets. The platform provides
comprehensive local data integration and its correlation to global data. While
the Instrument will house a well-curated collection of environmental data, its
unique service will transcend mere curation, with built-in tools for data
mining, fuzzy-logic reasoning, image analysis, and visualization -- developed
and interfaced to empower both student and faculty
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.