* 2018803
* MRI Consortium: Development of CCPflex – A multi-function, modular platform for next-generation Conductivity Concentration Profilers
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jack Puleo, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 924,974.00

This award will develop next-generation Conductivity Concentration Profiler,
CCPflex, systems for monitoring changes in the Earth's surface and surface
dynamics in coastal, ocean, and marine settings. The instruments will be housed
in the coastal engineering facilities at the University of North Carolina
Wilmington (UNCW) and the University of Delaware, available to the research
community through a proven shared-use model for use in field and/or laboratory
applications. Design, testing, and manufacturing will be executed via
partnerships with industry leaders in custom oceanographic instrumentation and
software development. State-of-the-art printed circuit board manufacturing
technologies will be utilized to produce the miniaturized measurement probes.
This project will enable transformative new research across a range of topics
including coastal storm impacts, coastal aquifers, and environmental monitoring.
Knowledge gained from research conducted using CCPflex systems will lead to
improved predictive coastal flood mapping, better inform evacuation orders ahead
of coastal storms, and aid in the development of resilient coastal communities.
This project will train the next-generation of applied engineers and scientists
through undergraduate involvement during the development process at UNCW – a
predominantly undergraduate institution. The project team will actively recruit
students from historically under-represented groups within STEM fields. Units
involving CCPflex will be incorporated into the researcher’s STEM high school
outreach program, “Making Waves in the Classroom,” to assist users in
understanding how sediment mobilizes on the beach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CCPflex system uses electrical conductivity to directly measure the porosity
profile of a fluid-sediment mixture, which is inversely related to the sediment
concentration profile. CCPflex will be capable of quantifying coastal sediment
transport processes in the highly concentrated near-bed region, which is known
to contribute significantly to the overall geomorphic change near the coast. The
breakthrough modular “plug-and-play” design provides a wide array of deployment
and sampling configurations to the end-user, significantly broadening the scope
of applications. The design criteria are driven by the needs of a diverse
community of coastal scientists. Groundbreaking probe design will include
simultaneous interface tracking capabilities for extended applications in ocean
surface dynamics and groundwater studies. Instantaneous near-bed sediment
concentration profiles at up to 50 Hz at millimeter vertical resolution will
advance the understanding of how turbulent flow (e.g., beneath a breaking wave)
contributes to the overall sediment transport at sandy beaches. CCPflex systems
will be suitable for deployment in conditions ranging from grain-scale sediment
transport small laboratory studies to highly energetic field campaigns (e.g.,
hurricane landfall).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.