* 2018132
* Mechanically Driven Growth of Hydrocarbons at Sliding Interfaces to Control Degradation and Wear
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Diana Berman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 289,847.00

Although tribology has been an active field of study, the limited understanding
of friction and wear processes continues to lead to failure of the moving
systems used in various applications. Although current approaches to protecting
the surfaces by deposition of damage-resistant coatings provide temporary
solutions, eventually the coatings degrade and wear off. This award supports
fundamental research to elucidate how the damage in the materials can be
reversed by in-situ replenishment of protective coatings. Insights from this
study will enable repair of the damaged surfaces without having to disassemble
the entire mechanical system. Not only will this research promote scientific
advances, but it will also improve the performance of the mechanical part
assemblies. It will provide a new solution to more reliable and energy-efficient
transportation and manufacturing systems, in which repair of the surfaces will
prolong the operation lifetimes significantly. This award will also offer new
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in the areas
of materials science, mechanics, and surface science, with an emphasis on
recruiting and retaining women and minorities in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanically induced surface degradation creates a
significant problem for mechanical assemblies and is the major cause for the
loss of usefulness. High-contact pressure and shear during relative movement of
the sliding interfaces causes local heating and as well as complex compression.
For a correct combination of materials in sliding contact, these conditions may
induce tribochemical reactions leading to the formation of protective films
directly at the contact. This project focuses on understanding the friction- and
wear-induced deformation of catalytic metal interfaces immersed in a hydrocarbon
environment, which causes an in-situ growth of layered carbon films on the
sliding surface. To elucidate the material growth processes, this research will
combine in-situ Raman analysis of the surfaces exposed to stresses during
macroscale tribology tests, with electron microscopy post-characterization of
the wear track cross-sections. The characterization data will be correlated with
the mechanical characteristics of the films to evaluate the triboactive response
of the dynamic system to the applied mechanical stresses, and to quantify the
damage tolerance of the grown films in different environments. The research will
also investigate alternative solutions to tribocatalysis
activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovations Division and the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.