* 2018322
* RCN-UBE: The Advancing Assessment Skills in BIOlogy Network (ASK BIO)--A Faculty Development Initiative for Under-resourced Institutions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Heather Seitz, Johnson County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 479,763.00

This Research Coordination Network is a response to two problems in biology
education: 1) There are often glaring mismatches between what biology faculty
and other STEM instructors state as their course goals and the assessments
students take; and 2) The lack of regional and local opportunities prevent many
faculty at under-resourced institutions, which disproportionally serve students
underrepresented in STEM, from engaging in professional development. The
Advancing assessment SKills in BIOlogy (ASK BIO) Network will address these
issues in two ways. First, the network will design and implement faculty
development workshops intended for faculty at under-resourced institutions on
how to write machine-gradable assessment questions that present a high level of
cognitive challenge and that are aligned with learning outcomes inspired by the
"Vision and Change" report. Second, the network will provide communities of
practice for participants with which they can remain
engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aligning assessments with learning objectives is a
basic element of good course design. In introductory biology courses across the
country, exam questions--what students get graded on--and course goals are
commonly mismatched: instructors who embrace the unifying conceptual frameworks
outlined in the "Vision and Change" report and the competencies-based focus of
the "Training Future Physicians" document often give exams that predominantly
test recall or low-level conceptual understanding. This project focuses on the
often-neglected skill of writing exam questions that ask students to apply,
analyze, synthesize, or interpret information in addition to just recalling it
and will develop regional communities of practice to help faculty with skills
development. ASK BIO will synergize with an ongoing effort by the BioInteractive
group at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), which is developing a
freely accessible online database of high-level, machine-gradable questions for
introductory biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to
Action" (http://visionandchange/finalreport) with additional support provided by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.