* 2018092
* I-Corps:  Technology to predict power generation and optimize energy storage in cities
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Jorge Gonzalez, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
technology to synchronize different sources of energy for buildings. The
stakeholders include utility, independent system operators, energy analyst,
building automation providers, energy aggregators, energy regulators and third-
party energy providers. The project will investigate how software predicting the
efficiency and configurations of solar cell installations can improve their
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project technology is based on
the development of a modified numerical weather prediction modeling system
(WRF). This system will allow designers to optimize active technologies, such as
photovoltaic (PV) installations on the roofs of buildings, and passive systems
such as efficiency enhancement, insulation and white roofs, to meet and minimize
the electricity demand. These technologies are developed not only to mitigate
extreme loads but also to provide and forecast PV-power potential. This system
can be used on-site or at a utility to promote integration of energy sources
such as solar PV, electro-thermal batteries, and micro-grids, and to optimize
demand response strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.