* 2018848
* MRI: Acquisition of an Infrared Microscope for Research Expansion and Training in the Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* David Rhode, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,750.00

This award supports the acquisition of a microscope-enabled Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy instrument at the Desert Research Institute (DRI), for
research expansion and training of DRI/University of Nevada, Reno undergraduate
and graduate students. Infrared microscopy provides fundamental information on
the molecular structure of organic and inorganic compounds and is both non-
destructive and versatile. This instrument will be used to advance knowledge for
at least two areas of research: 1) identification of microplastics (plastic
particulates &lt;5 mm) in environmental samples; and 2) reconstruction of past
wildfire temperatures from sedimentary charcoal deposits. Such research will
potentially transform the scientific community through further testing of new
applications, field, and laboratory methodologies. In addition, the team of
early career and experienced faculty and their students will use the infrared
microscope to advance knowledge for various applications in the earth sciences
including archaeology, sedimentology, climate change, assessment of human
impacts to the environment, and paleoclimate. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be engaged in hands-on training using this instrument through
research experiences and teaching opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microscope-enabled Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy instrument will
support a wide range of research and educational opportunities at DRI. The
infrared microscope will be used for the identification of microplastics in
environmental samples, to further field and laboratory sampling methodologies
for microplastics, development of a spatiotemporal dataset of polymer types, and
to assess plastic/biotic interactions. In addition, this instrument will further
test the application of infrared microscopy for determining wildfire combustion
temperature from western U.S. sedimentary charcoal. These areas of research have
implications for: 1) the identification of microplastic pollution sources and 2)
placing modern wildfire observations in the context of past wildfires. Through
these projects, the instrument will enhance research in areas of the Earth
sciences and enable hands-on training to visiting researchers and students. The
infrared microscope will provide the team of early career and experienced
faculty with a state-of-the-art research tool necessary to establish new areas
of research and to broaden collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.