* 2018149
* CC* Compute: GPU Infrastructure to Explore New Algorithmic &amp; AI Methods in Data-Driven Science and Engineering at Tufts University
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Abani Patra, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Advanced scientific and engineering research at Tufts University is employing
increasingly complex models, algorithms, simulations and machine learning
approaches to large datasets. The larger the dataset or the more complex the
model, the longer it takes to compute, slowing down researchers' progress and
limiting their ability to innovate. Tufts' addition of six Graphics Processing
Unit (GPU) enhanced compute nodes to its high-performance computing cluster
accelerates scientific and engineering research in the areas of Algorithm
Parallelization &amp; Acceleration and Machine Learning &amp; Deep Learning.
Researchers in biology, chemistry, computer science, mathematics, physics, and
urban planning leverage the GPU enhanced infrastructure to develop new
algorithms and models and accelerate scientific discoveries. Through
collaboration with the NSF-funded T-TRIPODS (Transdisciplinary Research in
Principles of Data Science) project and the Center for STEM diversity at Tufts,
the infrastructure provides new opportunities for underrepresented students to
acquire and extend data science and high-performance computing
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The six GPU enhanced compute nodes are each
configured with dual 20-core Intel Xeon Gold 6248 CPUs, 768GB of RAM and 8
NVIDIA Tesla V100 (32GB) GPUs interconnected with NVLink to improve scaling of
multi-GPU computation. The nodes are linked with a 100 gigabit network and are
accessible to researchers at Tufts and externally through the Open Science Grid
(OSG). The large core count, large RAM, interlinked GPU architecture provides
the greatest flexibility for researchers to mix traditional and GPU-enhanced
approaches in complex computational analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.