* 2018738
* MRI: Development of microXROMM for high-resolution X-ray motion imaging of small animals
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Matthew Fuxjager, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,276,092.00

An award is made to Brown University to develop a new biological imaging
technology, “micro-XROMM.” This microXROMM instrument will have ten times the
precision of current XROMM (X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology). Greater
precision will open up new research areas to study the bones, joints, and
muscles of animals that are too small for current XROMM, such as mice, frogs,
bats and birds. MicroXROMM will enable discoveries such as how small frogs can
jump so far and how the shoulders of bats can allow the amazing range of wing
movements in flight. Such discoveries offer fundamental insights into the
biomechanics of the natural world, and also form the basis for biologically-
inspired engineering designs. This project will provide training for the next
generation of instrumentalists by including undergraduate and graduate students
in microXROMM design and testing. Students will be drawn from diverse
communities including historically under-represented groups, thus recruiting the
best available talent into science and technology development. Technology
development projects such as this one increase US economic competitiveness
through home-grown innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the field of Comparative
Biomechanics, XROMM has opened up whole new areas of research on the skeletal
kinematics of animal movements (walking, chewing, swimming, etc.). However, more
than half of all vertebrate species are too small for current XROMM precision.
The microXROMM instrument will have ten times the spatial precision of current
XROMM (improved from 0.1 mm to 0.01 mm), and temporal precision will be at least
1 ms (1000 frames per second). The addition of microXROMM will open the door for
XROMM research on speciose small-bodied groups such as rodents, bats, songbirds,
tropical frogs, skinks, anoles, coral reef fish, gobies and minnows. MicroXROMM
will enrich basic research in comparative biomechanics, bioinspired design and
organismal and evolutionary biology more broadly. For example, microXROMM will
be suitable for studying gene knockout mouse strains, making it particularly
powerful for genome to phenome studies. The products of this development project
will be: (1) a multi-user microXROMM instrument at Brown University; (2) peer-
reviewed publications describing the design and validating the instrument for
research on species such as mice, fish and songbirds; (3) commercial
availability of the system for purchase by other researchers from a US small
business partner. This award is supported by the MRI program funds, and by co-
funding from the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics program in the NSF-
BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.