* 2018383
* MRI: Acquisition of a surface &amp; sorption characterization instrument to enable multidisciplinary research at a rural West Texas HSI
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nathan Howell, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 257,361.00

This award will the support acquisition of material surface characterization
instrument for research and education at West Texas A&amp;M University (WTAMU)
and the partner institution Amarillo College (AC), located in the rural
Panhandle of Texas. Both institutions are non-PhD granting institutions, while
WTAMU is designated as a Hispanic Serving Institution with an overall Hispanic
population of 26%. The proposed instrument will be able to quantify the surface
and volume in highly porous materials and particles when exposed to gases under
controlled temperature and pressure conditions. Ongoing research of 11 faculty
members from both institutions will benefit from the instrument while over 30
graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed to cutting-edge surface
science research. In addition, over 170 students will have an opportunity to use
the instrument through planned coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed team from environmental engineering, mechanical engineering,
agricultural engineering, chemistry, and biochemistry plans to study
physisorption and chemisorption phenomena using a Micrometrics 3Flex system. The
specific research areas to be explored include highly porous biochar as an
inexpensive material for treatment of wastewater; effect of small-scale
atmospheric cellulose in hail storm damage; improving the viability of methanol
fuel cells to produce high power output for electronics and vehicles in a small
space; and increasing understanding of surface chemistry of high energy
nanomaterials for use as solids fuel, energy storage media, and explosives. In
addition, evaluation of best practices in engaging Hispanic students in science
and technology is an important aspect of the proposed work. Specifically,
inclusion of Hispanic students in state-of-the-art instrumentation and their
desire to pursue science and technology topics will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.