* 2018740
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Diffractometer at the University of Southern California
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Travis Williams, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 303,546.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Southern California (USC)
is acquiring a single crystal X-ray diffractometer to support Professor Travis
Williams and colleague, Ralf Haiges. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles. A diffractometer also provides
accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to
neighboring molecules. The studies may impact many areas, including organic and
inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an
integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry, biochemistry and other
engineering fields at this institution. In addition, the diffractometer has
broad impact on teaching and training, outreach activities, and undergraduate
research at USC and regional partners from primarily undergraduate institutions
(PUIs). The instrument acquisition is an essential component of an outreach
program inspiring diverse, low-income high school students to become leaders and
innovators in science and engineering through the Young Scientists Program of
the USC Joint Educational Project and the Southern California Section of the
American Chemical Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray
diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The
instrument acquisition impacts the characterization of synthetic inorganic and
organic materials to develop new catalysts to advance manufacturing used for
biodiesel production, solar-to-fuel technologies, and photovoltaics. The
instrumentation is also used for studying catalytic processes to enable polymer
sustainability. In addition, the diffractometer benefits exploration of
organofluorine compounds of relevance to the methanol economy. The instrument is
also used to characterize products relevant to biological
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.