* 2018468
* MRI: Acquisition of 3D Imaging and Printing Instrumentation to Support Interdisciplinary Research at Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Warnock, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 56,135.00

This award will fund the acquisition of a structured white-light 3D surface
scanner. Structured white-light scanning uses a projected line of light and
optical cameras to capture the topography and texture of an objectâ€™s surface.
Accurate and portable, these scanners have become popular in the fields of
archaeology, engineering, and morphology. This new tool will have immediate
impact in five departments across three colleges at Indiana University of
Pennsylvania (IUP). It will enhance the research environment by broadening the
opportunities available to undergraduate researchers at IUP, promoting new
collaborations on campus and with non-profit, government, and industry partners.
IUP is a predominantly undergraduate institution serving a rural student
demographic, including many first-generation college students, and providing
hands-on research opportunities to students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation will serve multiple disciplines and be available to all
departments at IUP, with the potential for additional users from nearby academic
institutions and regional non-profit and industry partners. This award will
support researchers from the departments of Anthropology, Biology, Chemistry,
Geoscience, and others at IUP, opening new opportunities for interdisciplinary
research. The faculty and student research enabled by the requested
instrumentation spans a wide range of topics, such as: 1) measuring center-of-
mass change in extinct vertebrates, 2) morphometric identification of fossil
vertebrates, 3) expanding a human remains and zooarcheological digital type
library, 4) digital assessments of biostratinomy at the Cleveland-Lloyd dinosaur
quarry and more accurate actualistic taphonomic experiments of fossil transport,
5) determining the relationship between personalized fit and biomechanical
performance of officer personal protective equipment (PPE) and duty gear, 6)
visualizing the morphology of the brain endocast, the middle and inner ear, and
the tooth shape of Mesozoic mammals, and 7) analysis of protein binding site
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.