* 2018058
* BEE- Ecology of adaptation to food quality by genes and microbiomes in lake plankton
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Justin Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,177,950.00

The bodies of animals contain multitudes of bacteria that are sensitive to their
diet and critical to their health. These unseen players are major forces in
evolution, population fluctuations and the dynamics of ecosystems, but their
roles are largely unknown. This project investigates the effects of animal-
associated bacteria and evolutionary change in two critical ecological
processes: the flow of energy from plants to herbivores, and cycling of predator
and prey populations. Plankton in lakes are ideal for testing these questions as
they are ubiquitous and amenable to experiments over multiple generations and
evolutionary time scales. The project tests the roles of evolution and
microbiome composition in the response of plankton to changes in diet and
climate from the top to the bottom of the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California.
Experiments and models in a classic lab system of cycling populations of
invertebrates and algae will test the roles of evolution and changes in
associated bacteria in food chain stability. This research explores the integral
roles of host-associated microbes and genetic adaptation in the stability and
resilience of populations and ecosystems facing environmental change, and their
capacity to sustain delivery of vital ecosystem services like clean water and
healthy fisheries. This project will expand STEM education activities for
Hispanic communities and will train a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate
student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a combined approach integrating
observations in nature, lab experiments and modeling to test the roles of
genetic adaptation and microbiomes in the adaptive potential of populations and
ecosystems. Sequencing environmental samples will reveal changes in zooplankton
microbiomes from warm lakes with a low quality, terrestrial food base, to cold
lakes with more nutritious algae. Microbiome transplant experiments with clones
isolated from different lakes will reveal the roles of genetic adaptation and
host-associated bacteria in the transfer of energy from producers to consumers.
Culturing invertebrates in the presence and absence of co-adapted microbes will
reveal their effect on dynamic stability of predator prey cycles, and sequencing
of functional genes (metagenomics) will show how adaptive potential arises from
the hostâ€™s genes vs. associated symbionts. Finally, mathematical models of lake
food webs will synthesize the empirical results to explore the effects of
microbiomes for top-down control of primary production by consumers and the
vertical flow of energy to upper trophic levels like
fish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.