* 2018850
* MRI: Acquisition of a Virtual Reality System for Expert Decision Making and Immersive Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kannappan Palaniappan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 270,018.00

This Instrument of an immersive virtual reality (VR) system with synchronized
motion tracking system will provide a much-needed technology capability for
research and education that is not readily accessible to academia and industry
in the state of Missouri and the surrounding geographical region. The VR system
will support research and educational activities of a large number of University
of Missouri (MU) faculty members and their external collaborators in diverse
science and engineering fields such as transportation, imaging, civil structure
architectures, information technology, bioinformatics as well as education. The
VR system is planned to be integrated into multiple courses at MU as well as
other schools in Missouri. Further, this infrastructure will support NSF REU
sites, as well as other training programs already active at MU, while broadening
participation of underrepresented and underserved groups at the regional level.
Outreach activities in the project will help disseminate best practices,
technologies, tools, policies, and service models to streamline the
engineering/operations of the VR system for a new generation of applications.
This will be valuable for other campuses and research labs across the world.
Last, the planned VR system engagement with first responders in public safety
demonstrations will provide an opportunity to explore translation of the project
outcomes to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This immersive virtual reality
(VR) system with a synchronized motion tracking system will enable foundational
and applied research studies across multiple disciplines to gain a better
understanding of decision making under complex situations involving human-
machine interactions and learning in three-dimensional virtual reality datasets.
The research activities envisioned will span a broad set of areas such as:
computer graphics, computer vision, machine learning, transportation systems,
built environment prototyping, public safety during disaster response,
computational biology and bioinformatics. The project outcomes will create new
knowledge pertaining to immersive application development, training, and
personalized learning to benefit end-user groups such as police, fire fighters,
civil engineers, public works personnel, transportation engineers, and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.