* 2018498
* Robust Inference and Specification Analysis in Incomplete Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hiroaki Kaido, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 272,446.00

Empirical researchers in social science often face situations in which their
models or data are in- complete. Such incompleteness arises when researchers do
not want to impose strong assumptions on parts of their model or some of the
data are missing for reasons not known to the researcher. Incomplete models
occur in many empirical studies, such as strategic voting, product choice,
school choice, and network formation. Incomplete observations of data are common
in studies that evaluates public or business policies. This research will
develop new statistical methods that allow researchers to estimate incomplete
models and conduct hypothesis testing in a way that does not depend on how the
model is written. The research will develop a theoretical framework for
understanding the best statistical procedures to judge the costs of incorrect
models. The project will also develop computer programs for implementing the
proposed estimation and hypothesis testing procedures that will be freely
distributed to the public through an online repository. The results of this
research will improve policy evaluation, hence establish the US as the global
leader in policy evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a likelihood-based framework for robust inference and specification
analysis in incomplete models. It will study a class of models that have one of
the following structures: i) given a structural parameter and observable and
unboservable variables, the model predicts a set of values for an outcome; or
ii) given a structural parameter and observable and unboservable variables, the
model predicts a unique value of outcome, but the researcher only observes a
set-valued outcome. Such models are nonstandard because they may admit multiple
likelihood functions. Identification and inference methods based on moment
inequalities have been extensively studied recently, but an alternative
likelihood-based approach is less explored. The research aims at developing a
novel framework for constructing robust estimation and inference procedures
based on the least favorable pair of likelihoods and its associated scores.
Furthermore, it will provide a framework for understanding the consequences of
model misspecification in the presence of model or data incompleteness and
introducing the notion of pseudo-true identified sets. The methods developed in
this research will be useful for policy evaluation, hence contribute to
effective policy formulation and implementation of efficient policies in the
U.S. and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.