* 2018728
* MRI: Acquisition of Automatic Test Equipment to Enhance Research and Research Training in Engineering and Computer Science at San Francisco State University
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Pooyan Fazli, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 749,304.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of
state-of-the-art Automatic Test Equipment at San Francisco State University
(SFSU) to accelerate research, expand research training capacity, and build new
programs on electronic design and testing as well as collaborative robotics.
This industry-standard test system will bring new experimental capability to
test a variety of integrated circuits and circuit boards and will enable
functional tests, parametric measurements, memory tests, scan tests, and speed
tests. This MRI equipment acquisition will create new research opportunities and
enhance existing research capabilities at an urban, Hispanic-serving, non-Ph.D.
granting institution in the critical areas of hardware security, machine
learning hardware, neural machine interface, wearable robotics, and artificial
intelligence in robotics. The equipment will catalyze the establishment of an
expert testing center that will benefit the broader research community and
promote extensive collaborations with academic and industry partners. It will
provide opportunities for Master’s and undergraduate students to engage in
frontier research using cutting-edge technologies, which is critical for them to
compete successfully for positions in industry or entrance into Ph.D. programs.
The Automatic Test Equipment will provide a new tool for recruiting, retaining,
and engaging students and faculty members from underrepresented groups in
engineering and computer science at SFSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Automatic
Test Equipment acquisition will greatly advance the research programs of faculty
members and student researchers enabling them to test and characterize circuits
ranging from simple digital circuits to complex system-on-chips. In hardware
security research, the instrument will catalyze progress in designing
reconfigurable circuits for hardware obfuscation. It will be used for testing
the functionality, performance, and security of circuits and design techniques
to enhance the security of Integrated Circuits. In the area of machine learning
hardware, it will be used to test and characterize the functionality, power,
frequency, and reliability of memristor-based pattern recognition circuits. The
focus will be on testing analog integrated circuits interfaced with memristor
crossbar arrays and determining memristor properties in pattern recognition
applications. In the neural-machine interfaces area, the Automatic Test
Equipment will enable collecting and interpreting bioelectric signals from human
neural control systems to identify human states, including emotion, intention,
and motion; and to control external devices, including power prostheses and
virtual input devices. It will allow testing of embedded neural-machine
interface prototypes with integrated microcontrollers, Radio Frequency chips,
and biosensors. In the robotics area, the Automatic Test Equipment will be used
to: (1) test and debug electronics used in wearable robotics to improve the
mobility and quality of life for the disabled population; and (2) verify the
functionality and security of sensors, including cameras and range and
positioning sensors employed in autonomous robots and cyber-physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.