* 2018073
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Individual differences in Type 1 thought: The other half of human intelligence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Keela Thomson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 30,356.00

This research project is designed to extend our understanding of intelligence to
types of thinking that have been largely ignored in the intelligence literature.
IQ tests are among the most powerful predictors of individual achievement and
outcomes, including education, salary, and health. Prominent theories of
intelligence and IQ tests have focused on a cluster of cognitive abilities that
require effortful, deliberative, working memory-heavy processing such as
logical, spatial, and verbal abilities, which fall under the umbrella of what
psychologists call Type 2 reasoning. Intelligence research has largely ignored a
second class of abilities—called Type 1 abilities—which operate automatically,
effortlessly, and without working memory (such as recognizing your mother in a
photo, or solving 1+1 = X). This program of research will investigate whether
individual differences in Type 1 abilities are the “other half” of human
intelligence, alongside Type 2 abilities. This work may improve aptitude testing
and placement in educational and professional settings. Additionally, the
proposed work has potential to improve education and training methods by
providing an unprecedented evidence-based approach to developing individualized
learning skill profiles, allowing education to be tailored to individual
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the dominant theory about the nature
of intelligence holds that it is a unitary entity. Research has consistently
found that a single measure of general intelligence (the g factor) can predict
all other specific cognitive abilities (such as verbal skills, math skills, and
even interpersonal skills). However, this work has largely failed to test Type 1
abilities due to a number of assumptions that have since been demonstrated to be
false, such as the notion that individuals do not vary in their Type 1
abilities. Surprising preliminary evidence suggests that despite the g factor’s
broad predictive ability, it may be unrelated to Type 1 abilities. This would
mean that what we know about Type 2 intelligence from traditional IQ tests may
not apply to Type 1 abilities. This project will develop tests to measure
individual differences in Type 1 abilities and use them to investigate whether
Type 1 abilities are unitary or contain multiple factors. Second, the project
will contribute to emerging evidence about the independence of Type 1 abilities
from Type 2 abilities by examining the relationship between Type 1 abilities and
a battery of existing IQ tests. Finally, we will address the real-world
implications of the ability to measure Type 1 IQ by investigating what life
outcomes Type 1 IQ predicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.