* 2018782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Heat Exposure and Dietary Choices
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Giovanni Giuntella, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2021
* USD 62,600.00

Global obesity epidemic and secular increases in heat are two problems facing
the world. Heat waves may have negative consequences on human health but it is
not clear through which mechanisms increasing heat affect human health. This
research project will use both economic theory and data t investigate the
effects of long-term heat waves on obesity through its effects on dietary
choices. The research project combines the economics and psychological and
behavioral literature to link changing rising heatwaves and obesity through
dietary choices. The project will link three large data sets over long periods
of time for the study. This is one of the few studies that links obesity to heat
waves with the major innovation coming from its focus on long-term heatwaves as
opposed to short term increases in temperature. This research also explores the
potential mechanisms through which heat waves affect obesity and other health
problems. The results of this research project will provide inputs into policies
to reduce the effects of climate change on health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will synthesize
three large datasets: the Nielsen HomeScan Consumer Panel, a nationally
representative panel of U.S. household retail purchases of more than two million
unique Universal Product Codes (UPCs) from 2004 to 2017; the NOAA Daily Global
Historical Climatology Network (GHCN-Daily) database, and the Nutritionix
Consumer Packaged Goods (CPG) dataset represented in the Nielsen panel. The
researcher will construct a panel of household grocery purchases, the
nutritional content of those purchases, and measures of contemporaneous heat
exposure based on historical weather data from the household's geographic
location. The proposed research will apply generalized additive models (GAMs),
allowing for the common finding in prior literature of nonlinear effects of
temperature on economic behavior and outcomes, to estimate the relationship
between temperature and nutritional content of purchases. The researcher will
then use these findings to elucidate the mechanisms by which heat influences
dietary choices and identify regions or subpopulations for which targeted
mitigating policies would be most valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.