* 2018794
* MRI: Acquisition of a X-Ray Diffraction System for Materials Research in Alabama
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Majid Beidaghi, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2023
* USD 280,487.00

With this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, Auburn University is
acquiring a new high-resolution X-ray diffraction system. The system enables
cutting-edge research in materials science and engineering at the university
across five disciplinary fields and will be available to researchers throughout
the state of Alabama. Research enabled by this instrument focuses on the
development of new crystalline thin film and nanostructured materials for next-
generation electronic devices and renewable energy systems. Materials for
electronic devices include ultrathin crystalline films and multilayers that are
engineered to produce electronic and magnetic properties that do not occur
naturally. The system is also tailored to study electrochemical reactions in
materials such as those used for batteries and catalysts, which advances their
applications in future energy technologies. The instrument will be managed
through the Auburn University Research Instrumentation Facility and available to
student and faculty researchers across the university and to other academic and
industrial researchers across Alabama, where there is no instrument with its
capabilities at any other university. In synergy with this work, investigators
will support minority undergraduate students to perform research projects
through the Auburn Collaborative Approaches Among Scientists and Engineers
(CASE) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program run by the Office of
Inclusion, Equity, and Diversity. Faculty researchers at Auburn will mentor
students in the REU program each summer on projects employing the system for
experiments on next-generation materials synthesized in the investigators’
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The X-ray diffractometer is designed to
perform measurements with high angular resolution using an X-ray monochromator
on the source and detector. A two-dimensional area detector enables ultrafast
measurements for more efficient use of the system. Measurement capabilities
include reciprocal space mapping, X-ray reflectometry, temperature-dependent
studies, and in situ electrochemical studies. The instrument will enhance
research output in electronic and energy materials research at Auburn.
Electronic materials research is focused on complex oxide and chalcogenide thin
films, multilayers, and superlattices synthesized via molecular beam epitaxy and
pulsed laser deposition that require high-resolution capabilities. These
materials are promising for spintronic devices and topological quantum
computation where Auburn has a growing interdisciplinary research team. Energy
materials research is led by faculty hired through the Auburn energy cluster
hiring initiative and is focused on transition metal oxide and carbide materials
for catalysis and energy storage. This work will take advantage of an in situ
battery cell attachment and heated stage for temperature-dependent studies.
Graduate and undergraduate researchers will be trained on the instrument and
enhance their experience for future careers in industry and scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.