* 2018114
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Multidisciplinary Resesarch and Teaching at an Undergraduate Liberal Arts College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Catherine Combelles, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 530,760.00

An award was made to Middlebury College to acquire a confocal microscope. This
award provides the rural areas outside central Vermont with access to a key
piece of modern research technology. Access to this instrument allows for
enhanced education and research opportunities for students and faculty members
at Middlebury College, as well as for colleagues from Castleton University and
Norwich University. At Middlebury College, this microscope will be used in
multiple courses across disciplines including biology, neuroscience, and
physics, as well as in student-directed independent studies. This will expose
almost a fourth of the entire student body to new, cutting-edge research
technology. Within these disciplines, half of the students are women, nearly one
fourth are of an ethnic minority, and over 15% are Pell grant recipients or
first generation college students. This grant also supports a number of
community outreach events and activities. Free and reduced lunch rates are as
high as 56% in the communities surrounding Middlebury College, indicating
substantial rural poverty. This poverty combined with low college-enrollment
rates limits the access of many school-age children to high quality research and
learning experiences. The confocal microscope made available by this award will
enable Middlebury College to offer several new opportunities to educate and
inspire local school-age children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also enables
Middlebury and other regional faculty to pursue novel avenues of research, which
were previously hampered or impossible. This award supports faculty across
disciplines pursuing a wide range of research and education. In physics, a
confocal microscope will allow faculty and students to employ a novel
absorption-based imaging technique using the photothermal effect for contrast.
In neuroscience, on-site access to a confocal microscope will allow faculty and
student researchers mentored by accomplished faculty to investigate the
development of the nervous system through multi- channel, high-resolution
fluorescent immunohistochemistry and 3D reconstructions. This award also
supports the pursuit of questions pertaining to the cellular response in neurons
and glia to mechanical stress. The confocal microscope will allow Biology
faculty to pursue questions involved in the regulation of vesicle release in C.
elegans, memory formation in rats, and oocyte development. This award will
improve undergraduate participation in advanced research by supporting a
microscope that can rapidly colocalize multiple fluorescent labels from in-vivo
and in-vitro specimens while providing an accessible user-interface for student
learning. This will support the granteesâ€™ mission to train the next generation
of scientists and policy makers. This award enables novel research avenues
pursued by undergraduate students and faculty, and results will be disseminated
in peer-reviewed journals and at local, national, and international scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.