* 2018892
* CC* Planning: Designing a Process to Improve Research Computing Infrastructure at City Tech
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Ariyeh Maller, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,183.00

New York City College of Technology, a comprehensive college within the City
University of New York and a Hispanic-Serving Institution, is creating a five-
year strategic plan for cyberinfrastructure (CI) and future investments and
strategic management in research computing resources. A team of faculty engaged
in international high-performance computing projects are convening a broad-based
stakeholder group to consider issues of CI governance and leadership, high-
performance computing, data infrastructure, and faculty training and workforce
development. The ecosystem of CI users includes researchers working on particle
physics, galaxy formation, genomics and integrative systems biology, and protein
dynamics and drug discovery, as well as faculty in a broad range of domains who
need to learn the fundamentals of research computing, and students who are
exposed to CI through their faculty mentors. These stakeholders are considering
how to construct laterally and vertically integrated partnerships that draw upon
the expertise of practitioners from New York State Education and Research
Network, The Carpentries, and the NSF Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CC* planning
initiative is to design a flexible, extensible, accessible research
cyberinfrastructure (CI) that is capable of meeting the evolving computational
needs of City Techâ€™s most advanced CI users while cultivating a long tail of
impact within the larger CI ecosystem. Identified institutional needs include a
faculty-led governance structure, systematic rather than ad hoc resource
acquisition policies to avoid the creation of silos, increased professional CI
support for users, and the creation of a stable and sustainable starting point
for systemic CI planning and governance. This planning grant provides that
starting point. The work of the project will proceed through a combination of
forums, Working Groups, and consultations from entities with expertise in CI
development. Topics for investigation include a faculty led leadership
structure, data, HPC, and stakeholder engagement. Project deliverables are a
five-year Cyberinfrastructure Master Plan and planning for future proposal
submissions to the NSF MRI and CC* programs to seek partial support for
implementation of the Master Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.