* 2018952
* MRI: Acquisition of a Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer for High-Throughput Measurements of Glycolysis and Mitochondrial Respiration at Skidmore College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Sylvia Franke McDevitt, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 266,517.00

An award is made to Skidmore College to support the purchase of instrumentation
for measuring subtle, real-time changes in mitochondrial respiration by two
primary output measurements: oxygen consumption and extracellular acidification.
The 96-well automated format allows for high throughput analysis of small sample
volumes with high accuracy and high resolution. The analyzer will be used by
faculty and students in the Neuroscience Program and the Departments of Biology,
Chemistry and Health &amp; Human Physiological Sciences for basic science
research, translational research and teaching. Experimental use and data
analysis will be integrated into multiple courses across the undergraduate
science curriculum, thereby reaching a broad array of undergraduate users.
Furthermore, the instrument will be featured in summer workshops for Skidmore
Scholars in Science and Math (S3M). S3M scholars are rising sophomores who are
strong science students from underrepresented backgrounds in STEM. It is
expected that exposure to the instrument and analytical practice through courses
and the S3M workshop will lead students to incorporate the instrument into their
student-driven independent research under the guidance of their
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analyzer works with a wide variety of samples
including cultured cells, excised tissue, bacteria and small animal embryos
making it ideal for the various research interests of Skidmore faculty.
Immediate research uses by the PI and co-PIs include investigation of
mitochondrial function in neuronal cells, the impact of aging on muscle and
endothelial cells, the identification and screening of novel respiratory genes
in C. elegans mutants, identification of endocrine control of fish gill ionocyte
metabolism, and investigation of metal homeostasis in bacteria. The acquisition
of the instrument coincides with the opening of Skidmore College’s new Center
for Integrated Sciences, a new science building which brings together all 10
STEM departments and programs under one roof. Importantly, the intellectual
merit regarding the shared use of the instrument is in line with the College’s
mission to integrate research and teaching within the sciences. Additionally,
the instrument will contribute to existing active and future collaborations
between Skidmore scientists and outside researchers. Data acquired on the new
system will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and through scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.