* 2018964
* MRI: Acquisition of Plasma Multi-ion-source Focused Ion Beam Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Elizabeth Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,297,022.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art focused ion beam /scanning electron microscope
outfitted with advanced detectors and automation tools. The instrument enables
and supports a diverse range of research projects and programs, within academia
and industry, that involve three-dimensional, multi-modal characterization and
patterning of microstructures. Such three-dimensional analysis is particularly
important for developing materials processing strategies for additive
manufacturing and for understanding mechanisms leading to material degradation
and failure. In addition, the nanopatterning capabilities of the instrument
provide precision engineering of novel nanometer-scale optical and mechanical
devices. The location of the instrument within the Research Triangle
Nanotechnology Network, a node of the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure (NNCI), provides enhanced access to researchers from across the
nation, impacting local universities, not-for-profit institutions and
industries. The instrument will be integrated into the curriculum developed
under an NSF-funded National Research Traineeship program, which brings together
the materials science, statistics and machine learning communities to develop
new approaches to materials informatics research. Workshops and training modules
will be developed to broaden participation from minority institutions and to
educate a new generation of researchers at the intersection of statistics and
materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the acquisition of
an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) multi-ion source focused-ion beam/ scanning
electron microscope (pFIB/SEM) to support the ongoing and future research of
numerous faculty, postdoctoral and student researchers from across five academic
departments at North Carolina State University and regional universities. In
addition, the instrument will be broadly utilized by other academic and industry
research communities via the Research Triangle Nanotechnology Network, a node of
the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI). The
instrument is outfitted specifically for statistically meaningful quantitative
characterization of material microstructures in three dimensions across length
scales from nano meter to millimeter. The coupling of automation tools with the
rapid sputtering rates unlocks the ability to: 1) study material properties
governed by complex hierarchical material microstructures, 2) study three
dimensional microstructures in materials that would be susceptible to artifacts
from ion implantation using conventional Ga ion sources, and 3) pattern large
area yet high fidelity (nanometer-scale resolution) patterns in a variety of
materials. The broader impacts of the infrastructure lie in leveraging the
unique capabilities of the North Carolina State Analytical Instrumentation
Facility in training a diverse user-base and in developing education modules at
the graduate, undergraduate and K-12 levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.