* 2018995
* Collaborative Research: Scale-free continuum percolation of bubbles as a universal mechanism of the boiling crisis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Md Mahamudur Rahman, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 160,000.00

Boiling heat transfer is an exceptionally effective heat removal process and
plays a critical role in electronics cooling, chemical processing, power
generation, HVAC, and water purification. However, boiling is susceptible to a
degradation, known as a boiling crisis, which may result in cooling system
failures. Understanding this boiling crisis is key to the development and safe
operations of nuclear reactors and computer processing units that rely on
liquid-vapor two-phase cooling. Despite decades of research, the mechanism
triggering a boiling crisis remains unclear and controversial. In this project,
a new stochastic model is proposed based on the analogy between the boiling
process and the formation of traffic jams. The project seeks to offers a novel
perspective of boiling heat transfer to the thermal community. It also provides
multidisciplinary STEM training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate boiling crises as a critical transition in the bubble coalescence
process. The instability will be captured with a stochastic percolation model
based on four fundamental boiling parameters: bubble wait time and growth time,
bubble footprint radius, and nucleation site density. With a critical
combination of these four parameters, the boiling crisis occurs when all the
bubbles suddenly merge together. This hypothesis has recently been validated on
smooth surfaces, in both pool and flow boiling conditions, as well as
preliminary results on engineered surfaces. In the proposed work, the
universality of the hypothesis will be tested by analyzing the boiling behavior
of various surfaces and fluids, at different pressures, and under diverse flow
conditions. The project will be accomplished through novel boiling experiments
that combine state-of-the-art infrared diagnostics and post-processing
algorithms, which enable measurements of time-dependent temperature and heat
flux distributions on the boiling surface, as well as other boiling heat
transfer parameters. The results of the experimental investigations will be
shared with the thermal science and engineering community to support the
evaluation of other models and stimulate the development of new
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.