* 2018705
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Nathan Tintle, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,254.00

The acquisition of a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster for use by faculty
and undergraduate students at rurally located Dordt University will
significantly impact several new and ongoing, multidisciplinary research
projects in both STEM and non-STEM fields. This cluster will generate
opportunities for Dordt faculty and other regional college and high school
faculty to integrate high-performance computing into their research, training
activities, and classrooms. Research projects covering a wide range of academic
disciplines will be supported by the new HPC cluster, including computational
biomedicine, medicinal chemistry, statistical genetics, planetary chemistry, and
structural integrity under seismic loading. The project will also expand
opportunities for HPC use within other fields such as social sciences
statistical research, digital humanities, institutional research, and IT. The
research endeavors of this team of undergraduate research mentors will be
substantially catalyzed by the HPC cluster, leading to a diverse and
interdisciplinary set of high-impact research findings, providing cutting-edge,
high performance computing research experiences for undergraduate students, and
acting as a model for cross disciplinary computational resource sharing at
Primarily Undergraduate Institutions. Other faculty in computer science, data
science, statistics, engineering, and chemistry will also utilize the cluster in
upper-level courses as research training opportunities for students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award will provide
infrastructure that will enable faculty to further develop and sustain research
programs that already produce skillfully trained undergraduate researchers,
generate peer reviewed publications, and attract external support. To
accommodate the multidisciplinary range of the research applications of HPC
users, this project will provide a high performance computing cluster consisting
of a head node and 18 compute nodes in three standardized configurations: eight
regular compute nodes, eight high RAM nodes, and two Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU)-based nodes for applications, such as large molecular modeling systems,
that will harness the massively parallel vector processing abilities of GPUs.
Over the three years of the project, approximately fifty graduate school-bound
undergraduate students (over half female; at least 10% minority) will receive
intensive research training on the proposed HPC cluster by the primary faculty
users. Furthermore, at least 1500 additional undergraduate, middle and high
school students (many from rural, first generation college, or lower socio-
economic strata), and faculty will use the cluster as part of STEM courses and
outreach activities, including high school teacher training and faculty
development workshops, as well as research/education programs for middle and
high school students. The HPC resources will also be integral to a new
initiative at Dordt University focused on recruitment and retention of
academically talented students with financial barriers to education. This award
will bring additional high-performance computing capability to a region of the
country which currently has limited access to HPC resources, but has seen recent
rapid growth in STEM. The HPC cluster will reach a diverse user community and
maximize student impact, inspiring more students to pursue STEM careers and use
computational tools across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.