* 2018204
* Building Community Capacity for Assessment of Student Learning in Undergraduate Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Victoria Moore, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 05/31/2021
* USD 24,603.00

While many college and university faculty understand the importance of evidence-
based instruction, opportunities to obtain the training required to write clear
and incisive assessment questions that reliably evaluate student understanding
of biochemistry and other STEM subjects are limited. The purpose of this project
is to train a cadre of approximately thirty instructors from colleges and
universities in the Southeastern United States, including the area's many
historically black colleges and universities, in best practices for writing
effective assessment questions. This will be accomplished through a workshop for
molecular life sciences faculty. In the workshop, participants will work with
experienced colleagues who will provide training on the principles of effective
question writing and, more importantly, work with them on illustrative examples
and, finally, on the participants' own questions. An online community will be
established to maintain contact between the participants and the facilitators to
support the former in applying lessons learned in their classrooms. In turn, it
is anticipated that workshop graduates will mentor colleagues interested in
improving their own question-writing
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professional development of educators has the
potential to benefit large numbers of students over many years. To provide
training in effective question design for the molecular life sciences, this
project will organize a one-and-a-half-day workshop for thirty
scientists/educators in Summer 2020. The workshop will build on expertise gained
by the organizers in designing and scoring the annual undergraduate
certification exam offered by the American Society for Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology. The workshop will begin with an introduction to writing
effective questions and corresponding rubrics, followed by hands-on practice in
revising questions and ultimately creating new questions. A keynote speaker will
discuss best practices in assessment. The workshop will conclude with
reflections on the question-writing process and sustaining a community of
question writers. Held in the Atlanta area, the workshop will be advertised to
diverse undergraduate institutions, including minority-serving colleges and
universities. The workshop will be regional in scope and will have the dual
goals of equipping educators to construct clear questions targeted to specific
learning objectives and laying the foundation for an inclusive, national
community that connects educators interested in effective question design. This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.