* 2018122
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Decision-Making Processes for Resilient Tourism-Based Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Tashi Gurung, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 21,590.00

Since the turn of the 21st century, tourism has experienced exponential growth
due to the increasingly interconnected nature of the world and the relative ease
of travel. According to the United Nations World Tourism Organization, tourism
is now one of the world’s fastest growing industries. Since the inception of
tourism studies, a majority of research has focused on the positive economic
benefits of the industry, overlooking the widespread negative economic, social,
and environmental impacts. Similarly, studies have often focused on tourism from
the perspective of consumers in developed countries. Tourism research that does
focus on host destinations in developing countries are rare and also typically
limited to the perception and attitudes of hosting residents. Research has not
been focused on the decision-making processes of destination stakeholders.
Globally, households in regions with high levels of tourism, particularly those
invested in tourism-based livelihood strategies in rural areas, are rapidly
diversifying their livelihoods to tourism-based ones. This research will
investigate the social, cultural, economic, environmental, and institutional
factors influencing their decisions to do so.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project explores the livelihood and management decisions of
stakeholders by drawing from the theoretical frameworks of complexity and
commons theory and integrating this thinking with existing tourism literature.
The research will be carried out in the Himalayan region of Upper Mustang,
Nepal, a region particularly relevant because of dramatic infrastructural
changes and its recently being opened to tourism in 1992. Pilot work in the area
in 2018 and 2019 suggests that households are rapidly diversifying their
livelihoods, resulting in an exponential increase in tourism activities since
2007. Using surveys, semi-structured interviews, and participant observation,
this research will first investigate local inhabitants’ decision-making
processes, regarding whether and how to engage in tourism-based livelihoods.
Second, the research will engage elected officials to understand their decision-
making processes in developing and managing tourism. This research contributes
to transitioning and reframing tourism studies within broader interdisciplinary
scholarship - one which considers tourism to be a set of choices open to people
among other livelihood and management options linked to other social, cultural,
and environmental outcomes. In addition, this research has the potential for
real-time practical, institutional, policy, and managerial impacts, which will
be valuable for effective management of tourism in the study region, as well as
other tourist destinations facing difficult institutional and governance
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.