* 2018617
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Performance Computing Cluster for Research and Workforce Development at University of Cincinnati
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

This project will the support the acquisition of a high-performance computing
(HPC) and high-speed storage system at the University of Cincinnati (UC). This
instrument will meet the computing needs of UC researchers and scientists
spanning a broad range of fields including, physics, chemistry, aerospace &amp;
mechanical engineering, computer science, bioinformatics, medicine, and digital
humanities. The research projects enabled by the HPC system in these areas will
advance fundamental science and contribute to national priorities in health and
national security. This system will also serve as a launching facility for the
development of novel algorithms, and initial and scalability testing of codes,
which will then be ported to national supercomputing facilities. Over 117
faculty and students will immediately benefit from this equipment. In addition
to scientific advancements and development of the next generation of HPC-enabled
workforce, this project will provide opportunities for the training of HPC
administrators and facilitators. Through participation in the Open Science Grid,
the equipment will also enable the research activities of external users. This
project will involve the participation of underrepresented groups through summer
internships, and workshops at local inner-city schools. Further, this project
will offer the possibility of exposing researchers in humanities to the benefits
of HPC through collaboration between the Advanced Research Computing and the
Digital Scholarship Centers at UC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computing cluster
will consist of Central Processing Units (CPU), Graphics Processing Units (GPU)
and high-speed scratch storage to substantially enhance the capabilities of the
Advanced Research Computing Center at UC and thereby support computational and
data science researchers by providing HPC resources for large-scale scientific
calculations, HTC for Monte Carlo type simulations, and GPUs for advanced
analytics, artificial intelligence, and visualization, all of which will enable
sophisticated and increasingly realistic modeling, simulation and data analysis.
These research efforts based on molecular dynamics and quantum chemistry
simulations, computational fluid dynamics, multi-universe stochastic models, and
data-intensive, deep learning and graph convolutional neural networks, will
advance our knowledge of physical &amp; cyber-physical systems, chemical and
mechanical behaviors of materials, the structure and origin of our universe and
contribute to the development of innovative applications such as brain-inspired
computing, effective personalized precision medicine for complex diseases,
carbon-neutral combustion devices, hypersonic propulsion systems, multi-UAV
autonomous systems, and smart cities. These objectives closely align with one of
UCâ€™s enterprise-level programs, the Digital Futures
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.