* 2018915
* FMitF: Track I: Automating the Verification of Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Baris Kasikci, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,943.00

Computer software is and has always been teeming with errors. When these errors
manifest in a deployed system they can cause severe problems, including
undesired behavior and unavailability of critical services. Formal verification
is an approach that allows the writing of software that is provably free of such
errors, but is notoriously difficult and time-consuming, which makes it harder
to adopt in practice. The proposed research will investigate a new approach for
automating the verification of complex software running on multiple machines,
thus bringing formal verification closer to becoming a practical
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will automate the verification
process by automatically identifying inductive invariants. It uses model
checking to identify an inductive invariant of a small, finite instance of the
system and then tries to generalize that invariant to all possible instances.
The proposed work is structured along three thrusts. The first thrust will
expand this initial idea to cover invariants with existential quantifiers, thus
broadening the scope of the approach. The second thrust will scale the approach
to more complicated systems by adding support for refinement. The third thrust
will go beyond decidable verification in order to support high-performance
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workâ€™s broader impact is
multi-faceted. First, it represents a path for bringing formal verification
closer to practical use and ensuring it does not remain just an academic
exercise. This will further enable building and deploying stable and reliable
systems to the immediate benefit of all end users. On the academic side, this
project aims to debunk the common belief that model checking is not applicable
to complex distributed systems due to its limited scalability. By doing so, this
project will bring together theorem proving and model checking, two areas that
have long been walking parallel paths towards correctness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data generated through this work (specifications,
implementations, proofs, configurations and script files) will be retained in a
secure machine cluster administered by the research groups of the principal
investigators, with electronic data backup service provided by the Departmental
Computing Organization of the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Department at Michigan and the Information and Technology Services of the
University of Michigan. They will also be hosted on publicly available
repository providers like github.com. Data will be retained for at least three
years beyond the award period, as required by NSF guidelines. The current
repository can be found at: https://github.com/GLaDOS-
Michigan/I4.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.