* 2018811
* CC* Regional:  Promoting Research and Education at Small Colleges in Alabama through Network Architecture Enhancements
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Damian Clarke, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 730,545.00

Advancements in data-intensive scientific instrumentation have greatly surpassed
the capability of some campus networking infrastructures to effectively connect
data-producing facilities to powerful computing and storage systems. Georgia
Tech (GT) working in partnership with Southern Light Rail (SLR) and its high-
speed research network, Southern Crossroads (SoX), has established this project
to increase connectivity to smaller and HBCU institutions in Alabama. As a
result of this project, both Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University
(AAMU) and the University of South Alabama (USA) are able to transition their
connectivity from a low-bandwidth ISP to a true high-speed R&amp;E network to
help increase their research efforts. Since their IT networking staff and budget
are smaller and do not possess the expertise or funding in procuring and
managing multiple internet providers, this award is allowing GT to install pre-
configured hardware appliances for connectivity, performance management, and
large data transfers at SoX.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the enhancement of the
network at AAMU, they are able to enhance their research on the following: UAVs
to manage agricultural data collection and analysis, astrophysics visualization,
and virtual mentoring research. Similarly at the University of South Alabama,
this project is leading to an increase in the data transfer between their
university and industry partners eliminating the need to exchange physical hard
drives. This is expanding their research in the field of multi-spectral imaging
for medical and other life science applications, as well as analysis of sensor
data from airplanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.