* 2018559
* MRI: Acquisition of micro-computed tomography system for imaging by multiple, inter-disciplinary, users at East Tennessee State University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Blaine Schubert, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,641.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant supports the acquisition of micron
scale imaging X-ray Computed Tomography system (XRCT), to be housed on the
campus of East Tennessee State University (ETSU) for the use of local and
regional researchers and their students. Micro-XRCT allows for non-destructive
imaging of the exteriors and interiors of solid sample with micron scale spatial
resolution allowing for rapid and quantitative measurement of the morphology and
structure of biological and paleontological specimens, physical samples, and
cultural artifacts. It is particularly critical for study of museum specimens,
artifacts, and rare samples owing to its non-destructive nature. The instrument
will support research on an extensive collection of cultural artifacts,
specimens, and fossils housed at the Museum of Natural History, Reece Museum,
Biological Sciences invertebrate and vertebrate museums, and Geosciences
osteological collections at ETSU. All told these public collections contain
hundreds of thousands of objects that are curated using public funds but may be
hard to access and view. Using XRCT, 3-D digital images of specimens can be
generated, analyzed, and easily shared with the public, all while preserving the
object for future generations to study. Combined with 3D printing, this
technology will significantly boost STEM training in the region and engage a
wider audience across Southern Appalachia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XRCT
instrument will be used many researchers across ETSU and the region, however, it
will receive heavy use from three departments at ETSU. In Biological Sciences it
will be used for high resolution, 3-D imaging of biological specimens to reveal
links between form and function, developmental processes, and evolution of
organisms. In the Center of Excellence in Paleontology it will be used for high
resolution, 3-D imaging of modern and fossil vertebrates to explore growth,
development, morphology and pathologies of modern and fossil vertebrates and as
part of large-scale digitization efforts at the ETSU Museum of Natural History
and Gray Fossil Site, one of the world's premier archives of Cenozoic mammal
fossils. The instrument will also support 3-D reconstruction of cultural
artifacts at the Reece Museum for research on form and function and to enhance
exhibitions and education opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.