* 2018275
* Collaborative Research: RUI: The Effect of a Mid-Ocean Ridge-Centered Environment on a Zoned Mantle Plume and Associated Secondary Magmatism
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Christopher Sinton, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 103,979.00

Volcanic ocean islands are of wide interest. Placed far from the influence of
continents, their flora and fauna followed unique evolutionary pathways and
their tall volcanoes rising from the seafloor create extraordinary marine
ecosystems. Their volcanoes are generated from long-lived rising plumes of hot
mantle. The lavas that erupt to form these islands contain geochemical clues
about long-term movements of the mantle. Each volcano eventually becomes extinct
as it is transported away from its source plume by tectonic plate motion,
eventually subsiding below the sea surface. In this study, lavas previously
recovered from the now drowned part of the Galapagos island chain that formed
between 5 and 10 million years ago will be analyzed for age and geochemical
composition. The proposed work will test models of how mantle plume composition
and melting can change over space and time. The work will also investigate
mechanisms of volcanism that occur away from the mantle plume. This is a joint
project between Ithaca College and Colgate University in collaboration with
GEOMAR (Kiel, Germany). The project invests directly in undergraduate research
experiences. The students will develop skills such as conducting a search for
background information, discussing/focusing research questions, learning new
analytical techniques, learning about data quality control, and managing
datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the age and composition of lavas
recovered from the Eastern Galápagos Platform and Carnegie Ridge (EGPCR) will be
analyzed for their age and composition. These features represent the 5-10 Ma
portion of the thickened oceanic crust on the Nazca plate created when the
Galápagos plume was located directly below the Galápagos Spreading Center. The
primary goal of this project is to use the EGPCR data to address global
questions about plume structure and dynamics and the extent of secondary
magmatism after plume-related magmatism has ceased. The activities for this
proposed study will focus on high resolution 40Ar-39Ar radiometric dating and
major, trace, and Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf isotopic ratio analysis of existing rocks
recovered from the region. This project invests directly in undergraduate
research experiences where four undergraduate students from Ithaca College and
Colgate University will perform laboratory work during the summers and continue
during the academic year. The project also enhances international cooperation
with the involvement of at GEOMAR in Kiel, Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.