* 2018572
* Managing light and heat in high power density air-bridge thermophotovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Stephen Forrest, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing low-cost, scalable, and renewable
energy sources is a grand engineering challenge with profound impact on society.
Thermophotovoltaic (TPV) cells can take advantage of many energy sources,
including solar energy and industrial waste heat. When used in combination with
thermal energy storage, these devices offer an approach with lower costs than
battery storage. Though promising, the efficiency of currently available devices
is well below that needed. A breakthrough in TPV technology is therefore needed
to enable deployment of this technology for affordable grid-scale energy. This
project will use a novel “air-bridge” architecture to achieve efficiencies
exceeding 50% while simultaneously lowering costs. The air-bridge architecture
will minimize cell heating as well as electrical losses. Deployment of this
technology promises to significantly reduce pollution and its impact will be
applicable to a wide range of technologies where light management is critical.
The project will lay the foundation for a new interdisciplinary course at the
Detroit Center for Innovation and empower a diverse community of students
through hands-on experiences. The course will be integrated with outreach
activities to students from under-resourced high schools in the Detroit Metro
area, expanding STEM opportunities to underrepresented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of
the proposed air-bridge cell archicture includes near-complete reflection of
out-of-band radiation, enhancement of output voltage through photon recycling,
and compatability with reuse of growth substrates. When the reflectance of the
back surface exceeds 99%, cell efficiency enters a new regime where it becomes
nearly insensitive to the bandgap of the cell and the temperature of the hot
emitter. The project will facilitate operation in this regime, broadening the
range of materials and heat sources suitable for TPVs. The project will also
provide a complete understanding of the optoelectronic and thermal properties of
air-bridge thermophotovoltaics. Modesl describing recombination and thermal
transport in air-bridge cells will be validated using systemic experimental
studies. These models will allow for the design of high-efficiency cells and
will be made available to the broader community through online repositories.
This project will pioneer techniques for fabrication of multi-junction air-
bridge cells that are compatible with reuse of the otherwise prohibitively
expensive growth substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.