* 2018403
* MRI:  Acquisition of a high-speed stereoscopic particle image velocimetry system for research and teaching at the University of St. Thomas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Cheol-Hong Min, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 424,013.00

Complex fluid flows play a critical role in many important areas of society and
technology including transportation, energy, defense, and the environment.
Examples of complex flow phenomena include flows with chemical reactions, flows
involving both liquids and gases, and flows that interact with structures. The
proposal will fund the acquisition of an instrument referred to as a particle
image velocimeter. A broad portfolio of research projects has been developed to
leverage the proposed instrument as well as expertise from a variety of
disciplines. Projects will investigate the mechanism and control of destructive
combustion instabilities, drag reduction for ships and pipelines using
microbubbles, and the conversion of acoustic noise into useful energy, to name a
few. These efforts can directly lead to advancements in the efficiency,
reliability, and safety of these systems while reducing environmental impacts.
The proposed projects enabled by the instrument includes collaborations across
disciplines as well as project teams spanning a variety of regional higher-
education institutions. Additional broader impacts include use of the instrument
in multiple undergraduate and graduate courses, outreach activities including a
K-12 summer STEM program for female students and enhanced preparation of
undergraduate researchers for graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of St. Thomas proposes an instrument acquisition project to fund a
high-speed stereoscopic particle image velocimetry system. The objective is to
use the requested system to support research and teaching needs of major faculty
users and their collaborators, faculty users at the University of Minnesota and
Dunwoody College of Technology, and additional St. Thomas engineering faculty
and students. The instrument will enable a broad range of interdisciplinary
research integrating fluid dynamics, data science, modeling and simulation, and
digital image analysis. A wide range of physical phenomena will be investigated
that require detailed 3-D measurements taken at high-speeds to better understand
the important details of the flow behavior. Immediate plans include the study of
fluid/structure interactions, multiphase flows, acoustic/flow interactions, flow
instabilities, and flow transitions. These flows exhibit complexities including
competing and coexisting instability mechanisms, phase boundaries, density
gradients, and multiscale features in space and time. The instrument will
further be used within the curriculum for topics such as fluid mechanics and
heat transfer, experimental methods, engineering design, verification and
validation of numerical simulations, and big data mining and visualization.
Finally, the instrument enables extensive validation of increasingly
sophisticated modeling and simulation tools both as a research activity and with
industry partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.