* 2018897
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The phenotypic consequences of adaptive introgression in naturally hybridizing primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jenny Tung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 32,175.00

Recent findings suggest that intermixing with now-extinct relatives like the
Neanderthals may have helped humans adapt to new environments during their rapid
expansion around the globe, and may still contribute to human differences in
disease susceptibility today. However, the extent to which benefits to
hybridization are also found in other primates is not well understood. This
doctoral dissertation project will use a model for natural hybridization in
primates to investigate signatures of beneficial transfer of genetic variants
between species. It will also ask whether hybridization affects hair color and
maturation timing in baboons, traits that may be important in mate competition,
fertility, or survival. The research will provide novel insight into
hybridization’s role in primate evolution and shed light on how hybridization
may influence primate diversity in the future. It will also contribute to STEM
education at the elementary, undergraduate, and graduate levels through the
design of new educational activities, mentored research opportunities for
undergraduate students, and support for the co-PI’s PhD training. Finally, this
project will facilitate public engagement with science through free-to-the-
public presentations that will also be accessible
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the potential benefits of
hybridization in primates, the project will integrate genomic and observational
data from wild baboons. It will test the hypothesis that hybridization
facilitates the transfer of a small number of advantageous genetic variants
between yellow baboons and anubis baboons. To do so, genomic data will be
generated for multiple populations spanning a baboon hybrid zone. These data
will be subjected to three complementary methods to identify genetic variants
affected by adaptive introgression. Cases of potential adaptive introgression
will be investigated for overlap with genes that are also differentially
expressed between yellow and anubis baboons. The project also will test the
hypothesis that genetic ancestry predicts hair color and maturation timing in a
well-studied baboon population at the center of the hybrid zone. It will assess
whether ancestry effects on these traits differ in number and magnitude across
the genome, based on evidence that hair and skin color traits tend to have a
simpler genetic basis than life history traits like maturation timing. Finally,
the project will test whether regions in the genome that contribute to ancestry-
related differences in hair color or maturation timing are candidates for
adaptive introgression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.