* 2018693
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Creating a More inclusive Biology Curriculum
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Aramati Casper, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2023
* USD 69,003.00

To make biology education more inclusive for all students and improve biological
literacy, this RCN will bring together an interdisciplinary team of scholars
from across biology, biology education, and gender studies to address systemic
gender inequities that may impact biology education. Multiple agencies
interested in education are calling for the creation of a more inclusive
biology. Yet, most of the work on inclusion has focused on pedagogical practice
and not the biology curriculum itself. This is a lost opportunity, as research
shows that the content that is taught can impact studentsâ€™ learning. This
network will be one of the first efforts in biology to expand education research
into curriculum to increasing inclusion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN-UBE
incubator project will develop an inaugural interdisciplinary network of
scholars from developmental biology, evolutionary biology, ecology, genetics,
physiology, and gender studies focused on coordinating research and curriculum
development on gender essentialism in biology. This effort will involve: 1)
identifying topics in biology courses that potentially affect systemic gender
inequities in biology education, 2) developing guidelines to help instructors
create and assess the effectiveness of curricula teaching these topics; 3)
collecting existing resources for developing curricula that impact systemic
gender inequities in biology education; and 4) determining directions for future
work. The network will be one of the first efforts in biology to expand
education research in curriculum reform to increasing inclusion. This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.