* 2018258
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next Generation Small-Angle X-ray Scattering System for Nanoscale Characterization and Development of Advanced Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2023
* USD 547,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The development of advanced functional materials
for energy efficient processes, life-enhancing biomedical applications, and
nanostructured materials for advanced manufacturing depends on state-of-the-art
tools required to characterize and understand the precise organization of
material structures over many length scales. Top among the list of such tools is
small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), where x-rays traveling through the material
relay length-scale information about the manner in which matter is distributed
throughout the chemical composition. To meet this need, this project is focused
on the acquisition of a next-generation (SAXS) system that will offer
researchers at Virginia Tech (VT) the ability to probe structural details of
nano-phase separated membranes for fuel cell applications, safe and efficient
electrolytes for energy storage, precisely ordered block-copolymer
nanocomposites for advanced optical devices, ordered biopolymers for targeted
drug delivery, gels and aerogels for lightweight insulation, and 3D printable
aqueous latexes for structured elastic materials. With the proposed instrument,
VT’s critical infrastructure as a regional resource in small-angle x-ray
scattering will be profoundly enhanced. With respect to the grand challenges
facing our society, this project will provide fundamental structural detail
needed to develop cost-effective, readily available materials alternatives
needed to meet critical demands for energy storage, water purification
membranes, fuel cell membranes for clean energy conversion, lightweight
construction and aerospace materials, and environmentally friendly materials for
the medical and healthcare industries. The interdisciplinary nature of research
activities in this project, ranging from pure chemistry and physics to materials
engineering, will provide a plethora of educational opportunities to a diverse
community of citizens and researchers eager to contribute to our nation’s
leadership in ensuring a healthier, more energy-efficient global
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on the acquisition of a next-generation small-angle x-ray scattering
(SAXS) system with advanced capabilities including a grazing-incidence GISAXS
module for thin film characterization; large sample chamber with a broad range
of sample cells; large-area, ultrasensitive, beamstopless SAXS detector for fast
data acquisition; an automated beam alignment/refinement to accommodate diverse
geometries and a user-friendly graphical interface to facilitate rapid training
and educational demonstrations. The goal of this project is to offer researchers
at Virginia Tech the ability to probe and quantify structural details over a
wide range of length scales (from 100’s of nm to a few Angstroms) of nano-phase
separated membranes for fuel cell applications, safe and efficient
macromolecular electrolytes for energy storage, precisely ordered block-
copolymer nanocomposites for plasmonic metamaterials, lipid bilayer constructs
and helical peptide nanocoils for targeted delivery of bioactive agents,
hierarchical gels and aerogels for lightweight insulation in construction and
aerospace applications, 3D printable aqueous latexes for vat photopolymerization
in advanced manufacturing, and anisotropic cellulose nanocrystal/polymer
composites. Building upon internationally recognized accomplishments of the
team, validated through a broad range of federally/industrially supported
projects, the cutting-edge research efforts to be accomplished in this project
will have far-reaching impact in the science and engineering of advanced
materials for critical energy solutions, biomedical applications, and advanced
manufacturing. The Principal Investigators have extensive experience in
scattering fundamentals, methods, and analysis, and are poised to lead this
diverse team of materials innovators toward new heights of structure-property
understandings needed to meet our society’s most complex materials
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.