* 2018556
* CC* CRIA: Planning a Regional Cyber-Infrastructure-Research Consortium for Middle Tennessee
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Anthony Skjellum, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,713.00

This CC* planning and research alignment project (CRIA) project is led by
researchers from the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC), Tennessee
Technological University (TTU), and Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU).
The mission is to build a regional Cyberinfrastructure consortium to advance
collaborative computing research in Middle Tennessee, building on the team's
expertise in computer and cyber systems. Middle Tennessee is an underserved but
growing region of the nation that combines rural, suburban, and urban areas and
sits at a nexus of major transportation routes and commerce in the Southeastern
United States. The project is also improving regional workforce development,
devising and implementing an innovative plan to broaden participation in
computing in the surrounding region, and building interdisciplinary proposal
teams to seek external funding to support educational and research activities of
consortium members. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UTC, TTU, and MTSU have complementary
strengths further strengthened by consortium partners. MTSU, for example, has a
strong agriculture component to their research endeavors UTC is the strongest of
the three teaming institutions in computational science. Sharing information,
cyber resources, expertise, and forming collaborative groups will enhance
personnel at each member campus. A major goal of this CRIA project is to
intensively study approaches to broadening participation in
computer/computational science in order to develop and implement a regional plan
for recruitment, engagement, and retention of students from underrepresented
groups. The team is also committed to improving regional workforce development,
which will have a broader impact on students within the teaming institutions and
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.