* 2018592
* RCN-UBE Incubator: REAL (R in Education and Assessment of Learning)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Abha Ahuja, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 74,866.00

Knowing how to use math and computing skills effectively has become essential to
working in science, particularly for biologists in recent years. However,
because of the rapid pace of change in biological and computing technologies,
many faculty members find themselves teaching skills which are also new to them
or that they had to learn independently. In this project, the research team
seeks to develop a network of researchers and educators who will collaborate to
increase their own computing and statistical skills, while also developing "best
practices" of how to teach these skills to students. Using the programming
language R, a free and open source coding language that is increasingly used in
the biological sciences, the R in Education and Assessment of Learning (REAL)
network will establish an inclusive, sustainable community of biology educators
and biology education researchers who will both teach and use R for the
betterment of biology research and education nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REAL network aims to support the training of biology
researchers in quantitative and computational methods; foster collaborations for
the development, sharing and assessment of educational modules for quantitative
skills and of R-code for biology education researchers; and to catalyze the
development of common standards and best practices for the training of
undergraduates and graduate students in quantitative and computational skills.
The networkâ€™s central activity involves training an initial cohort of beginners
in R to develop, assess and disseminate biology classroom modules to teach
quantitative skills using R and/or develop and test R code scripts and packages
tailored specifically for biology education research. REAL trainees will develop
novel educational modules to infuse effective, up-to-date quantitative skills
into the biology curriculum, rigorously assess the impact of their teaching, and
make significant contributions to education research both at the interface of
biology and computing and at the edges of current statistical practice. The REAL
Network will increase the number of biology faculty with the skills to
effectively teach quantitative and computational skills to biology
undergraduates, contributing to a new generation of biologists ready to tackle
the research and data analysis challenges posed by the development of novel
high-throughput technologies. In addition, these faculty will also be better
equipped to rigorously assess the educational outcomes of their students,
leading to improved teaching practices and allowing for the development of
common standards and best practices unique to the training of biologists in
quantitative methods.This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.