* 2018238
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Adam Hill, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2023
* USD 288,990.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and Chemistry
Research Instrumentation Programs. St. Lawrence University is acquiring a 400
MHz nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer (NMR) to support the research in the
groups of Professor Adam Hill and colleagues Samuel Tartakoff and Amanda
Oldacre. This spectrometer enables research in a variety of fields such as those
that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well
as the study of biologically relevant species and environmental chemistry. In
general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available for
chemists to elucidate the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential for
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at St. Lawrence University and nearby
institutions including SUNY Canton and SUNY Potsdam. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. It especially impacts organic chemistry projects, particularly
natural products characterization, small-molecule synthesis, and methods
development. Inorganic materials chemistry investigations involve preparing
useful heterobimetallic devices as potential tools for artificial photosynthesis
and also metal organic frameworks used as catalysts for the degradation of
organic pollutants. Other materials science research is ongoing of cerium
nanoparticles for scavenging physiologically damaging free radicals and the
structural properties of polysulfones for crosslinking polymer applications.
Environmental science projects such as the characterization of microplastics are
under study for possible remediation of environmental contamination. Research to
understand the efficacy of DNA-binding with disinfectant bacteriostatics is
being carried out. Lipoppolysaccharides with birefringence properties are being
studied as possible biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.