* 2018110
* MRI: Acquisition of a Wideband Continuous-Wave Characterization Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Weili Zhang, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 635,000.00

Given the proliferation of wireless devices, sensors, and computers in our
world, the efficient utilization of the electromagnetic spectrum is of paramount
importance. This project will support the acquisition of a continuous-wave
characterization instrument at Oklahoma State University (OSU) to address the
well-known and longstanding gap in electromagnetics and communications research
of the utilization of millimeter-waves and terahertz frequency waves. The MRI
instrument offers unique capabilities that have the potential to tackle the
fundamental research problems blocking the development of high-performance
communication, sensing, and imaging technologies. The MRI instrument will enable
research on the fundamental physics behind novel magnetic materials which could
speed up computer memory and produce more power-efficient architectures. It also
has the potential to bring new ideas on next-generation wireless communication
studies that may advance the current state-of-the-art in terms of speed and data
capacity for air-to-air and air-to-ground communications with unmanned aerial
vehicles. Finally, it will likely advance the field of compact imaging systems,
providing a means of developing new machine vision techniques that work when
radar, visible, and thermal infrared do not. Apart from these technological
benefits, the instrument will enable unique educational opportunities for the
next generation of engineers and scientists, including training and outreach
opportunities for high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students, teachers,
and scientists through the OK-LSAMP (OK Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation), the OSU National Lab Day, and the OSU Summer Bridge programs.
The instrument will also underpin new lab modules in communication and microwave
classes at OSU. Technology transfer and research progress based on the MRI
instrument will be enhanced by a volunteer advisory committee consisting of the
PIs and industry and university experts.&lt;br/&gt;The MRI characterization
instrument will enable narrowband transmission/reflection measurements and
wideband, arbitrary waveform measurements in the 0.11-0.50 THz range with
sub-500 kHz frequency resolution and 120 dB dynamic range. Specific goals
include the use of the instrument to develop research contributions in the
following areas:&lt;br/&gt;• Development of artificial materials with high
quality factor electromagnetic responses based on anapole and bound-in-the-
continuum concepts. These will be experimentally explored with high frequency
resolution leading to new and high-performance designs of mm-wave and terahertz
chem/bio sensors.&lt;br/&gt;• The physics of high frequency quasiparticle
dynamics in chiral and anti-ferromagnetic materials, spin-Hall auto-oscillators,
and resonance spin-wave spectroscopy. These studies will advance fundamental
understanding of quantum materials and lead to faster and more power efficient
computing architectures. &lt;br/&gt;• Propagation channel emulators for 5G and
beyond wireless communications using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). These
studies will provide new empirical channel models, providing the engineering
foundation for UAV-based communication networks in unpredictable environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;• Realtime behaviors of multichannel transmitters and
active radar transceiver arrays. These measurements will validate the improved
performance, efficiency, and reliability of mm-wave integrated circuits for
high-bandwidth communications and active imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will be set up for a variety of different measurement types by
leveraging the existing millimeter-wave and terahertz infrastructure at Oklahoma
State University and made available to both internal and external
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.