* 2018112
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Deploying a Science DMZ to Advance Research at the University of Montana
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Erin Landguth, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 307,645.00

A major component of the University of Montana's (UM) mission is to generate
world-class research and creative scholarship. To that end, UM established a
state-of-the-art Modular Data Center, ensured dedicated high-speed connections
for key campus sites, and deployed a shared computing cluster. A team of
researchers and IT professionals, reviewing the cyberinfrastructure plan
alongside researcher needs, determined that a well-configured dedicated network
for high-performance dataflow is needed to advance UM's mission. This project
installs a Science DMZ (UM-DMZ), a separate friction-free network dedicated to
scientific data transfer, into UM's research infrastructure. The UM-DMZ, along
with a robust research infrastructure, serves and attracts quality students,
educators and researchers who require access to high performance end-to-end data
transfers to conduct their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware includes using an
Arista network switch that allows for low-latency and deep packet buffering. It
supports sFlow and meets the needs for IPv4 and IPv6 scientific applications.
Various sized Data Transfer Nodes are deployed and a solid security foundation
using Zeek IDS system and network security policies are being implemented. The
UM-DMZ serves research efforts from diverse disciplines that impact the well-
being of society. This includes research on the environment and climate change,
genomic studies, the development of tools used to further scientific discovery,
and innovative student led research projects. Common themes uniting these
diverse projects are enhanced collaboration, high-speed data transfer, and
educational opportunities for students. Student participation through advanced
network courses, internships, and student led research, are important aspects of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.