* 2018769
* Collaborative Research: Tooth Wear and Diet Among Living and Fossil Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Kay, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 07/31/2024
* USD 279,866.00

The diverse shapes of cheek teeth are broadly reflective of the diets that
living primates and their fossil relatives consumed. Yet teeth stand apart from
other biological structures in that they do not have the capacity to remodel or
repair themselves and instead must continue to perform their chewing function,
even as they wear down. This is an issue exacerbated in long-lived animals such
as primates. This project investigates how tooth wear affects food break-down
functionality in two primate taxonomic groups with highly contrasting teeth—apes
and Old World monkeys—and explores what these patterns reveal about the dietary
evolution and competition between them. Data for this work will be collected via
microCT scanning of museum specimens and made accessible via a web-based
repository open to researchers, educators, and the general public, improving
access and educational opportunity, particularly for examining rare fossils.
This research will enhance existing methodologies through development of new,
freely available software for the scientific community and promote scientific
communication with a conference session dedicated to this subject matter.
Undergraduates will receive training in the scientific process and methods
applicable to a wide range of STEM professions. Project findings will be
publicly communicated through an exhibit that allows general audiences direct
interaction with researchers and fossil primate specimens at the Duke Lemur
Center, and through development of educational material for their youth summer
science camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the significant gap
in scientific understanding of how cheek tooth shape changes as teeth wear and
the attendant functional implications. Despite general acknowledgement that
natural selection continues to operate on primate dentitions throughout their
reproductive lives, even as teeth wear, the majority of primate feeding ecology
investigations have focused on the initial pristine form of teeth. This focus
has emerged from the methodological dependence on using identifiable and
homologous features of tooth crowns, which are often highly modified or
obliterated by wear, rendering worn teeth uninformative. The development of
homology-free quantifications of occlusal surface geometry, known as dental
topographic metrics, liberates researchers to extend comparisons across wear
series and better characterize lifetime dental form-function associations. This
research leverages these techniques to address how the divergent structural
patterns of ape and Old World monkey (so called bilophodont) molars change with
tooth wear to maintain and/or enhance features related to chewing efficiency and
wear resistance. Living species with diverse dietary and feeding substrate
preferences will be used in phylogenetically-informed comparisons incorporating
dental topography, enamel thickness distribution, and tooth wear. This broad
comparative sample will form the basis for the study of dental wear among well-
sampled fossil anthropoids from 35 to 15 million years ago to inform both the
dietary ecology of fossil taxa and evaluate the adaptive significance of
bilophodont molars of monkeys compared to the primitive cusp pattern still
observed in living apes. The results of this work will describe the lifetime
functional effectiveness of bilophodont teeth and inform the observed success of
the Old World monkey radiation compared to that of apes over the past 15 million
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.