* 2018453
* CC* Regional: Small Institution Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (SI-MORe-OFFN)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Dany Doughan, OKLAHOMA STATE REGENTS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 232,275.00

The Small Institution Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free
Network (SI-MORe-OFFN) project makes advanced cyberinfrastructure tools and
services available to five smaller campuses in Oklahoma, covering scientific
disciplines from chemistry and agriculture to health and nursing by connecting
these campuses to the OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (OFFN). The five
targeted campuses are Redlands Community College, University of Science and Arts
of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State University Institute of Technology, Oklahoma State
University in Oklahoma City and Oklahoma Christian University. The project
provides new and diverse research collaboration opportunities for faculty across
Oklahoma and enables the smaller, target institutions to expand their research
and education activities. The project also has a significant educational impact
for undergraduate and community college students at these metropolitan and rural
campuses by providing them with additional STEM and cyber-infrastructure
educational opportunities as well as exposure to leading researchers and cyber-
infrastructure practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SI-MORe-OFFN project
extends the OneOklahoma Friction Free Network to five smaller institutions by
implementing Science DMZs, Data Transfer Nodes and network performance
monitoring capabilities at identified locations and integrating these with other
similar capabilities across Oklahoma. In addition, the project enhances the
skills and abilities of technical personnel at each campus and facilitates
cross-campus collaborations, including shared uses of computing tools,
scientific equipment, and educational materials by engaging faculty and students
in the larger OneOklahoma CyberInfrastructure Initiative (OneOCII). OFFN is
managed by OneNet, Oklahomaâ€™s research and education network, and scientific
leadership is provided by the University of Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.