* 2018828
* Workshop: Forging Connections between Machine Learning, Data Science, and Power Systems Research. To be held at the National Science Foundation, March 5-6, 2020  in Alexandria, VA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Sairaj Dhople, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 01/31/2021
* USD 99,998.00

Overview: This proposal seeks support from the National Science Foundation (NSF)
to facilitate the organization of a workshop titled: "Forging Connections
between Machine Learning, Data Science, and Power Systems Research." The
workshop will examine theoretical and algorithmic advances from the areas of
machine learning and data science that have the potential to address
contemporary challenges in modeling, analysis, operations, and control of power
systems. It will seek to do so by engaging the participation of leading
researchers from power systems, machine learning, and data science as well as
related enabling and synergistic application areas such as robotics and
transportation networks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Contemporary
advances in the broad areas of data-driven computing and control hold tremendous
potential in aiding the transition of the power system to a truly sustainable,
resilient, and distributed infrastructure that can accommodate new generation,
distribution, and end-use technology at scale. With this in mind, the proposed
workshop will focus on teasing out foundational theories and methods from the
areas of machine learning and data science that are relevant to research
problems in power systems. Through a broad-based schedule that includes keynote
talks, panel discussions, and breakout sessions, leading experts from the
aforementioned areas will get a unique and unparalleled opportunity to exchange
technical ideas that will result in new theories, methods, and algorithms
tailored to realizing the next generation power system. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Broader impacts of the proposed workshop will follow
from a variety of avenues. First, it will serve as a unique opportunity for
researchers from the areas of machine learning and data science to engage with
leading experts in power systems to find common ground for engagement in
research and development for the bulk power system: a critical infrastructure
that underpins and governs societal progress. The workshop will also provide a
unique stage to showcase and share outcomes from cutting-edge NSF funded
research. Researchers will have an unparalleled opportunity to build
collaborative scholarly and institutional partnerships that transcend boundaries
imposed by their respective technical areas. Finally, participation of
researchers from minorities and underrepresented groups, as well as early-career
researchers will be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.