* 2018326
* MRI: Acquisition of a Time-Resolved Spectrometer Spanning Ultraviolet to Terahertz Spectral Range for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Winston Soboyejo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 568,262.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A broadband time-resolved laser
spectrometer supports a wide range of research and educational activities in
materials science, photonics, optoelectronics and functional biomaterials for
therapeutic applications. It enables multiple cross-disciplinary research by
providing a window into light-matter interactions across the spectral range that
spans the ultraviolet, visible, infrared, and terahertz. These research
activities drive innovative technologies that rely on harnessing and engineering
optical processes in materials: from lasers and light emitting diodes, to solar
energy, optical sensing and communications, to new biocompatible materials. The
spectrometer is located at WPI Laboratory for Education &amp; Application
Prototypes, which is a part of the American Institute for Manufacturing
Integrated Photonics and operates in collaboration with Quinsigamond Community
College. It supports photonics and related technology sectors in central
Massachusetts through an open-access-facility and service-center model and by
training a diverse workforce. The instrument enhances education of graduate,
undergraduate and community college students at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
and partner institutions by strengthening the research infrastructure and
enabling new and previously unmet research
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The broadband,
time-resolved spectrometer facilitates, in a single system, investigations of
phenomena that occur in a variety of materials upon their interaction with light
in the spectral range spanning the ultraviolet to terahertz, over sub-
picoseconds to microseconds time scales. By integrating three complementary
ultrafast spectroscopic techniques (time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy, time-
resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy and transient absorption spectroscopy),
each providing complementary information, it allows constructing a more complete
understanding of photoexcitations in emerging photonic, photovoltaic,
photoelectrochemical, flexible optoelectronic and biologically-inspired
materials. This work benefits research efforts by WPI scientists and regional
partners in these fields and fosters unique collaborations as a result of
bringing this multidisciplinary expertise together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.