* 2018837
* RCN-UBE: Training Undergraduate Biologists through Urban Agriculture
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Susan Singer, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2025
* USD 499,972.00

Less than 40% of undergraduate students in the US who start university with an
interest in science, technology, engineering, or math (STEM) actually graduate
with a STEM degree. Part of the reason for this attrition is because science
education can seem abstract and often not relevant to pressing community
problems. This project will develop a network that employs urban agriculture to
explicitly connect biology education to community issues, thereby making science
training more interesting and accessible for students from all backgrounds. The
main proposed activities include creation of course modules around urban
agriculture that help biology students learn every aspect of the scientific
process – from coming up with questions, designing projects, and collecting
data, to analyzing results and presenting findings. Other program activities
include study abroad programs and inter-institution semester exchanges organized
around urban agriculture. This inclusive network, consisting of educators from a
variety of institutions (including liberal arts colleges, tribal and
historically black colleges, and research universities), will continue to expand
through regional workshops and national meetings. The project will make
important community contributions by helping students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, stay interested in biology and become valuable
contributors to the scientific community. Importantly, the program will also
emphasize how urban agriculture can connect scientific training to community
needs through activities such as produce donations, educational outreach, and
other service projects with community partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate attrition from science fields is a
significant problem in the United States, particularly for students from
underrepresented groups. One reason for this attrition is because educational
activities are often not clearly connected to the social and environmental
challenges that motivate many students. This project will develop and expand a
network, Training Undergraduate Biologists through urban Agriculture (TUBA), to
make undergraduate biology education more tangible using urban agriculture as a
theme. Urban agriculture is ideally suited for undergraduate biologists because
it provides practical and cost effective opportunities for students to gain
scientific skills through extended and iterative field experiences and connects
students directly to environmental sustainability and social justice issues. The
network consists of diverse educator expertise from Liberal arts colleges, TCUs,
HBCUs and Research universities. Main activities involve creation of course
modules, workshops, network gatherings, student exchanges, and study abroad
experiences that will create novel and exceptional educational offerings, with
an overarching goal of reducing attrition from STEM majors. Importantly, the
network will also contribute to campuses and communities by enhancing
infrastructure, supporting volunteer service opportunities, and encouraging
students to engage in “changemaking” activities with community partners. Every
aspect of this network will aim to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion;
cultivate empathy, collaboration, and systems thinking skills; and foster
mutually-reciprocal community partnerships. This project is being jointly funded
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.