* 2018200
* Collaborative Research:  Time transect of ancient genomes of Indigenous North Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 235,000.00

This project will use community-based methods along with advances in
biotechnology and population genetics to study the evolution of Indigenous
peoples of North America during the past 5,000 years. As the time period under
study was a period of social transformation, the project evaluates the genomic
impact of changes in social structures that leave signatures in human genomes.
The project will serve as a model of integration of Indigenous knowledge with
genomics to investigate the evolution of populations in North America prior to
European contact. The project also supports a program for the training of
Indigenous students and community members in genomic theory and analyses. The
Summer internship for INdigenous peoples in Genomics (SING) program runs an
annual workshop to provide hands-on experience in molecular biology,
bioinformatics, and other genomics-related fields. The program provides a
support network for Indigenous students in the sciences and also functions as an
incubator of ideas on ethical and social implications of genomic research that
involves Indigenous communities. The long-term goal of the SING program is to
increase the number of Indigenous researchers and community members serving as
leaders in careers involving the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
examines how, prior to European colonization, dynamic social processes of
populations of North America have influenced human genomes through time.
Specifically, whole-genome sequences will be generated from ancient individuals
spanning five millennia in the Pacific Northwest. With Indigenous knowledge as a
foundation, a temporal analysis of population composition will be performed on
the sequences to assess demographic histories and demographic events in the
region. The project will also evaluate the impacts of social structure and
culturally mediated mate exchange on the evolution of genomes from the
Indigenous peoples studied. The project expands the potential for integrating
anthropological and genomic information to learn how culture and biology
interact in human evolutionary history. This project is jointly funded by the
Biological Anthropology and Arctic Social Science
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.