* 2018644
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Spectral Analysis Instrument
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Peter LoPresti, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 104,424.00

This project will support the acquisition of a modern, research grade Integrated
Spectral Analysis instrument to enhance and drive forward research and training
programs across multiple fields at The University of Tulsa. The instrument will
consist of two parts. The first part consists of a state-of-the-art Optical
Spectrum Analyzer (OSA) that can measure how the power in an optical signal is
distributed over a range of wavelengths, perform calculations on the signal
quality particularly with respect to interference and noise, and provide all of
this functionality in real time without the need for extensive processing on a
computer to recover critical experimental data. Measurement of optical power
over wavelength in real time provides the ability to characterize the chemistry
and physics of advanced materials, such as advanced light-emitting diodes,
materials for advanced flexible electronics, and the visualization and
measurement of chemical reactions. The wavelength and signal quality
measurements enable studies of advanced fiber optic systems, including Gigabit
optical communication for next generation internet and networks of advanced
optical sensors for monitoring seismic activity. The second part of the
instrument consists of the optical sources needed to probe the materials and
provide input to the communication and sensor systems. The sources provide
signals and optical power at the wavelengths of interest and in the format
needed to conduct the research and analysis. The instrument will support
research and both graduate and undergraduate student training in Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Geosciences, and Physics,
including new courses developed based on the instrumentâ€™s capabilities. The
instrument will enhance and build outreach programs for regional STEM teachers
and high-school students, and expand opportunities for collaboration with
commercial entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will acquire, install, and
commission a state-of-the art Integrated Spectral Analysis instrument for
research, training, and outreach by faculty and students at the University of
Tulsa. The instrument will consist of a state-of-the-art Optical Spectrum
Analyzer (OSA), broadband sources covering the ultraviolet to near-infrared for
probing materials and chemical reactions, tuned sources for measuring phenomena
at specific wavelengths, and high speed tunable data sources for evaluating
wired and wireless high-speed optical communication systems. Initially targeted
research areas include optical wireless, materials and structures for improved
LED efficiency and color quality, wavelength encoded distributed sensing of
microseismics, in-situ electrochemical analysis of flexible electrode materials,
and photophysical properties of organic dyes as visible-light photoredox
catalysts. The instrument will be housed in Rayzor Hall which allows easy access
to all faculty and buildings within the College of Engineering and Natural
Sciences. Existing physical infrastructure, including mounting racks, cabling,
connectors, and electrical isolation, will allow integration of the sources and
OSA into a single, cohesive unit and provide the support needed to maintain
system operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.