* 2018168
* FSML: Increasing access to the Crown of the Continent: A visiting researcher laboratory at the Flathead Lake Biological Station (Montana)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* James Elser, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 662,777.00

For ecologists, field stations are fundamental components of scientific
infrastructure akin to telescopes for astronomers. Generally, such stations
service both scientists of the institution that runs the station as well as
visiting researchers. This project will involve an expansion of laboratory
facilities at the University of Montana's Flathead Lake Biological Station
(FLBS), one of the USA's oldest field stations, to allow for increased capacity
to house visiting researchers. This renovation is in response to major recent
increases in activity at FLBS following hiring of a new director and new faculty
at the station. Providing these new facilities is important because they will
provide access to Flathead Lake, the USA's largest freshwater lake west of the
Mississippi River, as well as lakes and rivers that flow in both relatively
undisturbed environments as well as those being impacted by human activity,
providing abundant opportunity for research on diverse topics. Terrestrial
environments including grassland, forest, and alpine tundra can also be
accessed. In addition to research advancement, the new facilities will advance
education by providing greater access to diverse research projects for
undergraduate students who enroll in summer field courses at FLBS. Finally, this
increased capacity will allow important new research to take place in this
region on topics such as water quantity and quality, climate change, fisheries
management, and assessment of invasive species and endangered
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve a major renovation of
the upper level of a building at the Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS;
https://flbs.umt.edu/newflbs) to transform it from its current role as a storage
facility for field equipment into a state-of-the-art research laboratory for
visiting researchers, the FLBS Visiting Researcher Collaboratory (VRC). The
targeted outcome is 820 ft2 of new research-grade laboratory space to support
increased use of FLBS by external researchers drawn from the state of Montana
and beyond. This renovation is in response to major recent increases in activity
at FLBS following hiring of a new director and new faculty. These increases are
bringing use of existing FLBS facilities to a saturation level, making it
difficult to maintain and expand the role of the station in serving outside
users conducting research in this region. The facility will allow new
researchers to develop projects in the regionâ€™s diverse ecosystems and to
continue or develop new collaborations with FLBS researchers to advance this
work. By providing improved and expanded facilities for visiting researchers,
the VRC will expand the ability of ecologists to make fundamental advances in
our understanding of ecosystems in the Crown of the Continent and their response
to ongoing global change. The VRC will also increase the opportunities for rich
interdisciplinary interactions among researchers and students at all levels.
FLBS also attracts students at all levels to Yellow Bay for summer classes,
internships, and field trips. Developing a rich base of new "outside" users of
the station will increase the opportunities afforded and perspectives gained by
these students as well as the broader community with which FLBS interacts.
Finally, much of the research that will be facilitated by the laboratory is of
broad societal interest, dealing with topics of water quantity and quality,
climate change, fisheries management, and assessment of invasive species and
endangered species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.