* 2018852
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Raman Microscope System for Nano-Bio-Chemical-Thermal Research
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Xuemei Cheng, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2023
* USD 523,333.00

Biological, chemical, and physical processes in industries such as healthcare,
electronics, and energy production require controlled environments, sometimes
with extreme conditions. For example, organ transplants need to be stored at
ultralow temperatures. Fuel cells used for power generation often operate at
very high temperatures, with specialized gases. The design of advanced materials
and systems across many industries requires a better understanding of the
biological and chemical processes involved. This demands testing environments
that closely mimic real process conditions, which is an enormous challenge. The
acquisition of a confocal Raman microscope with sophisticated environmental
control will enable in vivo chemical mapping under a wide temperature range and
different gas/liquid environments. This instrument will facilitate cutting-edge
research and education projects across four research areas-nanomaterials,
bioengineering, thermal and chemical engineering, and collaboration among three
institutions-Villanova University, Bryn Mawr College, and Cabrini University.
Moreover, the instrument will support a range of integrated research and
education projects and provide opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds. This facility will also be integrated into
three K-12 outreach activities with an expected enrollment of over 500 under-
represented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a temperature range of -196 to
about 1000Â°C and controlled gas/liquid environments, the confocal Raman
microscope can provide high resolution and real-time structural and chemical
fingerprints of materials and chemicals. Raman spectroscopy has a unique
compatibility with aqueous or high temperature, particularly suited for
biological and high temperature characterizations. Seven projects will be
enabled at three institutions. They include investigations on solid oxide fuel
cells to provide important insight into fuel reaction mechanisms, two
dimensional materials to promote new synthetic methods and understanding of
their structure-property relations under extreme conditions, energy storage
materials for high-performance energy storage systems, spin-phonon coupling in
multiferroic oxides to provide unprecedented evidence for the mechanism of
multiferroicity, molecular mechanisms of cryo-injury for developing cell
preservation technologies, molecular properties of intact drosophila hearts to
provide insights on physiological aging. By addressing all these needs, the
proposed instrument will greatly advance knowledge and promote interdisciplinary
research in nanomaterials, thermal and chemical engineering, and
bioengineering/biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.