* 2018870
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer at the University of Virginia
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 273,700.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Virginia (UVA) is acquiring
a single crystal X-ray diffractometer to support Professor Robert Gilliard and
colleagues: Thomas Gunnoe and Diane Dickie. In general, an X-ray diffractometer
allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure
of a molecule, including bond distances and angles. It provides accurate
information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring
molecules. The studies described here impact many areas, including organic and
inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an
integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry as well as
other engineering fields at this institution. In addition, the diffractometer
has broad impact on teaching and training, outreach activities, and
undergraduate research at UVA. The regional partners from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) have significant female and underrepresented
minority populations the also benefit from the use of this
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray diffractometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The instrument
acquisition impacts the characterization of synthetic inorganic and organic
materials useful to advance manufacturing. The instrumentation is used for
studying catalytic processes and using electrochemistry to generate energy
relevant products, e.g., conversion of low potential energy chemicals into high
energy chemicals for the scaled use of renewable energy sources such as wind,
solar. In addition, the diffractometer benefits the exploration of materials
chemistry and engineering. It is also used to characterize products relevant to
biological chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.