* 2018489
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining causes and consequences of variation in male reproductive success in wild primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Sharmi Sen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2023
* USD 27,724.00

In nonhuman primates a range of male behaviors are observed that relate to male
success in siring offspring. This doctoral dissertation research project
examines reproductive payoffs of different male strategies (aggressive versus
affiliative) in wild geladas (primates). Results from this study provide
valuable insights about the evolution of male reproductive strategies and will
enhance understanding about the adaptive significance of male-female social
bonds in a long-lived primate species. While conducting the proposed research,
the doctoral student will continue to work with K-12 students from
underrepresented communities to foster excitement about science and research and
give talks about primate behavior and evolution at local elementary schools.
Additionally, the doctoral student will continue training undergraduate students
in the laboratory throughout her dissertation research and mentor women from
groups underrepresented in primatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates how different male behavioral strategies affect reproductive
success in geladas. Male geladas gain reproductive opportunities by becoming the
dominant leader over a family of multiple females and their offspring. Male
reproduction is thus a function of the number of fertile females in the group
combined with how long he remains the dominant leader (tenure length). The
proposed project will use long term data (collected over 13 years) in
combination with detailed behavioral, hormonal, and paternity data from
individually known leader males to assess which factors contribute to male
reproductive success. First, the investigators will measure reproductive success
by assigning paternity through genotyping all leader males and infants in the
project. Second, they will quantify physical attributes that could affect
reproductive success in geladas. These include: i) body size (measured through
laser photogrammetry), ii) chest patch redness (measured by comparing photos of
gelada chest patch against a standard color checker chart), and iii)
testosterone levels using fecal samples collected from individual leader males
(measured through a biotin labelled enzyme-immunoassay). Third, the
investigators will assess what social strategies males employ to increase
reproductive success by quantifying male-female social relationships through
behavioral observations and recording the occurrence of
infanticide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.