* 2018975
* CC* Team: Piloting a CI-Enabled Tribal College and University Research Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Dana Skow, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,679,994.00

The American Indian Higher Education Consortium and institutional partners
Sitting Bull College, Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College, United Tribes Technical
College Turtle Mountain Community College, Cankdeska Cikana Community College,
and North Dakota State University are partnering on this Cyber Team project that
establishes the socio-technical foundations of a cyberinfrastructure
(CI)-enabled collaboration that will both support current STEM research and
education programs and provide the framework for aggressive research program
development. The project involves faculty, students and IT staff at the six
participating institutions collaborating on CI improvements, IT staff capacity-
building, and distributed STEM programming focused on environmental science,
eventually including engineering, digital manufacturing and other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide professional
development, support, mentoring and collaborative research opportunities for
faculty and students at all North Dakota Tribal Colleges and Universities
(TCUs). The project will enhance opportunities for economic development and
enhance the design and delivery of health, education, and other services
developed through CI-enabled basic and applied research. It will serve as a
model for engaging TCUs nationally in the adoption of CI resources necessary to
support implementation of a significantly broader range of research and
education activities, particularly involving collaborations with the larger
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s collaborative capacity-
building framework implements the connectivist learning model in which networked
human and physical resources constitute a complex adaptive system that generates
actionable knowledge (both technical and domain-specific) sustainably. The
project tests the hypothesis that a connectivist framework can be transformative
in building the research and education capacity of small resource challenged
institutions and organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.