* 2018905
* MRI: Development of an Integrated Instrument for Testing Safety and Robustness of Robotic Co-Workers in Dynamic Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Herbert Tanner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 551,682.00

Merging human living spaces with robot workspaces sparks the development of
novel control, estimation and perception algorithms with theoretically provable
performance and safety guarantees. However, to date, rigorous experimental
protocols and equipment for validating the theoretically predicted performance
of the proposed algorithms does not exist. A major reason for this is the
difficulty associated with reproducing—in a systematic fashion—the dynamic
conditions encountered by robots operating in typical human-centric and natural
environments. The ultimate goal of this project is to promote human-robot co-
existence by developing a unique new fully integrated sensing and control
instrument, which will enable researchers to rigorously evaluate the performance
of robotic algorithms in response to systematically induced dynamic
perturbations that emulate real-world conditions. This award enables the
initiation of the effort to realize the envisioned instrument. In this project,
a component of the instrument will be realized to support research on legged
locomotion using a bipedal robot integrated into a controllable environment
realized by a novel instrumented variable impedance treadmill capable of
emulating a wide variety of terrain realities. The unique configuration of this
component will allow researchers to evaluate robot locomotion control and
planning methodologies and will be used to generate sufficiently rich and
expressive datasets, which will be widely shared through the internet to assist
research in training models of locomotion through machine learning algorithms.
The proposed effort will pave the way toward the development of similar
instruments for experimentally testing and verifying the strengths and
limitations of robotic algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will result
in the development of a stand-alone component of a unique shared-use research
instrument, which will make possible—for the first time—measurements that will
contribute to the creation of novel experimental protocols for the rigorous
assessment of robotic locomotion algorithms. This project will involve
assessment of the robustness of locomotion controllers to terrain variability
and uncertainty by performing synchronous measurements of the (i)
motion/kinematics of a novel bipedal robot walking on a unique variable
stiffness treadmill, (ii) the interaction forces between the robot’s feet and
the treadmill, and (iii) the deflection of the treadmill belt when a compliant
environment is simulated. Data of this kind are invaluable to studying and
assessing the performance of locomotion control strategies on a wide variety of
terrain realities. Perturbations like sudden changes in the stiffness of the
terrain underneath a leg—including the case where a leg encounters terrain
disruption in the form of step-down or step-up disturbances—can be
systematically induced and their effect can be measured by the developed
instrument. Such capabilities have never been available in the context of human-
sized robotic co-workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.