* 2018004
* MRI - Acquisition of a Quartz Crystal Microbalance with Dissipation Monitoring for Enhanced Research and Teaching of Interfacial Science in the State of Mississippi
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rinat Gabitov, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 185,486.00

The Quartz Crystal Microbalance with Dissipation (QCM-D) is a highly sensitive
balance that can detect changes in mass at the molecular level by monitoring
changes in frequency and dissipation of a quartz crystal. These capabilities
significantly enhance material development research of surfaces and interfaces
over a wide range of areas, such as coating development; fouling of membranes;
drug capsule preparations; and bio-absorption of aqueous media on geological
formations. This instrument will be used as a shared facility in the State of
Mississippi and the southeastern region, coordinated by investigators from the
University of Mississippi (UM) and Mississippi State University (MSU).
Specifically, this instrument will be used to dramatically improve research
productivity from at least eight Departments across two Universities (UM and
MSU), spanning Chemical, Biomedical, Civil, and Agricultural / Biological
Engineering; Department of Geosciences; and the School of Pharmacy. Fourteen
different research groups will immediately benefit from incorporation of this
instrument into their research activities, and up to 65 research students will
learn new interfacial measurements using this state-of-the-art equipment.
Additionally, over 200 students will be positively impacted by the study of
academic courses that will utilize the QCM-D for practical activities, with
approximately half of these students being from underrepresented groups.
Finally, this instrument will also be used for summer research activities to
interest K-12 students in STEM, as part of a dedicated outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QCM-D is a state-of-the-art instrument used in
material development and investigation of surfaces and interfaces. It has
molecular-level accuracy in measuring adsorption, binding, or removal of
molecules from a surface. The proposed instrument has several modules besides
the basic 4-channel flow module, including a constant humidity chamber; a module
to conduct concurrent microscopy measurements; a high temperature chamber to
150oC; and a spin coater to prepare individual sensors with unique surfaces.
This infrastructure will initially serve 14 research groups in areas of a)
multifunctional coating development for packaging applications; b) ionic liquid
/ polymer composites for membrane separations; c) coating development for drug
delivery; d) cell division and muscle contraction; e) graphene-based
nanocarriers for drug delivery; f) mineralization mechanisms at nano and micro
scales in geological applications; and g) bio-absorption of aqueous media on
geological formations. These efforts will be expanded to other areas with the
shared nature intended for this instrument with other institutions and
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CBET-MRI
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.