* 2018443
* MRI: Development of a Molecular Beam Instrument for High Resolution Laser Spectroscopy and Quantum Control Studies of Molecular Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* A. Marjatta Lyyra, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 320,469.00

The goal of this project is to develop an apparatus to produce a highly
controlled beam of molecules, integrated with a precise and highly controllable
laser system for the purpose of spectroscopic and quantum optics studies. This
forms an instrument that will allow the study of the response of molecules to
different colors of laser light in a regime where collisions and other effects
(line broadening) due to the random thermal motion of the molecules are greatly
suppressed. Specifically, molecules with large magnetic moments (analogous to
powerful but tiny bar magnets) will be studied. Such magnetic molecules can be
controlled by the laser in a way that makes them simulate unusual solid
materials that are engineered to outperform naturally occurring materials. In
addition, the high power provided by the instrument’s laser system will allow
for the development of control mechanisms with potential applications for
quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atoms with partially filled inner shells
exhibit large magnetic dipole moments which give rise to extremely large
anisotropy in their interactions. Some of the best examples of such magnetic
properties are found in the open f-shell lanthanides like dysprosium and erbium.
Molecules formed by such atoms are expected to have even larger magnetic moments
and offer novel dipolar properties. Very little is known about the electronic
structure of such molecules because theoretical ab initio calculations are very
challenging. The scientists carrying out this work plan to use this instrument
for an experimental high-resolution spectroscopic study of the electronic
structure of the lanthanide dimers. Such a spectroscopic study is important for
the developing area of quantum magnetism. For molecular quantum control, the
instrument’s laser system provides the electromagnetic field (light) needed to
modify (‘dress’) the energy levels of a molecule. The degree of dressing of the
molecular states is dependent on the intensity of the laser radiation. The high
power provided by the instrument's laser system will facilitate enhanced quantum
control of molecular systems. The instrument’s molecular beam provides a
collision free environment with long coherence times which is not available in
typical thermal samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.