* 2018267
* Trade and Global Economic Shocks: A Network Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Michael Adetayo Olabisi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 75,000.00

Fluctuations in economic growth in foreign countries affect the U.S. economy
primarily through trade; this issue will become increasingly important as US
trade with emerging markets, which tend to be volatile, increases. This research
project will study how fluctuations in economic activities in emerging economies
affect total economic activity, employment, incomes, and distribution of income
in the United States. The focus of this research is on demand shocks from
emerging economies, and the mechanisms through which these demand changes in
emerging countries affect economic activities in the US. Previous studies of the
effects of economic fluctuations in foreign countries on the US have focused on
supply side; this is one of the few studies that focuses on fluctuations in
demand in emerging economies. As the US’s share of trade with emerging economies
increase, fluctuations in economic activities in other countries will
increasingly become important in US economic outcomes. Th results of this
research can help the US better manage its international economic
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use a network
based framework to investigate the business cycle effects of demand shocks in
emerging economies on the US economy and the mechanisms through which these
effects occur. The model is an extension of Charney’s (2014) trade model to
explain growth at the intensive margin. The main innovation is to introduction
of trade growth in order to provide much richer insights into how economic
fluctuations in the US may be driven by trade and growth dynamics. The model is
estimated using data from sector-level input output tables, World Input-Output
Database, firm level trade data and product level aggregate trade data. The
possibility of US business cycles emanating from demand shocks in emerging
economies will become important in the future as the share of US trade with
these countries increases. The results of this research can help the US better
manage its international economic relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.