* 2018982
* CC* Planning: UCCS Computational Cluster for Science
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Terrance Boult, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 53,935.00

Classified as a “high research activity” university in 2019, the University of
Colorado Colorado Springs (UCCS) is a school in transition. While UCCS has good
Cyber Infrastructure for educational purposes, there is an urgent need and
opportunity to develop a plan for computational support for scientific research.
Maximizing a computational infrastructure’s impact depends on the scale and
scope of usage. A major part of this project is the analysis of the current and
planned scientific computational needs at UCCS and then mapping them to design,
which requires careful research to optimize. The investigators are using a
multi-pronged approach to raise awareness, gather qualitative data, and collect
custom data grounded within established motivational theory. This approach
yields baseline data and assesses change over time with future infrastructural
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One aim of this planning project is the design and
testing of a Cyber Aspirations and Readiness Assessment (CARA) instrument. The
instrument serves as a theoretically driven tool for longitudinal assessment of
initial aspirations, perceptions of barriers, and opportunities for success.
This planning process helps STEM faculty across campus better understand how
computing could accelerate their research, and how they could utilize different
computational resources. Such a model, processes, and experiences not only
benefit UCCS, but could be replicated at other institutions for their risk
assessment, benchmarking, and other activities during their computation
infrastructure planning. This plan for a cyber infrastructure provides a much
needed capability required by a broad range of science, engineering, and
education teams at UCCS and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.