* 2018562
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Modality Multi-Photon Digital Light Sheet Microscope in the Pacific Northwest to Support Bioengineering Research and Development
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthew Fields, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,081,462.00

This award is made to Montana State University to acquire a uniquely configured
Multi-Modality Multi-Photon Digital Fluorescence Microscope. The Center for
Biofilm Engineering at Montana State University, where the requested instrument
will be located, was originally established in 1990 as an NSF Engineering
Research Center (ERC), and it has a central mission to advance the frontiers of
health, energy, industry, and the environment through biofilm research,
education, and outreach. From inception, the Center for Biofilm Engineering has
taken a transdisciplinary approach to fundamental and applied research that
continues today and that embodies the Montana State University land-grant
mission for the integration of learning and discovery. Such research empowers
students to apply fundamental knowledge to real-world challenges. Currently, one
of the biggest challenges for engineering-based biological applications is the
ability to noninvasively visualize highly replicated live bio-systems in real-
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome challenges with conducting
physiologically relevant research in natural and engineered systems, the Multi-
Photon Digital Fluorescence Microscope will enable unprecedented image
acquisition speeds, significantly reduce phototoxicity, provide high resolution
label free identification of single cells, and increase penetration depths
producing images more representative of intact biofilms. All of these
advancements are integral to maintaining cell viability during imaging and will
support research projects of faculty, staff, and students across three colleges
(Engineering, Science, and Agriculture). The acquisition of this instrument will
allow cutting-edge, real-time, high-sensitivity imaging of intact, complex
biological samples and is, thus, ideally suited for biofilm
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CBET-MRI Program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.