* 2018360
* CC* Planning: Shepherd University CI and Regional Connectivity
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jason Miller, Shepherd University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,999.00

This project explores the benefits and costs of bringing fiber optic
connectivity and Internet2 access to the Shepherd University campus in West
Virginia. This project benefits students, researchers and technology developers
in the four-state region (West Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Virginia).
Network connectivity for research and education is a critical issue in many
parts of the United States. West Virginia has several cyber-isolated regions
including the Shepherdstown area that is home to Shepherd University. Rivers,
mountain ranges, state lines and right-of-way issues stand between the campus
and the major technology corridors and dense communication networks nearby.
Bridging these barriers would boost the research and educational capacity at
this state-supported primarily undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project incorporates the
following components. (1) Identify Regional Optical Networks (RONs) capable of
bringing Internet2 connectivity to the Shepherd University campus. Identify
possible fiber routes from each RON to the campus region. Evaluate costs
including for the problematic last-mile portion. (2) Select the most cost-
effective route. Work with one or more dark fiber providers and government
agencies to engineer a detailed plan that addresses geographical and political
boundaries including county and state lines. Enumerate local work permits that
would be required. (3) Determine sustainability with projections of ongoing
costs. Plan for preferred and alternative sources of revenue. Engage critical
partners from the faculty and administration of Shepherd University and other
colleges in the region. (4) Create a detailed cyberinfrastructure plan for the
campus. Design the Science DMZ and define the relationship between the
Internet2-enabled research network and the universityâ€™s enterprise networks.
Plan for secure access to Internet2 and related networks such as EduRoam. Plan
for preferred and alternative network architectures. (5) If implementation is
justified, identify one or more funding mechanisms for full Internet2
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.