* 2018560
* MRI: Acquisition of Ion Mill for TEM Sample Preparation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Joyce Palmer-Fortune, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 136,051.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Smith
College with the acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscopy sample
preparation tool. Acquisition of this tool greatly expands Smith’s capabilities
to make non-biological samples for study in the electron microscope, and thus
opens new research areas to Smith faculty and students, who are the primary
users of the tool. This tool allows researchers at Smith to offer undergraduates
accessible pathways into meaningful materials research in their first two years
of college and opens doors for women and underrepresented minorities who make up
100% of Smith students. Involvement with research in the early college years is
known to positively affect retention of women and under-represented minorities
in the sciences. In addition, students gain meaningful skills such as how to
make samples for the electron microscope, how to use an electron microscope, and
how to analyze the results. These skills are valued in graduate programs and in
industries that rely on materials development. Acquisition of this tool also
increases the ability of the faculty to mentor women undergraduates of all
racial and economic backgrounds in the physical and materials
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports Smith College with the acquisition of a
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) sample preparation tool. Acquisition of
this tool greatly expands Smith’s capabilities to make non-biological samples
for study in the electron microscope, and thus opens new research areas to Smith
faculty and students, who are the primary users of the tool. The acquisition of
the ion mill will enable scientists at Smith College to make high quality cross-
sectional TEM specimen, improved quality plan-view TEM specimen, and to train
Smith College undergraduates to make TEM cross-sectional samples and improved
plan-view samples. Acquisition of this tool greatly improves the opportunities
for current and future Smith faculty and students to enter into collaborations
with researchers at other institutions who engage in research on fabrication of
hard/brittle materials and especially thin films on substrates such as silicon,
GaAs or other semiconductor materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.