* 2018320
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Multidiscipline Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Kauser Jahan, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 144,389.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Rowan University is acquiring an inductively
coupled ionization, mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) to support the research projects
in the groups of Professors Lei Yu and colleagues Kauser Jahan, Tabbetha
Dobbins, Harold Connolly and James Grinias. In general, mass spectrometry (MS)
is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small
quantities of chemical species in complex samples. An ICP-MS combines a high-
temperature and an ionization coupled plasma source with a mass spectrometer.
The ICP source converts the atoms of the elements in the sample to ions. These
ions are subsequently separated and detected by the mass spectrometer. This is a
highly-sensitive analytical technique capable of measuring very low
concentrations of metals and non-metals in liquid samples. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse students with this modern
analytical technique. It is also used in outreach activities involving students
and faculty from Chemistry, Geology, and Paleontology. Analysis results are
useful for improving the public health and well-being of Camden and other
communities in Southern New Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts measurements of the electrochemical oxidation of metal
carbides and the dynamic solid-electrolyte-interface change of borohydrides for
solid state electrolytes in lithium-ion batteries. The instrumentation is also
used for exploring supercritical fluid chromatography combined with ICP-MS for
high-throughput synthetic reaction products and catalysts measurements. In
addition, it contributes to the analysis of silver-eluting thin films for
antimicrobial materials development. The mass spectrometer is also used to
understand the solar system by analyzing the aluminum 26- magnesium 26 isotopic
ratio. The ICP spectrometer is also employed in studies tracking heavy metal
contamination and mitigation in water for environmental
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.