* 2018966
* MRI: Acquisition of Omnipercipient Chamber for Gathering Ground Truth and Enabling Research on Smart and Connected Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Srihari Nelakuditi, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

This project supports the acquisition of an omnipercipient chamber (OmniC), with
all its sides mounted with a variety of antennas and sensors, for gathering the
ground truth (i.e., the information provided by direct observation as opposed to
indirect inference) on experiments conducted inside it. This instrument enables
the research in diverse areas such as wireless networking, therapeutic and
rehabilitation care, robotics and computer vision, cyber physical systems, and
augmented and virtual reality. OmniC addresses the needs of many researchers,
reduces the cost and effort of pursuing research, furthers inter-disciplinary
collaborations, and consequently improves the speed and accuracy of scientific
advancement. The labeled ground truth data generated from the experiments
conducted inside OmniC would be widely disseminated to help the global research
community. This project will also broaden the participation by involving women,
minorities, and undergraduates in research, with the help of women investigators
and local HBCUs. In addition to assimilating the research results into graduate
and undergraduate level courses, this project will showcase the research
advances to a wider audience in coordination with the University of South
Carolina's outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core benefit of this
instrument is that it captures the phenomenon being observed coherently across
the time, space, and frequency domains. The research activities enabled by OmniC
include: i) Devising next-generation mmWave and massive MIMO wireless networks
for high throughput and reliability by utilizing channel sparsity; ii) Designing
reconfigurable antennas that operate over a broad spectrum from microwave to
mmWave; iii) Characterizing thermal dissipation of mmWave devices and developing
antenna scheduling schemes for adaptive cooling; iv) Assessing mobility
impairments of patients and elderly leveraging the wireless signal reflections
and floor vibrations for gait measurement; v) Coordinating autonomous surface
vehicles and autonomous aerial vehicles during takeoff and landing under
inclement weather and communication constraints; vi) Tracking the movements and
poses of subjects across multiple videos and recognizing their emotions by
building and training deep learning models; vii) Canceling acoustic noise with
IoT relays exploiting the difference in propagation speeds of sound and wireless
signals; viii) Supporting ultra-low latency virtual and augmented reality
applications over mmWave networks through fast beam alignment protocols.
Overall, this instrument taps the common needs and synergy between a variety of
research groups across disciplines in advancing research on smart and connected
things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.