* 2018942
* MRI: Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Analytical Ultracentrifuge for Biomedical and Materials Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nancy Horton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 342,909.00

An award is made to the University of Arizona to support the purchase of an
analytical ultracentrifuge (AUC). More than 20 laboratories will use the new
AUC, with research programs spanning basic biology, chemistry, materials
science, and even biomedical research. As part of the research effort, 235
students, including 22 postdoctoral, 68 graduate and 145 undergraduate students
will benefit from training with the state-of-the-art instrumentation. The
training opportunities will be extended to collaborating schools and
institutions across the Southwest. The University of Arizona is a Hispanic
Serving Institution and hosts many programs supporting diversity and inclusion
of under-represented groups, many of which will benefit from training with the
new instrument. The AUC will also be used in the undergraduate lab courses,
where students will test hypotheses they generate for structure and function of
various enzymes. In addition, a “hands-on” demonstration showing the basic
principles of ultracentrifugation will be developed in the outreach course for
delivery at schools throughout Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research that will
be facilitated by the AUC includes the investigation of a new enzyme mechanisms
involving filament formation, DNA binding by viral replicative proteins,
protein-protein interactions in cell signaling, and liquid droplet formation by
intrinsically disordered proteins. The AUC will facilitate a range of research
projects by providing rapid and accurate assessment of ligand binding affinity,
stoichiometry, and when mechanisms of inhibition involve alterations of
quaternary structure. Chemical labeling (and completeness of labeling) of
proteins can be detected, as well as any effects on quaternary structure,
solubility, and aggregation. Aggregation is a major roadblock to many structural
and functional studies, and the new AUC will be used to assess protein
preparation stability and aggregation. The masses and polydispersity of lipid
containing nanodiscs will be analyzed to understand the effect of chain and
headgroup size, structure, and chemistry on lipid packing. Materials science
research will also benefit from the analysis of nanoparticles made from
tungsten, molybdenum, and titanium. Results from these studies will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed journals, presentations at scientific
meetings, and through classes and public outreach
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.