* 2018586
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Carl Zeiss EVO SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) at Lafayette College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* James Dearworth, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 563,976.00

An award is made to Lafayette College for a powerful and easy-to-use Carl Zeiss
EVO scanning electron microscope (SEM) to do several projects spanning multiple
disciplines – biology, chemical and biomolecular engineering, civil engineering,
environmental science, geology, neuroscience, and physics. Lafayette is a small
liberal arts and engineering undergraduate institution which prides itself on
high-impact undergraduate student research engagement. Societal benefits include
the training of the next generation of scientists, teaching them to think
critically with problem-based learning modules using the EVO. The Science
Horizons Program, a year-long mentorship program for students from
underrepresented populations culminating in summer research opportunities, will
ensure these benefits are realized by a diverse group of students. Additionally,
the EVO will be used in outreach activities for high school students to
encourage them to consider careers in science and engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the EVO is critically important as
it will enhance research productivity for faculty and undergraduate
collaborators on a multitude of diverse projects. The EVO will allow imaging of
a variety of materials (living and non-living) at the nanoscale using several
different detection modes, including correlation of electron microscopy and
optical microscopy. Use of the EVO will lead to new findings on understanding
the mechanisms of photoreception by tissues of the eyes in turtles, the physics
underlying magnetic nanoparticle ensembles, and the history of magma systems by
detailed analysis of accessory minerals. Other research made possible with the
EVO includes characterizing “smart” biomaterials for tissue engineering
applications, examining interactions between biofilms and their substrates for
design of containment systems, studying the mechanisms of mechanotransduction in
zebrafish, investigating nanowire synthesis, and analyzing single-photon
emission from defects in wide bandgap semiconductors. Results from these
research projects completed by faculty and undergraduate student co-authors will
be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and at regional, national, and
international scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.