* 2018756
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dynamic Nuclear Polarization (DNP) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ann McDermott, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
award is to acquire a klystron microwave source and a magnet for dynamic nuclear
polarization nuclear magnetic resonance (DNP NMR) spectroscopy together with an
existing 400 MHz NMR console. DNP uses microwaves to increase detection
sensitivity by up to two orders of magnitude, making materials characterization
that was previously intractable via a traditional NMR (spectral acquisition of
months) now accessible with a collection time of hours. A broad user base with
diverse, interdisciplinary research activities on energy storage, heterogeneous
catalysis, biomaterials, and NMR methods development benefits from the
instrument acquisition and is bolstered by partnerships with industry in the
greater New York/New Jersey area. Practical training in DNP NMR in both
undergraduate and graduate coursework at Columbia as well as bridge programs
between Columbia and Barnard (an all women liberal arts Columbia affiliate) are
integrated with research to increase the participation of underrepresented
groups in the training infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;DNP NMR spectroscopy has revolutionized the
characterization of low sensitivity elements and surface species, allowing
structural assignment at the molecular level for systems of fundamental or
commercial interest. The 263 GHz klystron/400 MHz sweepable magnet offers i) an
appropriate mid-field strength to study materials with large anisotropies (e.g.
nanoparticles and clusters), ii) multinuclear NMR capabilities that enable the
study of challenging low gamma/quadrupolar NMR nuclei in technologically
relevant materials (e.g. batteries and catalysts), and iii) the development of
new designer radicals for DNP. The klystron microwave source fits within the
space constraints and minimizes instrument maintenance. The instrument
acquisition enables and accelerates the characterization of a wide range of
inorganic and biomaterials, with an emphasis on sustainability, as well as
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
award is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and Division
of Chemistry (CHE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.