* 2018358
* Nonequilibrium Quantum Mechanics of Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Aditi Mitra, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 345,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on complex quantum systems that are in a highly excited or
nonequilibrium state. These systems can be realized in a myriad of experimental
platforms, and they are also ingredients in the next generation of devices.
Theoretical methods to study such systems are, however, still in their infancy.
Quantum systems also have a defining feature, called quantum entanglement, that
makes them qualitatively different from their classical counterparts. This
project will develop theoretical methods to study not only classical metrics of
quantum systems such as resistance and viscosity, but will also develop
techniques to study quantum entanglement. The study of entanglement is well
aligned with the NSF Quantum Leap initiative, whose goal is to push the
boundaries of quantum mechanics and its applications to next generation
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also has a strong educational
component as it will lead to the training of the next generation of scientists.
The PI and NSF funded research scientists will broaden participation by
mentoring high school students through the NYU-GSTEM program. The PI is also
committed to organizing a series of conferences that aim to bring together
diverse communities of scientists that usually do not have the opportunity to
interact, but share the common goal of understanding nonequilibrium phenomena in
complex systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEHCNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on
nonequilibrium phenomena in strongly correlated quantum systems. The project
will develop field-theoretic approaches to study transport, correlation
functions, and entanglement measures far out of equilibrium. The development of
a formalism for studying entanglement measures is well aligned with the NSF
Quantum Leaps initiative. The project also applies to current experiments in
cold-atomic gases, ultra-fast pump-probe spectroscopy of solid-state systems,
and light-matter coupled systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the
following major components: (1) Large-N bosonic and fermionic theories, along
with the two-particle irreducible formalism that naturally takes into account
conservation laws, will be employed to study nonequilibrium phenomena. Transient
conductivity and viscosity following a quantum quench will be studied.
Interacting critical systems will be studied, with the goal of searching for new
scaling physics out of equilibrium and exploring whether critical slow modes can
give rise to anomalies in transport. (2) An augmented Schwinger-Keldysh
formalism will be employed to study out of time ordered correlators, and the
Renyi entanglement entropy. Controlled weak-coupling expansions will be
developed to construct these entanglement measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project also has a strong educational component as it will lead to the training
of a graduate student and a postdoctoral research scientist. The PI and NSF
funded research scientists will broaden participation by mentoring high school
students through the NYU-GSTEM program. The PI is also committed to organizing a
series of conferences that aim to bring together diverse communities of
scientists who share the common goal of understanding nonequilibrium phenomena
in complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.