* 2018668
* RCN-UBE INCUBATOR STEM BUILD: A network of undergraduates, faculty, and makers utilizing 3D printing to Build Understanding through Inclusive Learning Design
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Claire Gordy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2023
* USD 74,983.00

Scientific discovery is a team effort that benefits from the intellectual input
of individuals with diverse backgrounds, perspectives, and lived experiences.
Lack of diversity in STEM fields in the US represents a loss of talent and slows
the progress of science. To increase the diversity of the STEM workforce in the
US, it is necessary to develop new ways of teaching complex concepts that are
engaging and effective for all learners. This RCN-UBE network will provide
training and resources to educators to help them create interactive 3D-printed
cellular and molecular puzzles for use in college biology classrooms. These 3D
models are designed to be accessible to all students, including those with
disabilities, making it possible for blind or visually impaired students to
learn about cellular and molecular processes along with their seeing classmates.
Because they are designed to be broadly accessible, published studies have shown
that these models increase understanding of difficult biological concepts for
all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will recruit three
geographically-based teams of faculty, 3D printing experts (“makers”), and
undergraduate research assistants to attend a training summit at NC State
University. Each team will be composed of members from three different
institutions and will collaborate to create a Tactile Teaching Tool-Guided
Inquiry Learning (TTT-GIL) activity that will be implemented at all three
institutions in the team. During the summit, teams will receive training in 3D
design and printing, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Process-Oriented
Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL), and assessment. Upon returning to home
institutions, teams will continue prototyping and refining their models, with
faculty designing the activity and assessment, and undergraduate research
students working with makers to produce the physical models. Each team will
assess the effectiveness of their TTT-GIL activity in at least three different
classroom settings. The researchers will evaluate the effect of participation in
this project on faculty teaching practices, undergraduate students’ STEM
identity and persistence, and training provided by makers at their home
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.