* 2018492
* SCC: Empowering Smart and Connecticut Communities through Programmable Community Microgrids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Peng Zhang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 743,715.00

The keystone of smart &amp; connected communities (S&amp;CCs) is a resilient
electric network which supports critical infrastructures and other functions
vital for citizens. Existing electric networks, however, can hardly sustain the
ever-increasing demand of growing communities. According to the Department of
Energy, in 2015, U.S. customers experienced an average of 198 minutes of power
outage, indicating an unsatisfied electricity resilience. Furthermore,
distributed energy resources (DERs), such as photovoltaics (PVs) increasingly
installed in U.S. communities, fail to improve electricity resilience, because
they cannot ride through sustained grid contingencies. Adding to these
challenges, extreme weather events and cyber-attacks can potentially lead to
catastrophic blackouts. Microgrids have proved to be a promising paradigm for
electricity resiliency. Unfortunately, transforming community power
infrastructures to truly smart microgrids remains prohibitively difficult due to
dependence on hardware; limited, unscalable analytics; and broader digital
surfaces vulnerable to cyber-attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of this project is to create smart programmable microgrids (SPMs). Our key
innovation is to virtualize microgrid functions, making them software-defined
and hardware-independent, so that converting DERs to community microgrids
becomes affordable, autonomic, and secure. To achieve our main objective, our
team will: 1) Architect a programmable microgrid platform for virtualizing
traditionally hardware-dependent microgrid functions as flexible software
services, fully resolving hardware dependence issues and enabling
unprecedentedly low costs; 2) Pioneer a concept of software-defined operation
optimization for microgrids, where operation objectives, grid connection, and
DER participations will be defined by software and plug-and-play, and can be
quickly reconfigured, based on the development of modularized and tightened
models and a novel asynchronous price-based decomposition-and-coordination
method; 3) Devise a software-defined distributed formal analysis for online
stability assessment under heterogeneous uncertainties and plug-and-play of
microgrid components or microgrids; 4) Develop a real-time-learning-based
cybersecurity function to protect SPMs against power bot attacks; and 5) Enable
anaerobic-biomass-digesters (ADs) as environmentally friendly and dispatchable
DERs by virtualizing the dispatch and control of ADs in SPM. The proposed SPM
will be demonstrated on a CT community microgrid through a recently built cyber-
physical testbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
groundbreaking, replicable technologies to modernize cost-effectively America's
energy infrastructures in the S&amp;CC and could transform today's community
power infrastructures into tomorrow's flexible services towards self-
configuration, self-healing, self-optimizing, and self-protection. The proposed
technologies are expected to be widely adopted especially by those communities
suffering high electricity costs, low energy reliability, and poor resilience
performances. This project will leverage resources of Eversource Energy Center
(EEC) to organize Annual EEC Workshops which will attract users and participants
from key stakeholders including utilities, regulators, state governments, state
legislators and towns and cities. This S&amp;CC project will impact a large
population of graduate and undergraduate students from multiple disciplines by
offering new curriculums and using programmable microgrid as a living laboratory
to help students gain hands-on experiences to tackle energy resiliency and
security problems. The influence of the project will reach beyond university
classrooms through UConn's Power Engineering Graduate Certificate Program. This
project aims to involve women, underrepresented minorities and persons with
disabilities in the development of this S&amp;CC project through multiple
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.