* 2018924
* Collaborative Research: Examining Pyrotechnology and Ecosystem Change in the Archaeological Record
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kevin Uno, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 145,798.00

Knowing when humans began using fire allows us to better understand our
evolutionary and biological history. This project will explore the question of
early fire use through archaeological investigation of human activities from 1
to 2 million years ago. The investigators will use ancient archaeological and
environmental data, along with modern data, to simulate how human exposure to
landscape fire would influence behavior and how human use of fire would have
affected landscapes. This research will provide insights into human
relationships with fire and help clarify the extent to which fire was a catalyst
for human cultural and biological development. The project will support early
career researchers, efforts to broaden participation in paleoanthropology, and
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The research
will be used to develop an educational outreach program with the American Museum
of Natural History that is focused on increasing scientific participation of
economically and educationally diverse middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological excavation and sampling will be
used to identify fire 1 to 2 million years ago in a region with a vast fossil
and archaeological record that spans between 4 and 1 million years ago. The
investigators will study burning of organic matter using polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, plant waxes, infrared spectroscopy of bone and sediment,
identification of microscopic charcoal, and microscopic plant fossils. They will
investigate these proxies at archaeological sites, in fossil soils, and a
sediment core from a body of water that borders the research area.
Investigations of these patterns at small scales (within archaeological sites)
and at local to regional ecosystem levels (paleosols and sediment core) will be
used to develop agent-based models of ecosystem responses to human fire use and
generate predictions about the frequency and origin of landscape fires. This
project combines experimental and archaeological advances with targeted field
studies to address these questions and provide insights into this critical
adaptation in human technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.