* 2018822
* CC* Compute: A High Performance GPU Cluster at Syracuse University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 393,128.00

Syracuse University is constructing a new compute cluster using Graphics
Processing Units. This production cluster will serve the needs of the Syracuse
University research community and the broader scientific community through
integration with the Open Science Grid. The use of Graphics Processing Units to
solve problems in science and engineering has grown significantly over recent
years. Campus cyberinfrastructure providers have seen increasing demand for
access to Graphics Processing Units in lieu of more traditional compute
architectures. Syracuse University has created a strong partnership among
campus-level cyberinfrastructure experts as well as at the national level
through the University's contributions to the Open Science Grid. This cluster
provides a significant resource for enabling science and cyberinfrastructure
development at Syracuse University. The application drivers come from a variety
of domains including computational forensics, high-energy physics, development
of smart vision systems, computational chemistry, biomedical engineering, soft-
matter physics, and gravitational-wave physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to
the Graphics Processing Units will be an important resource for education of
undergraduate and graduate students. Given the growth in related Graphics
Processing Unit computing, Syracuse University faculty are introducing Graphics
Processing Unit programming to undergraduate students from a variety of
backgrounds. The capabilities and availability of this cluster will allow for
broader adoption within the classroom environment, as well as provide compute
power to researchers. Undergraduates from across the College of Engineering and
Computer Science and the College of Arts and Sciences can use these resources,
giving them early preparation for new computing schemes. Access to the resources
via the Open Science Grid will allow researchers from across the U.S. access to
the compute resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.