* 2018661
* Elucidating how microtubule-microtubule interactions drive the dynamic reorganization of the microtubule cytoskeleton
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Marija Zanic, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,057,736.00

Microtubules are cellular polymers that build a variety of essential structures
inside of cells where they provide a major component of a cellâ€™s cytoskeletal
network. Dynamic microtubule arrangements and rearrangements define cell shape,
provide tracks for intracellular transport, and drive cell division and
motility. Thus, active remodeling of the microtubule cytoskeleton is vital for
cellular function. In recent years, biochemical studies of microtubules and
their associated proteins have provided important insight into the molecular
mechanisms underlying the dynamics of individual microtubule polymers. However,
the rules governing how individual microtubules interact to give rise to
dynamically-evolving cytoskeletal network architectures are still largely
unknown. This project will employ a multidisciplinary approach to elucidate how
microtubule-microtubule interactions encode the remodeling of the microtubule
network, specifically focusing on migrating cells. The ability to reconstitute
and manipulate the dynamic architecture of cytoskeletal ensembles will
ultimately allow the control of cellular behavior, as well as the future
development of biologically-inspired active materials. The project will provide
for a diverse interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students
and additional outreach efforts will be carried out in local schools and a
science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to elucidate
the role of microtubule-microtubule interactions in the dynamic remodeling of
the microtubule cytoskeleton, with a particular focus on microtubule network
organization in the context of cell migration. The hypothesis is that nodes of
microtubule-microtubule interactions serve as focal points for network
remodeling, providing encoded microdomains for localized protein activity, and
endowing the network with enhanced resistance to a variety of perturbations. To
test this hypothesis, this project will combine cellular studies with in vitro
reconstitution approaches and computational modeling. State-of-the-art imaging
will be used to determine the properties of microtubule interaction nodes, as a
function of angle, protein localization and microtubule dynamics parameters in
the lamella of epithelial (LLC-PK1) and migrating (B16 melanoma) cells. In
vitro, microtubule interactions will be reconstituted in the presence of
distinct classes of microtubule-associated-proteins (MAPs) that target and
regulate microtubule end dynamics, stabilize the microtubule polymer lattice,
and induce polymer damage and severing. The network topology will be controlled
using micropatterning techniques; biochemical and mechanical perturbations will
be exerted using microfluidics and laser severing; and ensemble behavior will be
modeled using computational simulations. Predictions obtained using in silico
and in vitro approaches will be directly tested by observations of microtubule
interactions in cells. Together, these approaches will uncover the interplay of
biochemistry, mechanics and dynamics in a physiologically-relevant context. In
addition to the immediate relevance for understanding cellular processes such as
cell motility and neuronal growth cone guidance, the mechanisms identified here
will be broadly important in the developmental context, where cytoskeleton-
driven morphological changes define multicellular tissue and organ structures
through the process of differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.