* 2018523
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Musculoskeletal Design on Bipedal Walking and Running Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Brian Umberger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Humans are unique among apes and other primates in the size and shape of our
back, pelvis and lower limbs, all of which contribute to the ease with which we
walk and run on two limbs. The main goal of this project is to elucidate the
walking and running capabilities of the earliest human ancestors, who – the
human fossil record indicates – possessed only a subset of these anatomical
traits. To achieve this goal, this project will integrate locomotor experiments
of humans and chimpanzees with computer simulations using detailed models of the
muscle and skeletal anatomies of humans, chimpanzees and Australopithecus
afarensis, a ~3.5 million year old human ancestor. This integrative experiment-
modeling/simulation approach will establish relationships between anatomical
traits and walking and running capabilities. The project will link biological
anthropology and computational science research, including the development of
new tools that provide a rigorous, quantitative basis for inferring walking and
running capabilities from fossils of human ancestors. It will also contribute to
education and training at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels,
and include a strong commitment to advancing academic diversity and inclusion.
The knowledge generated will be incorporated into an annual biomechanics
outreach event for high school students and a workshop providing computer
modeling and simulation skills for researchers in biological anthropology. Data,
models, and algorithms associated with this project will be shared online with
other scientists, educators, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the past 7 to 8 million years, our muscular, skeletal, and neural systems have
been adapted for overground locomotion. How did our lineage become skilled
walkers and runners, and what locomotor adaptations occurred among the earliest
hominins? This question will be addressed by integrating empirical locomotion
data with detailed models of the musculoskeletal system and the latest advances
in predictive simulation. First, a comprehensive experimental dataset will be
established for the 3-D limb motion, forces, and cost for bipedal chimpanzee and
human locomotion at matched speeds. This dataset will be used to validate model-
based, predictive simulations of walking and running in both taxa, and evaluate
three ecologically-relevant performance criteria, including energy cost, muscle
fatigue, and joint loading, as well as a weighted combination of all three. A
3-D model of Au. afarensis will then be used with the best-performing criteria
to predict walking and running capabilities for this species, with uncertainty
assessed via sensitivity analyses. Together, these data will provide the basis
for developing an early hominin-like deformable ape musculoskeletal model to
test the hypothesis that lower back and pelvis evolution enhanced bipedal
walking and running capabilities as compared to bipedal locomotion in
chimpanzees. Finally, a new bi-level predictive simulation approach will be
developed for discovering the selective forces that drive anatomical trait
evolution in bipedal locomotion. This integrative approach will provide critical
information about walking and running capabilities in the earliest hominins that
have been unapproachable using comparative fossil-based studies or
experimentation alone. This project is jointly supported by the Biological
Anthropology and Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.