* 2018653
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Materials Science Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Jiyeong Gu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2022
* USD 335,858.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
award supports the acquisition of a fast-scanning, high-resolution atomic force
microscope (AFM). This instrument is at the core of a multi-user imaging center
focused on materials science research at California State University Long Beach
(CSULB). This center opens the possibility to collaboratively explore newly
synthesized materials at the length scale of one billionth of a meter via
imaging. The research, training, teaching, and outreach of many research groups
focus on projects related to two-dimensional materials, curved magnetic
structures, and portable diagnostic sensors for disease detection. CSULBâ€™s
position of serving a well-qualified pool of underrepresented minority students
lends itself towards giving valuable early experiences and skills in important
small feature technology areas. The research results are disseminated to the
public via accessible high-resolution images by mentored students with
backgrounds representative of the overall
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The acquired
AFM instrument combines fast scanning, high-resolution nanomaterial imaging with
high stability, reproducibility, and reliability for measurements in liquids.
This instrument's advanced features are based on ultra-short, high-frequency
cantilevers and smaller, high-intensity laser spots. The cantilever's stability
is enhanced by using a secondary shorter wavelength laser to photothermally
excite only the well-defined cantilever portion of the tip. It allows for
dynamic studies of surface morphology in dry and liquid environments. Taking
advantage of these new AFM features, the research groups focus on the following
objectives: 1) pin hole reduction in bithermally grown metalorganic thin films;
2) enhanced electronic properties of surface cleaned suspended graphene; 3)
magnetochiral effects of curved magnetic surfaces; 4) nanopore fabrication for
linked-ring polymer translocation; 5) defect mapping of functionalized
nanosheets; and 6) surface dynamics in electrochemical
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.