* 2018239
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Confocal Microscope System for Research and Research Training at San Francisco State University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Laura Burrus, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 755,907.00

An award has been made to San Francisco State University (SFSU) to purchase an
advanced Laser Point-Scanning Confocal Microscope system for research and
research training of the diverse students (44% from historically under-
represented (HU) groups, &gt;50% low income, 48% 1st generation college
students, and 57% women) at this Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). The new
capabilities of this instrument, which will be housed in the Cell and Molecular
Imaging Center at SFSU, will enable students to become experts in state-of-the-
art technology, which is critical for success in highly competitive doctoral
programs and the biotechnology industry. Students using the system will also be
featured in Scientist Spotlights authored by SFSU HU undergraduates. These
spotlights showcase scientists that do not conform to classic stereotypes and
provide inspiring and relevant near-peer role models as well as examples of
diverse, local scientists to engage K-12 students and the public in STEM. The
advanced features of the system will also enable summer research training
courses to be held at SFSU to broaden opportunities for more SFSU undergraduates
to conduct research, a factor closely tied to degree completion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscopy system will impact a broad,
interdisciplinary range of research projects. Fifteen investigators from the
Biology, Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, Physics, and Kinesiology Departments at
SFSU will use the instrument to conduct studies in cell and developmental
biology, physiology, and materials science. The instrument will enable tracking
and quantification of changes in molecular features of cellular dynamics,
including chromosome segregation in C. elegans, organelle inheritance and size
regulation in yeast and Drosophila, and subcellular protein localization in
bacteria, plant, and mammalian cells. Features of the instrument will enable
detection of stimulus-induced changes in signaling molecules required for
development in mammals as well as the analysis of a broad spectrum of low-level
fluorescence in nanomaterials. The system will support SFSU researchers to
conduct relevant and impactful research and disseminate their new discoveries in
peer-reviewed journal articles and presentations at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.