* 2018337
* MRI: Acquisition of a flow cytometer to enhance undergraduate research at Wellesley College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrea Sequeira, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 371,712.00

An award is made to Wellesley College to support the purchase of a new flow
cytometer. The system will allow students and faculty to make highly sensitive
measurements of the properties of individual cells within large populations and
at multiple fluorescence wavelengths. Students and faculty will use the flow
cytometer to address questions in diverse areas of scientific research,
examining systems ranging from aquatic bacteria to eukaryotic cells and working
in both the lab and field. Providing students the opportunity to conduct
cutting-edge science using modern instrumentation is an important part of
undergraduate training. As such, the flow cytometer will also be used in
Wellesley's laboratory courses, providing our students with opportunities to
learn about current high-throughput analytical techniques through hands-on,
student-directed research projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new flow cytometer
will enable novel areas of scientific inquiry to be carried out across multiple
departments at Wellesley. Researchers will use the cytometer to study a range of
topics, including: extracellular vesicle-mediated interaction dynamics; the
structure and abundance of microbial populations in lake ecosystems;
compartment-specific redox dynamics; protein-protein interactions; mechanisms of
anti-microbial peptide interactions with bacterial membranes; and ploidy
discrimination studies in populations of invasive grasses. Results from the
research performed with this instrumentation will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed scientific journal publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.