* 2018873
* CC* Team: CAREERS: Cyberteam to Advance Research and Education in Eastern Regional Schools
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Carothers, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,399,829.00

Given the pivotal role of data and cyberinfrastructure (CI) in scientific
discovery and teaching, it is essential that all small and mid-sized
institutions be empowered to fully exploit them. Access to physical
infrastructure is certainly required, but researchers also need access to
“Research Computing Facilitators” (RCFs) possessing the mix of technical
knowledge and interpersonal skills required to help them use CI resources
effectively. This poses challenges for smaller institutions, since RCFs are in
short supply and are difficult to recruit and retain. Moreover, institutions can
often afford only one or two, making it challenging to support diverse
scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a
sustainable distributed approach to address these challenges in six Eastern
states, facilitated by the Eastern Regional Network, a nascent, but growing
collaboration among this project’s seven anchor institutions, other institutions
in the Eastern US, and the area’s regional network providers. The project
strategy has two principal legs: (1) expanding the RCF talent pipeline by
engaging students at smaller institutions in nearly 70 project-based mentored
experiential learning opportunities; and (2) developing a regional RCF pool
providing CI facilitation across institutional and geographic
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Success of this project directly enhances
scientific research at smaller institutions. The regional RCF pool enables
researchers to access appropriate expertise without the costs and delays of
building an institutional RCF team. The experiential training approach exposes a
relatively large, diverse group of students to the RCF profession, yielding
opportunities to encourage trainees, especially in underrepresented groups, to
pursue RCF careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.