* 2018207
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Research, Education, and Exhibit Programs at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Joel Martin, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 130,809.00

An award is made to the Natural History Museum (NHM) of Los Angeles County
Foundation for the purpose of acquiring a scanning electron microscope (SEM) for
research, education, and exhibition programs. The SEM will replace an earlier
model that served the Museum well for nearly 20 years. The NHM is a research and
educational institution that serves one of the nation’s most ethnically diverse
cities and largest school district. NHM’s Education branch will leverage the new
microscope to aid in communicating science to the public. Education and training
activities will include classes taught at graduate, undergraduate, and high
school levels in affiliation with several local universities and high schools. A
planned adjacent exhibit will incorporate the SEM into a public-facing setting
that uses graphics, images, and live-feed video to show visitors how images in
the sciences are produced and used. Other societal benefits include raising the
scientific literacy of the general public via outreach activities and through
in-house classes and demonstrations for visiting teachers and school groups of
all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new microscope will be used in a wide variety
of scientific research fields, including evolutionary morphology, vertebrate and
invertebrate biology and paleontology, systematic and phylogenetic biology,
mineral sciences, and more. SEM images will be used in a diverse array of
publications, books, and scientific reports. Results from research activities
will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and through national and
international scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.