* 2018889
* MRI: Acquisition of PeakForce Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy Package and Upgrade for Dimension Icon Scanning Probe Microscopy System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Francois Amet, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2021
* USD 40,110.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project funds upgrades to a scanning
probe microscope that is central to the research, teaching, and outreach
activities at Appalachian State University. This system is critical to four
different physics and chemistry research groups on campus and enables continued
collaborations with several institutions, including Duke University and the
Rochester Institute of Technology. Research performed using the upgraded system
will be conducted primarily by undergraduates and Masters students and will
focus on the development and characterization of electronic materials such as
organic semiconductors and atomically thin crystals. It benefits the public by
helping to develop renewable power sources and performant electronic
technologies. In addition to research, the instrument is used daily for teaching
and is integrated into Appalachian's graduate-level courses on microscopy
techniques, materials science, and nanoscience. The microscope is also regularly
featured in educational outreach and recruiting events, such as campus open
house tours and Appalachian's Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and
Mathematics (STEAM) Expo, a science festival event that gathers approximately
2,500 K-12 students annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award allows the addition of two nanoscale imaging
modes, Peakforce Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy and Quantitative Nanomechanical
Mapping, to the existing Dimension Icon scanning probe microscope at
Appalachian. Kelvin Probe microscopy characterizes changes in the work function
of a material at the nanoscale, whereas nanomechanical mapping images the
spatial variations of the strain and elastic modulus. The team uses these modes
to: (1) investigate and optimize the morphology of field-effect and photovoltaic
devices based on organic semiconductor blends; (2) characterize local doping in
van der Waals heterostructures; (3) image the local strain that arises from
Moire effects in twisted van der Waals heterostructures; and (4) characterize
the nanoscale morphology of switchable elastomeric materials based on metal-
coordination complex crosslinked polymer networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.