* 2018373
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Creation of a Science DMZ and 10Gb/s Connection to Internet2 for Tennessee Tech University
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Michael Rogers, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 276,322.00

This project facilitates national and international research collaborations at
Tennessee Technological University by establishing a dedicated 10 Gbps
connection to Internet2 and creating a high-speed Science DMZ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new cyberinfrastructure benefits a large number of
researchers across multiple colleges and research centers. It enables data-
driven research in areas including next-generation Networking, Cybersecurity,
High-performance Computing, Chemical Engineering, Biology, High-energy Physics,
Earth Sciences, and Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering. The upgraded
connectivity enables researchers to share data both internally and externally in
a fast, secure, and reliable manner over the dedicated research-only connection.
The Science DMZ equips researchers with use-case specific segmented resources
(network, disk space, and compute nodes) as well as increased autonomy and
flexibility to deploy isolated research prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
infrastructure bypasses Tennessee Tech's perimeter firewall while integrating
with the existing infrastructure. High-speed data transfer nodes (DTNs) provides
faster data delivery to and from the campus. The network design provides
dedicated connectivity for research traffic to most buildings. Several PerfSonar
nodes deployed at strategic network locations report real-time network and
application performance, allowing the operators to optimize network flows.
Finally, this new infrastructure brings IPv6 deployment to the campus. A study
of network and application performance before and after the deployment can
demonstrate the impact of a science DMZ on science workflows in terms of
performance, latency, and flexibility. The experience in implementing this
project at Tennessee Tech can provide guidance to other universities pursuing
similar cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.