* 2018144
* Fine tuning of protein functional atomistic dynamics in molecular evolution and cellular processes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Donald Hamelberg, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 971,504.00

Proteins are one of the basic cellular building blocks and are essential for
carrying out processes inside cells. The findings of this research will provide
new basic understanding of how the movement or dynamics of proteins and their
interactions of other molecules affects protein function. Better understanding
of protein function could help in the design of new protein catalysts for
biotechnology applications and well as lead to a greater understanding of how
protein disfunction contributes to disease. The research will also produce new
computational tools, including new software, that will assist others in their
research and in developing new technology. The research cuts across many
disciplines, including chemistry, biology, physics, mathematics, and computer
science, and provides an excellent opportunity to train students at all levels.
More specifically, the research will have a broader impact on the scientific
training of students at Georgia State University, with focus on better preparing
underrepresented minority students for graduate school. Georgia State University
is the largest and most diverse research-intensive university in Georgia,
providing a unique opportunity to engage a diverse student body and
underrepresented minority groups in science and engineering. Students will be
equipped with research experiences, fundamental knowledge, and professional
skills that are required to successfully transition to doctoral programs in
chemical and biomedical sciences. Additionally, the project will provide
outreach to a larger community through well-established programs at Georgia
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein conformational motions direct
molecular recognition, enzyme catalysis, and allosteric regulation in many
cellular processes. Conformational dynamics underlies the fine tuning of many
cellular processes, including transient protein-protein interactions, signal
transduction, and gene regulation in response to biochemical processes and
changes in cellular conditions. Deregulation of the dynamics controlling one or
more of these processes can lead to aberrant cellular function. Despite
intensive studies on elucidating the complex structure-dynamics-function
relationship, how protein function has evolved and is regulated remain poorly
understood. The goal of the research is to establish the dynamical link for
controllable modulations of function in proteins using large-scale computer
simulations performed under distinct substrate-binding and sequence conditions.
Specifically, the research will determine how various modifications of protein
function, including gain and loss of catalytic activity, are achieved through
evolution in the family of human cyclophilins and establish a complete model of
the sequence dependent allosteric mechanism in human Pin1. Additionally,
innovative and efficient computational methods will be developed to identify key
allosteric residues in proteins from large simulation data. General principles
of how allosteric signals microscopically propagate within a network of protein
residue-residue interactions will be obtained, complementing the well-
established thermodynamic models for macroscopic understanding of allosteric
regulation. The research will provide deep insights into the role of protein
dynamics in recognition, catalysis, and allosteric regulation in cellular
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.