* 2018104
* MRI: Acquisition of a LC/MS/MS for Multidisciplinary Environmental Studies and Training at Tennessee State University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ying Wu, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 140,000.00

An instrument that pairs liquid chromatography with triple quadrupole mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has the capability to analyze multiple compounds and
their chemical structures in complex mixtures. Acquisition of such an instrument
enables fundamental multidisciplinary research at Tennessee State University by
researchers from environmental engineering, chemistry, food science, soil
science, and biology. Key research activities include efforts to advance
knowledge on: 1) degradation products of insecticides in the environment, 2)
water treatment processes to remove pharmaceuticals, 3) processes that degrade
toxins in water, 4) absorption of insecticides by nursery pests, and 5)
pesticide residues in engineered food. The instrumentation will become a key
element of TSUâ€™s research infrastructure. The LC-MS/MS will be used in
undergraduate and graduate courses and will promote partnerships and
collaborative activities with surrounding universities and research
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This advanced LC-MS/MS instrumentation consists a
triple quadrupole analyzer with a mass range up to 3,000 m/z and a detection
limit of ng/l level. This capability will allow environmental engineering
researchers to determine seven neonicotinoid residues and possible degradation
products in soil and water, enabling discovery of the fate and transport of
neonicotinoids in the environment. Researchers will monitor emerging
contaminants, including perfluorinated compounds in groundwater, cyanotoxins in
surface waters, and residuals of pharmaceuticals and personal care products in
wastewater, improving understanding of the effect of degradation processes due
to biodegradation, photolysis, and hydrolysis on the behavior of emerging
contaminants. The LC-MS/MS will be used to characterize the residual analysis of
insecticides in the development of effective treatment methods of soil and
container media for nursery pests including Chrysobothris, Japanese beetle, and
fire ants. The LC-MS/MS will allow food science researchers to characterize the
structure and functionality change of bioactive polysaccharides to learn more
about the stability and shelf life of engineered food. Researchers in
agriculture will use the equipment to study complex pesticide
residues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.