* 2018912
* CC*: Integration-Large:  POWWOW: Software-Defined Infrastructure for Wireless, Edge Cybersecurity Testbeds
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Anish Arora, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 898,968.00

The project, POWWOW, is a test-bed for large-scale, real-world experimentation
in sensing, edge computing, networking, cyber-security, privacy and ethics.
POWWOW will extend the large campus network that is in regular use at The Ohio
State University (OSU). By embedding novel software-defined sensing, computing
and networking capabilities at the edge and the core of this network,
researchers will be able to study, in a carefully controlled manner, real-world
communications and activities on campus, in order to develop new technology for
not only sensing and networking but in particular technology and policies for
cyber-security, privacy and ethical use of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The POWWOW
research cyberinfrastructure is unique because it integrates with OSU's large-
scale production networks to support “living lab” studies in smart sensing. Its
focus on real-world sensing and device operations distinguishes POWWOW from
other wireless networking testbeds that focus on communication and networking.
Researchers and educators will add their own devices and systems, including
diverse sensors, wireless sensor networks, software defined radios, controllers,
actuators, and vehicles all of which can be dynamically instrumented.
Researchers may then, privately and in real time, process data from these
devices, share the data, and communicate securely with authenticated users and
their devices leading to the discovery of new methods for sensing the acoustic
and the radio frequency environment to get private information as well as new
methods for concealing information from being sensed. The project team is
uniquely composed of researchers across OSU several institutes as well as
cyberinfrastructure engineers from the OSU's Office of the CIO that will
translate POWWOW into sustained, production use for wide-ranging projects in
research and education. Lessons learned from POWWOW will enable systems like it
to be replicated in other research environments, thus greatly scaling
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;POWWOW will accelerate the ability of research
communities across the nation to perform new types of data-driven research and
education. Because it connects to state level resources, such as the Ohio Cyber
Range, it may be leveraged at the national level through initiatives such as
Fabric-Net, to stimulate the development of an ethical basis for designing
privacy preserving services in a world of ubiquitous sensing where explicit
consent for every service is infeasible. Project activities will engage students
via academic programming and R&amp;D opportunities, ranging from scrubbing and
curating data to hackathon-type projects that explore innovative uses of data,
and developing, deploying and supporting POWWOW capabilities. This project will
contribute to broadening participation in computing by prioritizing research
users and projects where engagement of undergraduates from under-represented
groups by leveraging established pathways at OSU such as the GEM Consortium and
the Ohio LSAMP Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;POWWOW will be hosted on campus at
http://powwow.osu.edu. This site will disseminate the artifacts resulting from
the project (such as publications, software, system designs and datasets), along
with the policies and guidelines for accessing and using POWWOW. The site will
be maintained for the duration of this project, and potentially well beyond it,
as POWWOW is adopted by researchers and becomes widely
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.