* 2018068
* Interventions on Diffusion Processes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Evan Sadler, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 283,000.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The project seeks to improve our
understanding of how social networks shape the spread of opinions, products, and
ideas. The core objective is to turn insights from theoretical models into
practical guidance on how to conduct targeted seeding, how to design regulations
for social media, and how to advertise new products with uncertain quality. The
award funds three projects. The first project will develop a framework to study
how best to target individuals based on their network positions in order to
spread a new idea or innovation. The second project will model the distinctive
features of social media markets in an effort to identify inefficiencies and
propose potential regulatory solutions. The third project will study the
interplay between word-of-mouth advertising and how consumers learn about
product quality. Managing the spread of information and misinformation has
become a core concern in recent years, and results from these projects will help
regulators and business leaders make more effective decisions in this domain.
Methods developed in the process may also prove useful in other applications in
which individual choices affect a contagion process—for instance, modeling the
spread of disease while accounting for changes in human behavior that occur as
it spreads. The research therefore has the potential to advance our nation’s
capacity to meet current and future challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
projects contribute to a broader agenda on how to leverage social spillovers to
spread innovations and how to manage these spillovers to mitigate the spread of
misinformation. The first project will lead to a new approach to optimal
targeting in order to disseminate new ideas and innovations. The second will
provide a framework to evaluate proposed reg- ulations on social media. The
third will help us understand how word-of-mouth marketing conveys information
about product quality. While several recent papers demonstrate the efficacy of
many network-based interventions, this agenda faces challenges because network
data are typically noisy and expensive to gather, and determining optimal
policies is computationally hard. Building on methodology that the PI introduced
in a previous paper, these projects leverage new results on random graphs to
obtain a computationally tractable model that makes predictions based on
distributional information about the network
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.