* 2018992
* MRI: Development of a Calibration System for Stereophotogrammetry to Enable Large-Scale Measurement and Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Niezrecki, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 455,096.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project will develop a multi-sensor
system that will allow measurements from moving platforms, such as remotely
connected/remotely paired unmanned vehicles or drones. The novel instrument will
be used for real-time calibration of specialty cameras in a novel computer-
vision system. This new knowledge and technique will enhance public safety
through rapid and accurate inspection of critical infrastructure and large-scale
physical systems. This instrumentation will contribute to fundamental research
at the University of Massachusetts-Lowell and the development of new curriculum
on sensors integration, controls, and machine-vision. Collaborations with local
high school teachers will introduce K-12 students to computer-vision and
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) inspection, encouraging them to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This potentially transformative instrumentation
will be used for real-time calibration of stereophotogrammetry and remotely
paired digital cameras, thereby streamlining calibration procedures and enabling
measurements from moving platforms. The multi-sensor system records the
orientation angles and the relative distance between two paired cameras needed
to triangulate the 3D position of optical targets with respect to the cameras’
retinal plane. This obviates the need for time-consuming calibration and fixed
sensor positioning and has the potential to enlarge the field of view. The
instrumentation will provide a new means for recording data to inform and
validate ongoing advanced modeling efforts and to enable a new understanding of
large-scale systems’ dynamic characteristics. Research using this
instrumentation will drive a fundamental understanding of how physical
parameters such as displacement, deformation, and strain characterize the
behavior of large-scale systems like large infrastructure, wind turbine blades
and parachutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.