* 2018069
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cyberinstrument for AI-Enabled Computational Science &amp; Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Amy Apon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 651,000.00

This project aims to acquire an instrument focusing on Artificial Intelligence
to drive fundamental research and enable applications of existing methodologies.
The instrumentation extends the supercomputer at the institution and would serve
as catalysts for academic partnerships in the state among Clemson, Medical
University of S.C. (MUSC), USC, and some HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Instrument extends the supercomputer at the institution and enables research on:
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Computational Intelligence, Deep
Learning, and Statistical Methods. The instrument enables research on Biomedical
Data Science and Informatics, including the development of tools and deep
learning methods for third generation sequencing data, new machine-learning
algorithms for biomedical knowledge discovery systems. The Instrument enables
research on root nodulation in legumes, cancer biology, and genomics algorithms;
Visual Computing. It also enables research on fundamental problems related to
physical simulation and numerical control problems spanning broadly from
predictive scientific visualization to production of artificial sampling data
for Deep Neural Network Training and to the control and safety assurance of
real-world artifacts such as autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.