* 2018900
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-Accelerated Cluster, High Performance Rio Grande Valley Cluster (HiRGV)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nikolaos Dimakis, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 699,077.00

The acquisition of the High-Performance Rio Grande Valley (HiRGV) computing
cluster at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) will support novel
and ongoing multidisciplinary research and provide faculty and student training
using heterogeneous computing technologies. HiRGV will have a mix of processors,
such as multi-core and Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). While GPUs were
initially developed to satisfy the extreme computing needs of dynamic
visualization in video games, they are now the driving force in many
applications, such as artificial intelligence, that need massive parallelization
to achieve high performance. The projects supported by HiRGV will advance
scientific knowledge in multiple areas that are all highly relevant to national
interests: Design and development of Very Large Scale Integrated chips will
become faster; Weaker signals will be found in gravitational wave searches,
where the U.S. is the leading nation at present; Fuel cell efficiency will be
improved using novel materials; Cancer therapy will be advanced; A novel
cryptography tool and service will be provided to the community; Deep
reinforcement learning algorithms will be developed to resolve challenging
decision making problems; Beekeepers will be allowed to monitor beehive health
by AI systems; Molecular mechanism will be discovered for type 2 diabetes. All
of the above work will be carried out at the second largest Hispanic-Serving
Institution in the country. Undergraduate and graduate students from a
predominantly under-represented group will receive hands-on training in high
level computing and acquire skills that are in high demand for the 21st century
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the projects supported by
HiRGV are as follows. 1) Parallel computation for large-scale sparse matrix
solution; Minimized fill-ins and non-zero entries to the top-left directions
will improve execution time for SOLVE phase of sparse matrix solution; 2) Fast
fully-coherent all-sky (FCAS) search for gravitational wave (GW) signals;
Transitioning from the current episodic to an always-on FCAS search for GWs from
binary inspirals will result in a major improvement in detection sensitivity and
parameter estimation accuracy; 3) Quantum Theory of Atoms and Molecules (QTAIM)
on catalytic layers correlated with CO adsorption phenomenological models will
solve the shortcoming of current approaches in small molecule adsorption and
fuel cell technology; 4) Studying the Molecular Mechanism of GRP119 Receptor
Ligand Recognition and Activation Through Molecular Dynamics Simulations;
Elucidated ligand recognition and activation of the GPR119 and other lipid
binding receptors of the same family will be used for treating type 2 diabetes
and other diseases; 5) Molecular target identification and drug discovery for
cancer using high performance GPU cluster; Discovered biomarkers and target
proteins can be applied to a drug design given a target cancer service; and 6)
Applying computer vision technologies (CVT) to honey bee health and
surveillance; CVT recording will provide how to analyze honeybee movements,
presence of pests, or the amount and type of pollen brought into a hive; 7)
Developing a novel cryptography tool that offers various desirable security
features with low computational cost using GPUs; 8) Developing deep
reinforcement learning algorithms that provide reactive human-like decision-
making, high-level deliberative and explanatory capabilities, and efficient
transfer of knowledge between tasks. In addition to the above projects, the
HiRGV will support six projects in terms of code development, testing, and
performance assessment, enabling them to run on Texas Advanced Computing Center
(TACC) resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.