* 2018933
* CC* Compute: High-Performance Computing Backbone for Accelerating Campus-Wide and Regional Research
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Aaron Wemhoff, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 397,196.00

Villanova University is acquiring a high-performance computing resource to
expand the capabilities of at least 27 identified researchers in engineering,
physical sciences, and social sciences. The grant also prepares students for the
STEM workforce through engagement in computational research, education via the
creation and modification of ten undergraduate and graduate courses, and student
training in high performance computing operations. The impact of this grant
extends well beyond Villanova University by establishing the Southeastern
Pennsylvania High-Performance Computing Consortium to create new collaborative
opportunities between Villanova and non-Villanova researchers, and by connecting
Villanova to the broader Open Science Grid network to distribute resources to
researchers nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant focuses on three
objectives to expand Villanova’s computational infrastructure for research and
education. First, this work establishes new computational hardware – including
1,184 central processing units (CPUs), 10,240 graphical processing units (GPUs),
and 448 terabytes (TB) of data storage – along with complementary software and
networking resources. Second, resource usage expands fundamental research in
seven project areas relevant to the mission of the National Science Foundation,
including (1) materials for fusion energy applications, (2) causes of various
nasal sinus diseases, (3) ion transport in energy storage devices, (4) speech
perception and language processing, (5) river behavior, (6) nonlinear mechanical
behavior, and (7) machine learning algorithms. Finally, practices are developed
to mitigate the costs associated with growing and maintaining the computing
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.