* 2018758
* CC* Compute: A high-performance computing cluster to accelerate research, education, and training at Rhodes College
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Brian Larkins, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 389,662.00

Rhodes College is building and deploying a high-performance computing cluster
that serves as the cornerstone of a campus-wide research computing center. This
project establishes a needed computing resource that enables new capabilities
for researchers and students in computer science, biology, mathematics,
chemistry, and economics. The cluster provides a new computing resource at a
scale not previously available on campus and advances the institutions' ability
to support research, including analyzing mitochondrial DNA, modeling inorganic
compounds, and improving the performance and usability of parallel and
distributed systems. As a research-intensive liberal arts college, this cluster
system at Rhodes College dramatically advances the opportunities for students to
be engaged in computation-based scientific research alongside researchers in a
wide range of disciplines. This cluster system also functions as a platform for
classroom experiences that help students understand how computational methods
can be used to better understand the world. The system supports class activities
in computer science, biology, and mathematics. Additionally, this project
enables researchers to prepare their experiments to run on national compute
resources through XSEDE and will also contribute unused computing resources to
the Open Science Grid, a national, distributed computing
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster system supports both high-
performance and high-throughput workloads with an overall system capacity of
1,584 cores, 9TB of memory, and 504 TB of storage. The cluster is comprised of a
login server, storage server, 44 compute nodes, and a 100Gbit/s InfiniBand
interconnect network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.