* 2018753
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Roger Lalancette, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 273,700.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Rutgers University Newark is acquiring a
single crystal X-ray diffractometer to support Professor Frieder Jaekle and
colleagues: Roger Lalancette, Michal Szostak, Demyan Prokopchuk and Trevor Tyson
from the New Jersey Institute of Technology. In general, an X-ray diffractometer
allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure
of a molecule, including bond distances and angles. The instrument acquisition
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. In addition, the diffractometer has broad
impact on teaching and training, outreach activities, and graduate and
undergraduate research at Rutgers University Newark and regional partners such
as the New Jersey Institute of Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the
X-ray diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels.
The instrument acquisition impacts the characterization of synthetic inorganic
and organic materials to develop new catalysts to advance manufacturing for
optoelectronic applications. The instrumentation is also used for studying
catalysts made from main group Lewis pairs and amide cross-coupling by nitrogen-
carbon bond activation. In addition, the research team benefits from the
instrument by being able to explore transition-metal catalyzed reactions of
carboxylic acids and multiferroic complex oxides. The diffractometer is also
used to characterize products relevant to molecular catalysis for sustainable
energy conversion and compounds for chromophore-semiconductor
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.