* 2018550
* MRI: Acquisition of A New Accelerator Mass Spectrometer for Radiocarbon Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mark Roberts, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,661,251.00

This project will provide funds for new instrumentation at the National Ocean
Sciences Accelerator Mass Spectrometry facility (NOSAMS) at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. The facility is dedicated to high quality
measurements of the rare isotope of carbon (carbon-14 or radiocarbon), which can
be used to date carbon samples in the ocean and the environment, and to
understand the natural carbon cycle. The mission of the facility is to provide
high quality radiocarbon measurements and expertise to the Ocean and Earth
science communities and to develop innovative new radiocarbon methods. The
researchers will purchase a new state-of-the-art Accelerator Mass Spectrometer
(AMS) system designed specifically for radiocarbon measurements in different
sample types, including new interfaces for direct measurements of carbon dioxide
gas. Acquisition of the new instrumentation will result in improvements to the
nature, quality, and quantity of analytical services provided, and will
facilitate the development of new techniques and services. Access to state-of-
the-art equipment and techniques is crucial to providing high quality training
and research tools for the next generation of U.S. based earth and ocean
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use the funds to purchase
a new system, and to compare commercially available AMS systems to the Mini
Carbon Dating System (MICADAS), manufactured by Ionplus, which was identified as
the most appropriate based on documented precision and the availability of
versatile gas interfaces. The newly developed gas interfaces will diminish the
need to make elemental carbon (graphite) for some sample types. The new system
will improve NOSAMS service to the science community by offering improved
precision, greater efficiency, and new cutting edge measurement options. In
particular, the newest AMS systems have the capability to produce high precision
measurements on graphite and on relatively small amounts of carbon dioxide,
using the hybrid gas ion source. Elimination of the graphitization process
offers the potential of reduced blank and per-sample measurement cost.
Applications that would be enhanced by the new AMS system include: measurements
of carbon-14 in seawater, in carbonates, and in complex organic mixtures using
Compound Specific Radiocarbon methods and Ramped Pyrolysis and Oxidation. One
core NOSAMS mission is to produce high quality sea water measurements to
constrain the time scales of ocean mixing and ventilation. Repeat hydrographic
studies have revealed measurable changes in ocean mixing and ventilation on
decadal time scales, including warming of the deep ocean, which has important
implications for ocean circulation, sea level, and climate. Radiocarbon can
provide independent time scales, but requires the highest precision to resolve
small variations, and high through-put to allow spatial resolution. Carbonate
measurement capabilities will be enhanced by higher precision (using graphite)
and lower-cost high-sampling-density measurements (using gas ion source
interface at moderate precision). Compound specific radiocarbon analysis and
Ramped Pyrolysis and Oxidation can be used to determine the relative age and
provenance of individual compounds and compound classes in complex organic
mixtures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.