* 2018078
* MRI: acquisition of a gas chromatograph isotope ratio mass spectrometer for compound-specific isotope analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Christopher Junium, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 302,110.00

This award supports the acquisition of a gas chromatograph coupled to an
isotope-ratio mass spectrometer (GC-IRMS) at Syracuse University (SU). GC-IRMS
systems permit the analysis of stable isotopic ratios of hydrogen, carbon, and
nitrogen in particular classes of organic materials ranging from waxes to amino
acids to synthetic organic compounds. By isolating the isotopic signature of a
single compound type with known pathways of synthesis, deposition, and
degradation, GC-IRMS instrumentation allows us to link isotopic signals to
particular chemical, physical, or biological processes. This instrument will
therefore enable a broad group of users at SU to generate data that addresses
questions of pressing social importance in a variety of fields. For instance,
hydrogen isotopic analyses of lipid compounds produced by terrestrial plants can
quantify paleoclimatic changes in rainfall. These data can then be used to
evaluate the skill of climate models and hone our understanding of the
reliability of future projections from these models. Analysis of nitrogen and
carbon isotopes in amino acids also have the potential to advance our
understanding of ocean ecosystem responses to both past and current global
change. The instrument also serves an important educational function, providing
undergraduate and graduate students with training in laboratory and analytical
skills directly transferrable to STEM careers. Additionally, the GC-IRMS will
support ongoing efforts to create summer internship opportunities for
underserved K-12 and community college students, providing direct exposure to
future career pathways in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GC-IRMS techniques
combine the chromatographic resolution provided through GC with the precise
isotopic measurements provided by mass spectrometry. This type of
instrumentation will support ongoing NSF-funded research in paleoclimatology,
ecology, and biogeochemistry. For instance, the presence of a GC-IRMS at SU will
enable hydrogen isotopic analyses of terrestrial leaf waxes, which will be used
to reconstruct monsoon dynamics during past warm intervals in Earth history.
Moreeover, nitrogen and carbon isotopic analyses of baleen and carbonate shell-
bound organic matter will support reconstructions of trophic webs in marine
ecosystems. Additional users at SU and affiliated institutions will use
compound-specific isotopic methods to interrogate the controls on the growth of
freshwater microbialites, the transformation of pollutants in fluvial systems,
and the structure and function of multi-trophic interactions in terrestrial
ecosystems. The GC-IRMS therefore fulfills a major gap in research
infrastructure at Syracuse University and will support the continuation as well
as the growth of cutting-edge research across a variety of disciplines of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.