* 2018413
* MRI: Acquisition of a laboratory beamline small (wide)-angle X-ray scattering tool for in-situ characterization of (bio)materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Hamid Ghandehari, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 524,804.00

Research activities in the areas of (bio)materials science and engineering are a
major focus of various universities and companies across the State of Utah and
its surroundings. The proposed instrumentation seeks to provide an integrated
laboratory beamline X-ray scattering tool comprising small-angle (SAXS), wide-
angle (WAXS), and grazing incidence (GI) capabilities for the characterization
of (bio)materials. This instrument is the first-open access facility fitted for
in-situ characterization of bio(materials) in the Intermountain West region and
it will be used by numerous research programs at large institutions (R1 and R2),
undergraduate institutions, as well as in-state and out-of-state companies. The
instrument enables research activities by a diverse and large group of faculty
and students within Chemistry, Mines &amp; Earth Sciences, Engineering,
Pharmacy, and the School of Medicine. Highlighted research activities
facilitated by this instrumentation include investigation of materials for
sensing and energy harvesting; protein folding; catalysts for synthesis and
combustion of advanced fuels; next-generation wireless neural interfaces such as
in artificial vision; single-molecular diagnostics; and quantum electronic
materials. The instrument will also facilitate the education and training of
students and researchers in advanced characterization techniques. Additionally,
most research groups and industry efforts have started to shift their research
programs into the implementation of in-situ and in-operando approaches to help
investigate (bio)materials failure and performance under dynamic conditions
which are capabilities that this instrument will enable. More importantly,
students and postdocs across many institutions will strongly overlap with
scientists at regional companies and government laboratories which will allow
them to seek internships and job opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SAXS/WAXS tool will meet the critical research, education, and training needs of
various research and teaching institutions in the Intermountain West region. The
principal use of the instrument will be to characterize the morphology and
structure of a broad range of (bio)materials such as, conducting organic thin
films, petroleum-based structures, nanocomposites, nanoparticles, organic-
inorganic hybrid materials, bioparticles, protein folding/interfaces, biological
systems, and mesoporous materials. The proposed SAXS/WAXS tool will include
several accessories for in-situ and in-operando measurements and will allow for
simultaneous SAXS and WAXS studies of solids, pastes, liquids, and thin films in
both transmission and reflection modes which are vitally needed given the broad
user base. About 44 faculty members at 7 universities, 1 national laboratory, as
well as 7 companies have expressed their strong interest and support for having
a SAXS/WAXS system readily available that could help minimize trips to the
synchrotron facilities or for screening and optimizing samples prior to a more
specialized synchrotron experiment. The location of the SAXS/WAXS instrument
within the Nanofabrication, Nanoscale Imaging and Surface Analysis core facility
laboratory at the University of Utah will boost the research of regional
companies, promote collaborative research, enhance existing laboratory outreach
activities to underrepresented students in STEM fields, and expand educational
programs. The proposed instrument will also be of great benefit to smaller
institutions in the State of Utah and its surroundings that cannot afford out-
of-state travel to synchrotron facilities. The Nanofabrication, Nanoscale
Imaging and Surface Analysis core facility laboratory at the University of Utah
will organize an annual workshop where faculty and students will give oral
presentations on research activities enabled by the SAXS/WAXS
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.