* 2018988
* Community Facility Support: Travel support for student participation at the 2020 Electron Backscatter Diffraction Topical Conference; Ann Arbor, MI - June 2020
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* John Allison, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support early career scientists to attend a topical conference
on electron backscatter diffraction. The conference will contribute
significantly to training of students and early career investigators and provide
a venue for multidisciplinary discussions and exchange of ideas and concepts,
from the fundamental (academic) to the applied aspects (industry). The tutorial
that opens this topical conference will provide not only basic training that
will be particularly useful to students and early career investigators, but also
access to a number of expert users from a variety of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This topical conference series has become the de
facto meeting in North America for training, development and application of this
core microanalytical technique. This conference will provide a venue for ideas
to be shared between the primary disciplines utilizing the technique:
geoscience, materials science, data science, and engineering. The exchange of
cutting-edge knowledge from and between these communities will facilitate
dissemination of knowledge and further research
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.