* 2018152
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive, social, and institutional dynamics of decision-making in complex hazard-prone environments
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Eric Toman, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,275.00

Recent years have demonstrated the substantial threat that wildfires pose to
communities across the U.S. This project evaluates how local-level wildfire
protection planning processes shape social interaction and consequently the
implementation of risk mitigation measures at both local and regional scales.
These local planning processes confront a range of challenges that relate to the
need to coordinate risk mitigation efforts at multiple spatial and
administrative scales (e.g., spanning public and private lands) and to promote
cooperation among diverse stakeholder groups with distinct goals for managing
wildfire-prone landscapes (e.g., fire suppression, timber production, protection
for threatened species). This project improves understanding of how risk
governance networks affect policy learning in collaborative planning processes
and the scope of decisions they produce, how social processes (such as learning,
cooperation, and competition) affect the implementation of those decisions, and
how interdependent decision-making processes affect the efficiency of risk
mitigation at regional scales. Understanding the interplay among cognitive,
social, and policy processes is critical for reducing the vulnerability of
communities to wildfire. Through partnerships with the Colorado Forest
Restoration Institute and other key groups, the project engages policy makers,
outreach professionals, and other stakeholders in initiatives that contribute to
the design of communication strategies and capacity building programs to reduce
wildfire risk. The project also directly addresses one of the top thirty-three
NSF 2026 Idea Machine winning entries: "Large Landscape Resilience by
Design".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses theoretical and empirical
gaps in scientific understanding of how the structure of decentralized risk
governance networks affects policy learning and decision making, as well as the
capacity of collaborative groups to implement decisions. Key research questions
include: How do risk governance networks affect policy learning in collaborative
planning processes? How do risk governance networks affect the scale and
boundary-spanning potential of risk mitigation plans? How do social processes
affect implementation conformance, and particularly the implementation status of
large scale and boundary-spanning risk mitigation plans? How do risk governance
networks affect the efficiency of risk mitigation at regional scales? In a
departure from the abstract and generalized measures of policy learning used in
much research on policy learning, the proposed research breaks new ground by
evaluating learning through quantitative indicators of systems thinking in
cognitive maps of collaborative decision-making processes. In so doing, the
research makes significant methodological contributions through application of
the tools and perspectives of network science to evaluate cognitive maps.
Likewise, rigorous assessment of implementation enables evaluation of how the
performance of decentralized governance systems varies according to patterns of
interdependence among decision-making processes. This research is critical for
developing a more complete model of how cognitive, social, and institutional
dynamics shape risk governance systems, and ultimately the resilience of
communities and regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly supported
by the Decision, Risk and Management Sciences Program of the Social and Economic
Sciences Division and the NSF 2026 Fund Program in the Office of Integrated
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.