* 2018176
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer and Equipped with Solid-State Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Howard Fairbrother, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 559,783.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Johns Hopkins University is acquiring a 500
MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with solid state
capabilities and other probes to support Professor Rebekka Klausen and
colleagues Howard Fairbrother, Sara Thoi and Adelina Voutchkova-Kostal from
George Washington University. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as permitting study of biologically relevant species. In
general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is
an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this
institution and nearby universities such as Georgetown University and the US
Naval Academy. The instrument is also used on university NMR Summer School and
in collaboration with museums to study cultural heritage
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
spectroscopic studies of polymeric materials based on main group elements. The
instrumentation is also used for studying supramolecular materials as well as
analyzing conjugated polymer blends and surface-immobilized polymers. In
addition, it provides information for exploring biodegradable polymer-
functionalized nanocellulose composites and for the study of cultural-heritage
materials. The spectrometer is also used to identify phosphorus(III)-oxyanions
relevant to agriculture and food safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.