* 2018428
* RCN-UBE Incubator: NEWT: Network Exploring Wildlife Trade
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Jennifer Sevin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2022
* USD 70,961.00

Humans have traded wildlife for millennia, but in the past 10 years legal and
illegal wildlife trade has exhibited outsized growth, including in the United
States, generating global revenues in the hundreds of billions of dollars
annually with massive biological and social significance. Few colleges or
universities offer opportunities for biology students to study the many facets
of wildlife trade, which include direct impacts to wildlife populations,
establishment of invasive species, and transmission of disease – including
between animals and humans – and complementary disciplines, such as conservation
law, cultural history, economics, and social sciences. This network will engage
undergraduate biology students in pursuing authentic research questions in
wildlife trade through new courses, learning modules, and resources, allowing
students to build research skills while delving into a dynamic and timely topic.
Investigating wildlife trade will yield useful information on a largely data-
deficient topic and also introduce students to new career paths in biology and
associated disciplines. The network will foster interactions between faculty and
students at different universities, and across disciplines, thus encouraging
collaboration and shared scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Course-based
undergraduate research experiences form the basis of this RCN-UBE network, with
participating faculty from two-year and four-year institutions incorporating
modules on wildlife trade into existing courses or creating new courses.
Students will develop research questions and will collect and analyze data from
pet shops, international trade databases, online pet forums, and news sites.
Incorporating research in undergraduate biology education leads to increased
competency in biological subjects, breadth of skills, and confidence in applying
knowledge and skills to solve real-world problems. This network will eliminate
traditional barriers to research, such as a requirement of a high grade point
average or other scholastic attributes that may distinguish undergraduate
students seeking research experience, setting enrollment in a course as the only
requirement necessary for participating in research. Importantly, removing
barriers to participation and the other benefits provided by this network will
be important for students from under-represented groups, thereby fostering more
inclusive classrooms and research environments. Students participating in the
network will develop skills in science communication by sharing their results
with public groups, thereby increasing community literacy in the issue of
wildlife trade. Project insights, opportunities, and challenges encountered in
initiating wildlife trade-based courses and course modules will serve as a
foundation for the development of a full RCN-UBE proposal. This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action" (http://visionandchange/finalreport) with
additional support provided by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.