* 2018222
* Collaborative Research: A place-based, student-led research project in the Pioneer Mountains, Montana: an investigation of very dry, alpine glaciation proximal to the Laurentide Ic
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Spruce Schoenemann, The University of Montana-Western
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2024
* USD 97,614.00

This project will incorporate local geoscience students and an experiential,
place-based educational approach to reconstruct the glacial history of the
Pioneer Mountains in southwest Montana. This project will immerse first-
generation, under-represented college students at the University of Montana
Western in climate research. Students will investigate the region’s glacial
history in collaboration with the NSF-supported Community Cosmogenic Facility at
University of Vermont. The investigators will test the hypothesis that glaciers,
located near large ice sheets and experience both cold temperatures and
exceptionally low precipitation, may have reached local ice extent maximums
considerably earlier than the Laurentide (i.e., Canadian) Ice Sheet maximum
(~21,000 years ago). They will do this by sampling and dating glacier moraines
in the Pioneer Mountains, which today have very low precipitation due to
blocking by ranges along the Continental Divide. Glacier moraine sequences from
the Pioneer Mountains may shed new understanding into the mechanisms by which
mountain glaciers respond to Earth’s long-term orbital fluctuations and
concomitant climatic changes. This place-based research project will provide the
undergraduate students, many of whom are from rural Montana, with an immersive
opportunity to better understand their own states’ landscapes, the geomorphic
processes that formed them, and the important climatic information they
provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide insight into glacier
advance and retreat during the last glaciation in continental climatic regions
that were proximal to the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS), in an exceptionally dry
mountain range where the glacial chronology has not been studied. The Pioneer
Mountains are one of the few ranges in western Montana underlain by granite,
making it feasible to use 10Be in quartz for cosmogenic nuclide exposure ages
and thus produce the first moraine chronologies for the region. The
investigators will test whether the differences in maximum-ice times found in
eastern ID and northwestern WY are due to regional climatic contrasts, such as
anticyclonic wind patterns driven by the presence of the LIS or non-climatic
factors (e.g., hypsometry and response time). Such atmospheric pressure systems
would deflect westerly maritime moisture flux away from the northern Rocky
Mountains as the LIS developed, and therefore the glacier maxima in the Pioneers
may precede the LIS maxima and the aforementioned glacier systems. Results from
this work will advance the understanding of temperature-dependent glaciers under
extremely dry and very cold conditions, providing insight about how current
glaciers in the coldest, driest regions of the world may respond to modern
climate warming. This project is jointly funded by the Geomorphology and Land-
use Dynamics Program (GLD) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.