* 2018979
* CC* CRIA: Building CI Strategies and Capacity at the Tribal Colleges
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Algirdas Kuslikis, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,995.00

The AIHEC CC* CRIA project: Building CI Strategies and Capacity at the Tribal
Colleges, addresses the issue of bringing the nation’s 37 Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCUs) into the national cyberinfrastructure-enabled STEM research
and education community. This comprehensive CI strategy focuses on CI training,
planning and community-building involving both STEM faculty and TCU IT
organizations, advancing the capacity of TCU faculty and students to participate
in the national STEM research and education infrastructure. CI research and
education stakeholders participating in the project include Internet 2, the
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), the Center for Computationally Assisted
Science and Technology (CCAST), the University of Colorado Boulder Research
Computing Center, and the Oklahoma University Supercomputing Center or Education
and Research (OSCER). The project implements a cost-effective model for
broadening participation of an important historically underrepresented
population in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project implements a connectivist
model of knowledge management in which interactions among members of a network
adaptively distribute resources needed to support individual and group
activities to achieve common goals of the network membership. In this project,
TCU STEM faculty and IT professionals and national CI STEM domain-specific
researchers comprise this extended adaptive network. Project-related activities
involve interactions within the network (e.g. training events, work with data
analytic tools) that generate new knowledge and skills, build the collective
capacity of the TCU members of the network to develop, implement and support
research and education programming. Capacity-building interactions among members
of this extended network include knowledge-sharing, mentoring and collaborative
problem-solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.