* 2018134
* Collaborative Research: Provenance of Alkenones &amp; Holocene Temperature Evolution of the NW Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Julian Sachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 565,879.00

This project will produce a set of 12 new sea-surface temperature
reconstructions along the western North Atlantic to examine the accuracy of
alkenone-based ocean temperature records. Temperature data over the past several
thousand years show a mismatch between land-, sea-, and climate model-based
estimates. Climate models suggest that temperature remained relatively
unchanged, while land-based records shows slight warming. Oddly, sea surface
temperatures show 4-6°C cooling over the same period of time. But concerns exist
about how well these records reflect temperature conditions in the region.
Alkenones are produced by algae which may be biased by the temperature of the
season when algae are most abundant. They can also be carried to the North
Atlantic from elsewhere by ocean currents and reflect temperature conditions of
those regions. This study will attempt to resolve these issues by examination of
alkenones collected directly in the water column throughout the year and
comparing these to alkenones deposited on the seafloor nearby. Hydrogen isotope
ratios and radiocarbon data will provide a test of how much material is
transported from different sources. Alkenone temperature data will be compared
to other temperature proxies (e.g. Mg/Ca of foraminifera) in the region. The
project creates significant learning opportunities for middle and high school
teachers who will team with scientists in the classroom to develop climate-based
curricular instruction and participate in shipboard research during sediment
coring operations. It will also provide significant support for undergraduate
students and an early career postdoctoral student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
global composite of Holocene temperature proxy records indicates 0.5-1°C of
cooling over the last 8,000 years, driven largely by a 2°C cooling in northern
hemisphere marine records. Transient climate simulations, however, show no such
cooling, and continental temperature records in eastern North America and Europe
indicate slight warming. This “Holocene Conundrum” is one of the most prominent
unmet challenges facing the climate science community. The northern hemisphere
trend is largely driven by 4-6°C cooling in three alkenone SST records from the
NW Atlantic. To determine whether this data-model mismatch indicates a gap in
understanding of the climate system, these anomalous proxy records must be
examined in the context of the factors influencing alkenone deposition in NW
Atlantic slopewaters and compared to other SST proxies in the same locations for
which samples are not available and analyses are presently lacking. Both
deficiencies will be addressed in this research by measuring hydrogen isotope
values and radiocarbon ages of alkenones, along with Mg/Ca ratios in planktonic
foraminifera, from sediment cores and archived sediment trap samples collected
in 2004-2007 in the NW Atlantic slopewater region. Alkenone SST records can be
biased by lateral transport of slow-sinking alkenones via surface and abyssal
currents, or by seasonal production, both potential causes for the data-model
mismatch. This project will take advantage of the large hydrogen isotope
gradient in NW Atlantic surface waters to ascertain alkenone synthetic
provenance by measuring 2H/1H ratios in alkenones. Provenance will be further
assessed by measuring alkenone 14C ages to determine the extent of pre-aging
during advection. Comparison of alkenone temperatures and 14C ages to fast-
sinking, foraminiferal Mg/Ca temperatures and calcite 14C ages, across a series
of locations and depths, with seasonal resolution, will allow for the full
characterization of advective or seasonal biasing in either proxy relative to in
situ and satellite SSTs. Having established the impact of these potential
biases, a robust re-assessment of NW Atlantic Holocene SSTs will be made via 12
new reconstructions (6 each from the two independent proxies) from 6 planned
coring sites on depth transects east of New Jersey and Nova Scotia, allowing a
possible solution to the “Holocene conundrum”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.