* 2018554
* Theoretical and Empirical Investigations of the Dynamics of Homophily and its Impact on Students' Achievement, Decisions, and Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Jackson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 393,847.00

People are more likely to interact with individuals like themselves. One word to
describe this is ‘homophily’; when this is the case, people have biased social
connections. This homophily affects people’s sources of information,
opportunities, behaviors, and support. As a result, homophily may have important
social effects. This project will use game theory and data analysis to study
homophily and its consequences. The data portion will track the evolution of
social connections over time, primarily in school settings. The project will
examine (i) how homophily evolves and changes as students spend more time in a
given setting and (ii) trace the impact of that homophily on students’
psychological well-being, achievements, and decisions about course selection and
fields of study. The team will also use mathematical techniques to build modes
of (i) how friendships and homophily patterns evolve over time and (ii) models
of how homophily and social learning help and hinder people in learning about
the potential benefits of specific decisions. The results will help us learn how
social interactions aid and hinder both students and the broader
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new data, facts, models,
and understandings of the dynamic evolution of homophily, how it differs across
traits, and how it depends on traits such as risk aversion and empathy. This
includes work on how friendship and study partner networks evolve among
students. The team plans to test causal hypotheses using data on student
interaction patterns, perceived well-being, stress levels, and academic
achievement. The new theory will focus on network formation and the evolution of
homophily over time. The first new model will differentiate between
characteristics that are easily observed by agents, such as gender and
ethnicity, and other that take repeated interactions to observe, such as
specific personality characteristics. The second model will example the impact
of homophily. It will consider how people make decisions based on information
that they learn from friends’ experiences. The team wants to determine whether
and how homophily exacerbates herding behavior, whether herding behavior can
differ across groups, and whether groups can crowd each other out. Additional
work will focus on how the efficiency and diversity of choices made by
individuals depends on the level of homophily, the diversity of a group’s
aptitudes across actions, and the riskiness of the various
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.