* 2018253
* MRI: Acquisition of a Superconducting Rock Magnetometer System for Earth Sciences Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Sarah Slotznick, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 509,952.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports acquisition of
a superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) equipped with in-line rock magnetic
coils and automated sample handling system (RAPID system) and required ancillary
equipment. The SRM will support research and research training in the Department
of Earth Sciences at Dartmouth College. The SRM will support research on the
development and evolution of the geomagnetic field, continental paleogeography,
and deep-time environmental magnetism. The SRM will also support postdoctoral
scientist, graduate, and undergraduate student research. The investigator plans
local K-12 outreach through laboratory tours and summer research internships.
The instrument will also support regional collaborations and faculty and student
use from institutions in the New England region and likely
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic study of minerals, sediments, and rocks
can inform us about past conditions on Earth’s surface—from the development and
evolution of the geomagnetic field to the geographic position of continents to
the timing of key events in Earth (and human) history to tracking changes in
climate and environmental conditions—which in turn can inform our projections of
Earth’s future. Research at Dartmouth will focus on novel magnetic applications
and techniques such as “deep-time” environmental magnetism with absolute timing
of magnetic mineral formation and development of a quick, non-destructive
technique for identifying magnetic iron sulfides present in low-abundance. The
SRM-RAPID system and thermal demagnetizer will provide an on-campus resource for
measurements of thermal demagnetization and paleointensity. These protocols
require large sample numbers and high-resolution steps that can result in tens
of thousands of measurements per study. The instrumentation will also support
automated alternating field demagnetization and rock magnetic experiments
involving magnetic susceptibility, anhysteretic remanent magnetization, and
isothermal remanent magnetization. Remanence magnetic measurements made by the
SRM-RAPID system can be used for efficiently characterizing the magnetic
mineralogy of samples, as well as analyzing ancient recorded fields in geologic
samples. The high-sensitivity of the SRM and the low magnetic moment of the
RAPID system holder will allow researchers to push the frontiers of the field
through analysis of weakly magnetized sediments, heavily remagnetized volcanics,
and very small samples such as biological specimens, filtered particulate,
chemical residues, and pure mineral phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.