* 2018840
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Robert Bodnar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 975,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) grant supports acquisition of
an Electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA). Support is also leveraged with funds
from the Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program. EMPA
analysis is a critical and multi-functional technique for chemical
characterization of natural and synthetic solid materials. EPMA is by far the
most important method for quantifying the abundance of major and trace elements
in minerals, and EPMA data are crucial for our understanding of planetary
formation, ore-forming processes, volcano dynamics, processes in the Earth’s
interior, abiotic and biotic mineral formation, and incorporation of Rare Earth
Elements and other economically valuable trace elements into minerals. EPMA is
also becoming increasingly relevant to a broader spectrum of materials science
and engineering, with innovative work now possible on, for example, batteries,
CO2 sequestration, and impurity distribution through synthetic inorganic solids.
The new EMPA will replace an aging instrument which was commissioned in 1988 and
is now obsolete and vulnerable to critical failure of major components. This
instrument also lacks key functionality for modern research. The new instrument
will support ongoing research efforts at Virginia Tech (VT) and will facilitate
new research directions and improved educational opportunities within and
outside geosciences and at regional institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPMA
provides quantification of the compositions of materials at the micrometer scale
through detection and characterization of the X-Rays that are produced when an
electron beam is focused on a sample. A modern and reliable EPMA is essential to
directly support the work of many researchers at VT and to provide valuable
‘pre-processing’ links to other instrumentation on campus, such as transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). During the
past half-century, data from VT’s EPMA labs have contributed to science and
engineering studies related to hundreds of published abstracts, papers, and
student theses. Within Earth Sciences at VT, EPMA is critical for groups
researching the origin and evolution of Earth’s crust, deep mantle processes in
Earth and extraterrestrial planets, the early evolution of life, ore-forming
processes, the evolution of volcanic systems, processes governing the
equilibration of minerals in natural and synthetic systems, and Earth’s volatile
cycles (particularly concerning carbon and sulfur). EPMA analysis will support
field-based research, geochronologic studies, crustal-fluids experimentation,
and deep-planet experimental petrology. Acquisition of a new EPMA will provide
VT with new capabilities, including simultaneous cathodoluminescence imaging and
trace/major elemental mapping, which is increasingly important for the
geochronological work of several faculty. It will also permit precise
quantification of the abundance and distribution of critical light elements in
natural and synthetic materials. Finally, it will improve capabilities to detect
and quantify trace metals by an order of magnitude in some
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.