* 2018411
* Investigating the effects of thermal-opto-mechanical interactions on optical responses of multilayer semiconductor nanocrystals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Fuqian Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 442,600.00

This project will investigate the optical characteristics of multilayer
semiconductor nanocrystals under different thermal environments and mechanical
stresses. Semiconductor nanocrystals are nanoscale crystalline particles with
physical and optical properties that are tunable through controlling their size
and geometric shape. This project will study the characteristics of multilayer
semiconductor nanocrystals made from cadmium selenide, cadmium sulphide and zinc
sulphide, which are synthesized in a microreactor system. A comprehensive
understanding of the thermal-opto-mechanical properties in these multilayer
semiconductor nanocrystals can lead to the development of nanocrystal-based
devices and systems, as well as better design approaches for their applications
in optomechanical devices and systems, nanophotonics, and biosensors, such as
white light-emitting diodes. The results from this research will help strengthen
U.S. standing and influence in nanoelectronics, solar energy and nanophotonics.
The interdisciplinary nature of this research will help the American workforce
become more competitive in both materials processing and photonics through the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. These students will master the
synthesis and characterization skills of semiconductor nanocrystals and will
develop the skills for solving technical problems. The investigator will
actively recruit women and underrepresented minorities in order to promote their
inclusion in the fields of nanophotonics and
biophotonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor nanocrystals as potential
building blocks of nanophotonics and biophotonics have attracted great interest
in a variety of applications. The comprehensive understanding of the effects of
the geometric dimensions and thermal-opto-mechanical interactions on the optical
characteristics of the multilayer semiconductor nanocrystals can help develop
better performing and more reliable nanocrystal-devices and systems. This
research project will investigate the optical characteristics of the multilayer
semiconductor nanocrystals under thermomechanical loading, including tension,
compression and cyclic heating-cooling via a closely coupled experimental and
modeling approach, and the dependence of the geometrical dimensions of the
multilayer semiconductor nanocrystals on the precursor concentrations,
temperature and residence time. A microreactor in a microfluidic system will be
developed to synthesize the multilayer semiconductor nanocrystals and to
investigate the rate mechanisms controlling the growth of the multilayer
semiconductor nanocrystals in a flow environment. The research team will
establish correlations between optical properties of the multilayer
semiconductor nanocrystals, stress, and temperature as well as the geometrical
dimensions. The team will develop numerical models that can quantitatively
analyze optical responses of nanocrystals under thermomechanical loading. These
relationships provide fundamental understanding of the thermal-opto-mechanical
coupling in semiconductor nanocrystals and can provide guidelines to better
design nanocrystal-based devices and systems with high performance and
reliability. Students will be trained on the design of microfluidic reactors and
the development of the techniques for local characterization of thermal-opto-
mechanical behavior of semiconductor nanocrystals. A design project of
developing microfluidic systems for chemical reactions will be developed and
offered to high school and undergraduate students, from which students can learn
both the technical and nontechnical requirements for the design of a useful
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.