* 2018103
* Collaborative Research: Collective decision making &amp; local public good provision: Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Michael Touchton, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 67,334.00

Participation in decision making by citizens and stakeholders has been widely
promoted as a means to improved and sustainable outcomes in both domestic
governance and international development. For example, the World Bank has
invested billions of dollars in community-driven development, which emphasizes
the participation of beneficiaries in decision making around development
projects. Direct democracy, especially in the form of participatory budgeting,
has spread across the globe. One motivation for promoting participation is the
idea that by participating in decision making related to a local public good,
participants will feel more compelled to invest in the maintenance of that good.
In turn, public goods will provide more benefit to the community if they are
well-maintained and last longer. Political theorists, too, have posed the
question: does participation “make better citizens?” An even more important
question for policy makers is: which kinds of participation manage to do so?
This research evaluates the influence of participatory mechanisms on behavioral
outcomes in one county in a developing country. The results of the study inform
the ongoing design of participatory institutions in that country, other
countries on that continent, and around the world; there are more than 11,000
participatory budgeting programs and programs are expanding far more quickly
than evidence can keep pace. The results of this study thus are immediately
useful to governments and advocates of participatory institutions as they
design, adopt, and expand public participation in pursuit of
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses a randomized controlled
trial (RCT) to evaluate the impact of common participatory processes on
individual willingness to invest in local public goods, such as a well, a health
clinic, or solar array. The RCT takes place in 90 communities, where the
researchers provide all villages with a local public good. The method of
selecting a good for each community is randomly assigned to involve either: (a)
preference aggregation through consultation, (b) preference aggregation through
voting at a public meeting, or (c) consensus-building through deliberative
discussion.The research team randomly recruits villagers to attend these
meetings and surveys them on their attitudes and behaviors surrounding
participation and development projects before and after the meetings. The
researchers return 1 year later to measure the state of the public good and the
participants’ updated attitudes and behaviors. The researchers then leverage
their strategy of random assignment of meeting rules and random selection of
participants to compare villages across space and over time to identify the
effects of the decision-making process on participants’ selection and
maintenance of the public good. This study thus provides rigorous evidence to
inform future program design and investment in participatory institutions for
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.