* 2018768
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Resolution X-Ray Computed Tomography System for Real-Time, In Situ Studies of Various Effects on Microstructure of Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Richard Brow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2021
* USD 918,397.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
high-resolution, four-dimensional (4D) X-Ray Computed Tomography (XCT) system to
enable a broad range of fundamental materials research. The knowledge gained
will enable advances in the design of novel and high-performance materials –
leading to smart and more resilient structures, better medical treatments, and
to enhanced energy efficiency. The XCT system will also support education,
training, and outreach activities at Missouri S&amp;T and partner institutions,
including historically black Lincoln University and Tuskegee University. These
activities include training of K-12 students and teachers, integration of the
instrumentation into courses and interdisciplinary training and mentoring of
graduate and undergraduate students, including individuals from underrepresented
minorities at the partner institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Features of a
material’s microstructure dictate its performance (e.g., mechanical and
transport properties). Any external or internal stimulus that imparts changes to
microstructure of a material – for example, mechanical load, or chemical
reaction – invariably causes its properties to change. Knowledge of such
intrinsic microstructure-property links in materials can reveal the origins of
the materials’ physicochemical behavior, which can subsequently be capitalized
on to optimize their performance. The XCT system – owing to its ability to
perform in-situ, real-time characterization of 3D microstructure of materials of
various types – will advance research in many areas relevant to design of new
materials (e.g., novel cementitious materials; and shape memory alloys), and
optimization of performance of prevailing materials (e.g., glasses and ceramics;
biomaterials for tissue repair; digitally-fabricated materials; and energy
storage-and-conversion materials). With such capabilities, the XCT system will
empower the pursuit of high-risk-high-reward research – for instance, to study
how mechanical/thermal loads or undesired reactions lead to initiation and
propagation of microcracks in a heterogeneous porous material, and to what
extent the cracks will affect the material’s transport properties.
Significantly, the XCT system will facilitate research geared towards revealing
microstructure-property links, and bridging fundamental knowledge-gaps in:
characterizing the early stage reactions and microstructure developments in
novel CO2-efficient cementitious binders; modeling the development of porosity,
lack of fusion, and other defects in additively-manufactured metallic parts;
fabricating bespoke components of nickel-titanium shape memory alloys for
stiffness-matched biomedical applications, precision force actuators, and energy
absorbers; elucidating the deteriorative reactions and transport phenomena in
nuclear waste glass surface alteration layer; developing oxygen reactive polymer
nanoparticle-based therapeutics to treat traumatic brain injury; and revealing
the fundamental relationship between 3D internal microstructural network (with
sub-micron resolution) of lithium-ion battery electrodes and the transport of
ions and electrons, and correspondingly the battery’s
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.