* 2018584
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Female Great Ape Behavior and Reproduction in Forest Fragments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Carson Murray, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 25,200.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines how habitat fragmentation affects
wild female chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), specifically assessing the
consequences of forest fragmentation and food availability on female behavior
and reproductive performance. The project will advance fundamental knowledge
about species responses to environmental change. In addition, as human land use
rapidly alters forests, understanding how primates cope with habitat loss and
fragmentation is of paramount import to their successful conservation. Results
will help stakeholders develop and adopt efficient management plans for forest
fragments to ensure the protection of chimpanzees and related biodiversity. This
project also presents opportunities for training through public outreach and by
engaging undergraduate students in field data collection and analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will take advantage of two forest fragments
which are similar in population density but differ in terms of food abundance
and proximity to a larger chimpanzee population. Fragmentation usually co-occurs
with substantial loss of food resources, as is the case for one of the forest
fragments under investigation. However, the other fragment is still comprised of
primary forest, presenting a powerful natural experiment through which to test
the effect of fragmentation independent of food availability. The overarching
hypothesis of this project is that female behavior will be more impacted by food
availability and isolation than fragmentation. Alternatively, female chimpanzees
may have sufficient behavioral flexibility due to their fluid social system to
mitigate negative consequences of fragmentation. By integrating novel and
existing ecological and behavioral datasets, this project will test how habitat
fragmentation impacts female chimpanzee subgrouping patterns, dispersal and
ultimately, reproductive performance. Subgrouping data will be collected through
full day focal follow of adult females and monthly nest surveys along line
transects. Female dispersal behavior will be assessed through genetic data,
which will be generated from non-invasively collected fecal samples. Finally,
female reproductive performance will be characterized from two metrics: the
adult female-clinging infant ratio and C-peptide values measured through non-
invasively collected urine samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.