* 2018427
* MRI: Expansion of the Molecular Education and Research Consortium in Undergraduate Computational ChemistRY (MERCURY) via Addition of High Performance Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Maria Gomez, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This high-performance computer (HPC) adds to the HPC MERCURY resources, and
enables 12 more research groups to benefit, expanding the consortium to 38
computational chemists and physicists at 33 different institutions. The
consortium is the Molecular Education and Research Consortium in Undergraduate
computational chemistRY (MERCURY). Its objective is to increase the number of
undergraduate students participating and benefiting from this stimulating and
highly productive environment. The enabled research projects described utilize
the tools of computational chemistry to solve significant problems in chemistry
and chemical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Instrument is expected to
increase the number of undergraduate students participating and benefiting from
this stimulating and highly productive environment. The enabled research
projects utilize the tools of computational chemistry to solve significant
problems in chemistry and chemical physics. This Instrument expansion builds on
the progress and momentum of the 2001 MRI grant, which allowed the consortium to
purchase a high-performance computer and assisted in formally establishing
rigorous, accessible research programs at the member institutions. The
instrument enables research in computational chemistry, spanning the fields of
biochemistry, biological, bioinorganic, biophysical, environmental, inorganic,
materials, machine learning, nanoparticles, physical, physical organic,
photochemistry, polymers, and solvation effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.