* 2018784
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)Spectrometer to Enable Material Science Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 501,173.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of California Berkeley is
acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with
1.3 mm and 3.2 mm solid-state probes, a diffusion probe, and micro-imaging
capabilities to support Jeffrey Reimer, Hasan Celik, and other colleagues. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, batteries, as
well as permitting study of biologically relevant species. In general, NMR
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and
graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution and nearby
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
spectroscopic development of analytical methods to investigate porous and soft
materials. The instrumentation is also used for studying supramolecular
materials commonly known as MOFs (metal-organic frameworks) capable of absorbing
and exchanging gases. In addition, it provides information for developing solid
polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries. The NMR spectrometer is also used to
sequence dependent materials by optimizing the chemistry of MOF synthesis to
establish the relationship between chemical functionality and diffusion rates,
and kinetics of uptake and release of substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.