* 2018417
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Triple Quadrupole mass Spectrometer Instrument for Southeast Louisiana
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthew Tarr, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 326,141.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of New Orleans is acquiring an
inductively coupled, triple quadrupole, mass spectrometer (ICP-triple Q-MS) with
laser ablation capabilities to support the research programs of Professor Phoebe
Zito and colleagues Matthew Tarr, David Podgorski, Viktor Poltavets and Robert
Mahon. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods
used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in
complex samples. An ICP-MS combines a high-temperature and an ionization coupled
plasma source with a mass spectrometer. The ICP source converts the atoms of the
elements in the sample to ions. These ions are subsequently separated and
detected by the mass spectrometer. This is a highly-sensitive analytical
technique capable of measuring very low concentrations of metals and non-metals
in liquid samples. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse students with this modern analytical technique. It is also
used in outreach activities involving students and faculty from Louisiana State
University, Southeastern Louisiana University, the Louisiana Universities Marine
Consortium, the University of Alaska-Anchorage, Southwest Engineers and other
area institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the mass spectrometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
the identification of isotopic compositions to improve the geologic record and
the analyzes of clay sources for pottery in the archaeology field. The
instrumentation is also used for detecting synergistic effects of nanoparticles
in the environment and for identifying metals and their concentrations from
natural and human impacted aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. In addition, it
contributes to the determination of calcium rich deposits in fishes, shelled
invertebrates, and coralline algae and the measurement of contaminants in
fishes, and organisms at the base of food webs with trace elements such as
arsenic and cadmium. The mass spectrometer is also used to search for innovative
approaches and alternatives for renewable/rechargeable batteries with industrial
partners. The ICP spectrometer is also employed for analyses of trace elements
bound to organic matter and other petroleum complexes altering toxicity, biotic
and abiotic reactivity, and contamination in aquatic water
bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.