* 2018393
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Game Theoretic Updates for Network and Cloud Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Arjun Guha, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 01/31/2021
* USD 295,000.00

Updates are common in cloud-computing networks, and they occur for many reasons.
Some network updates are planned while others are unplanned and automated. Since
network updates can take seconds or minutes to complete, and cloud-computing
networks must be "always on", updates must be efficient and transparent.
Researchers have proposed various abstractions for network updating that
leverage advances in formal methods to synthesize update plans and protocols,
ensuring that the system remains well-behaved during an ongoing update. However,
despite several high-profile cases of network updates gone wrong, operators
continue to use relatively naive approaches. We investigate key shortcomings of
prior work on update abstractions that limit their utility and widespread use in
practice, and develop a new abstraction that addresses the heterogeneity, scale,
and dynamic nature of real-world updates. The project's novelties are (1) a new
game-theoretic foundation for network updates, (2) algorithms for synthesizing
update controllers that are robust to failures and changing conditions during
the update, (3) algorithms for explaining update failures, (4) a language design
that allows synthesized controllers to be safely modified, and (5)
implementations and evaluations of these mechanisms for virtual network
functions and serverless-computing platforms. The project provides network
operators with tools that make updates to networked systems easier, safer, and
more reliable, and develops a framework that makes datacenter computing more
reliable and secure.

Some specific key shortcomings of previous work on network updates are the
following. (1) They assume that the network behaves predictably during the
update. However, at scale, network demands and concurrent updates can cause
unpredictable or even adversarial behavior in response to the update. (2) They
have limited explanatory power when an update plan cannot be found or cannot be
completed. (3) They make it hard for operators to choose between alternative
update plans. This project consists of a comprehensive research plan to address
these shortcomings. The key technical innovation is a formulation of updates as
the search for a winning strategy in a two-player game, between the operator (or
control plane) and the network. This formulation allows a uniform modeling of
key elements, including hardware and software failures, variations in demand,
and the addition and removal of network elements. To produce updates that are
robust to changing conditions and failures, this work uses program-synthesis
techniques to automatically generate an update controller that corresponds to a
winning strategy in the game. To help operators when fatal errors occur, the
project develops algorithms that exploit this game-theoretic formulation to
explain the root cause of update failures and present alternatives. Finally, to
give operators more control over updates, the investigators develop approaches
for synthesizing update controllers that are interpretable and modifiable. The
game-theoretic formulation is applicable to several kinds of networked systems,
and the project will instantiate and evaluate our tools for platforms that
implement virtual network functions and serverless functions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.