* 2018683
* MRI: Development of a high energy-loss electron spectrometry system with improved detection sensitivity for an advanced electron microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 625,000.00

Electron energy loss spectrometry (EELS) in the (scanning) transmission electron
microscope has become an essential tool for materials characterization. EELS can
provide insight on chemical composition and bonding, which is similar
information to that generated by synchrotron X-ray methods available at several
large facilities. In this research project, a new type of EELS system will be
developed, which is more versatile and can detect more elements than currently
achievable in existing systems. It will also have the advantage of greatly
improved spatial resolution down to the nanoscale, which is considerably better
than can be achieved at synchrotron sources. The new EELS system effectively
transforms the (scanning) transmission electron microscope into the equivalent
of a synchrotron facility but with improved spatial resolution. This
instrumentation developed will impact a wide range of research activities across
broad sectors of materials science ranging from semiconductors to advanced
alloys. It will support projects not only internal to Lehigh, but also from
other universities, government labs and industry. The knowledge developed will
be presented to many Lehigh students via classes taught by the PI/co-PIs and
also to numerous industry/government attendees of the Lehigh Microscopy Schools.
A joint symposium will be organized between the synchrotron and electron
microscopy communities to exchange knowledge on this fertile overlapping
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new EELS system has four major
components: (1) an EELS spectrometer with improved optics design for the
detection of higher energy-loss electrons, (2) an ultra-high sensitivity
electron detector for lower signal detection in the high-energy-loss range, (3)
a multi-functionality scan generator for flexible electron probe control and (4)
an integrated software platform to efficiently control not only the spectrometer
and detector, but also the microscope to record high-energy-loss signals while
maintaining high spatial resolution and allowing energy-filtered imaging. The
new high-energy-loss EELS system will be able to detect energy-loss signals up
to ~13,000eV. This means that K ionization edges up to Se (Z = 34, including all
3d transition metals), L-edges up to Tl (Z = 82, including all the lanthanoid
series) and M-edges up to U (Z = 92) can be recorded by the new EELS system. The
palette of materials systems that become accessible for EELS analysis will be
broadened to include for example, gold nanoparticles for various catalytic
applications, high entropy alloys with heavy elements and rare-earth based
light-emitted diodes. The software packages created through this development
project will be made freely available for future
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.