* 2018408
* MRI: Acquisition of a digital spatial molecular profiler to advance research and training at a Hispanic-serving institution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Robert Renthal, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 430,257.00

An award is made to The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) to purchase a
NanoString GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiler (DSP) system which affords the unique
capacity for sensitive detection of &gt;40 proteins or 96 RNAs (up to 1000-plex)
in situ in tissue sections. Acquisition of the GeoMx DSP system at UTSA as
shared instrumentation will enable use of a state-of-the-art research instrument
by scientists, engineers, and students at all levels (high-school,
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral). Use of the instrumentation by
underrepresented minority trainees in several programs and courses will help to
broaden their participation in modern research endeavors. The GeoMx DSP system
will be used by hundreds of research trainees/personnel and students enrolled in
organized courses to provide them with training in cutting-edge technology,
pique their interest in research, and maximize their marketability for careers
in academic and industrial science. Ultimately, this resource will be integrated
with existing teaching and outreach programs to promote learning using real-
world experimentation and discovery. Use in outreach activities will help expand
scientific literacy among members of our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NanoString GeoMx DSP system addresses a major limitation of contemporary ‘omics-
level molecular biology research by permitting high-throughput detection of
proteins or RNAs in tissue sections. Highly multiplexed, spatial detection of
proteins or RNAs will facilitate interpretation of basic biological processes
indicated by protein or gene expression within, rather than to the exclusion of,
the context of complex tissue architecture. This instrumentation will be housed
within the existing UTSA Genomics Core which is already equipped with
instrumentation for high-throughput bulk or single-cell ‘omics studies. Thus,
the addition of the GeoMx DSP will be optimally situated to benefit
investigators in multiple departments within the College of Science and College
of Engineering at UTSA, as well as various academic institutions across San
Antonio and South Texas. UTSA investigators will use this instrument to ask
transformative questions on broad basic biology research topics including
germline stem cell niche biology, cerebral organoid models of brain development,
vascularization in tissue engineered constructs, chemosensory neuronal
circuitry, arthropod vector tolerance, bioengineering of skeletal muscle
replacements, and mechanisms of insect olfaction. These uses reflect experiments
that could not otherwise be undertaken without the GeoMx DSP, demonstrating the
transformative nature of this instrumentation. Results from the research
performed with this instrumentation will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
scientific journal publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.