* 2018853
* MRI: Acquisition of a  Photonic Nanofabrication System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Foram Madiyar, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 523,552.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
photonic nanofabrication system that enables three-dimensional fabrication of
nanoscale to mesoscale structures with ultrahigh print resolution. This
instrument will catalyze, potentially transformative fundamental research at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in areas ranging from soft robotics and
sensors/actuators to cellular and lattice structures--enabling societal advances
in areas from precision surgery and biomedical devices to manufacturing and
warehouse distribution. This instrument will be a major regional resource for
nanofabrication research and training and it will enhance Embry-Riddleâ€™s
collaborations with other universities, research centers, and industries. The
award will also support educational activities for K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students, and the public-- significantly impacting diverse populations
of all ages and backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in additive
manufacturing provide an opportunity to design and fabricate complex
microstructures with unconventional geometries and materials for a wide range of
engineering applications. This instrument will enable fabrication of biofidelic
and biomimetic scaffolds and micromechanical and microfluidic devices to study
biochemical processes and cancer research. Key projects will advance fundamental
understanding in key areas including&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- electromechanical
relationships between micro dielectric elastomer and compliant electrodes of
soft robotic actuation and knowledge of how muscular hydrostatic actuation
works.&lt;br/&gt;- relationships between the optimized microstructure geometries
and mechanical properties and number of cells in 3D-printed micro lattice
cellular structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- 3D geometries that offer better loss
for guided waves or improved antenna radiation and optimal dielectric
interconnections that are enabled by a 3D polymer
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.