* 2018314
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Computed Tomography Scanner for Three-Dimensional Characterization of a Wide Range of Geological and Biological Archives
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 489,934.00

Critical information, unavailable from any other source, is contained within
natural geological and/or biological archives and a large multi-disciplinary
academic community across the United States is developing and applying state-of-
the art technologies to extract and interpret this information with growing
accuracy and precision. Much of it is structural, and macro- and microscale 3D
imaging provide a critical first step in the characterization of samples and
quantification of structural data. Yet facilities currently available to the
United States academic community for the three-dimensional characterization of
geological and biological samples, are limited. This award provides for the
acquisition of a Geotek Rotating X-ray Computed Tomography (RXCT) scanner to be
housed within the National Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Seafloor Samples
Laboratory (SFSL) at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). The
scanner will be operated as a center to service the existing and growing need
for 3D imaging and analysis within the ocean sciences community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RXCT scanner will facilitate the 3D characterization
and analysis of geological and biological archives readily accessible to
researchers across the US. Open access to non-destructive, macro- and microscale
imaging of corals, shellfish and other marine calcifiers, sediment cores, wood
and speleothems, transforming researchers' ability to address critical questions
about environmental change and its impacts on living systems. Furthermore, open
access to 3D imaging will drive the development of new technologies for the
quantification, analysis, interpretation and 3D animation of structural data.
Digital 3D images and animations will be shared across the world, via multiple
media types, connecting science with the public, and inspiring the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.