* 2018375
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nano-characterization System for Engineering and Physics Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Foram Madiyar, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 452,327.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art nanoscale characterization system to empower basic research in
smart materials, thin films, and biomaterials at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University (ERAU). The project’s research findings may enable advanced bio-
materials for enhanced medical treatments, novel electronic and smart materials
with new functional capabilities and enhanced energy efficiency. The system will
enrich research collaborations—both within the university and with R&amp;D small
businesses-- and establish a pipeline of skilled nano-characterization
researchers from a large and ethnically-diverse pool of graduate and
undergraduate students. Nanotechnology will be introduced to K-12 students
through STEM programs including Girls in Engineering Math and Science (GEMS).
Public understanding of nanotechnology will be heightened through an exhibit at
the Daytona Beach Museum of Arts and Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is grounded in a physics- based approach and many of the projects are focused on
materials and structures behaviors in harsh environments. The instrumentation
will enable researchers to map the properties of heterogeneous biomaterials, 3D
printed smart materials, and nanocomposite materials to their microstructure.
The instrument will also enable unprecedented simultaneous characterization and
imaging of phase-changing materials at the onset of their transition
temperatures. The researchers will integrate the high temperature measurements
with simulation to advance fundamental knowledge of thin films structural
stability -- in collaboration with researchers at the national labs and at other
universities. The instrumentation will lay the foundation for needed
microstructure-properties- additive manufacturing processing correlations to
establish the durability of 3D printed thick-film dielectrics and electric
conductors for antennas and electronics under harsh environments. The system
will also help establish the elastic and viscoelastic properties of novel
synthetic arterial grafts and shunts to ensure structural compatibility, achieve
optimal compliance, and prevent cardiovascular malfunction. The system will also
provide crucial tribological insights of 3D printed dielectric metal-elastomers
composites and establish their deformation-electric current constitutive
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.