* 2018587
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope to Enable Multidisciplinary Materials Research, Education and Outreach, in Detroit
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 980,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
high-resolution electron microscope at Wayne State University (WSU) capable of
chemical and structural mapping on the nanoscale to advance research being
performed by 23 different investigators in the fields of energy
conversion/storage, catalysis, microelectronics/sensing, and biomedical
sciences. Technological advances arise from the capability of the instrument to
provide sub-nanometer imaging and chemical resolution correlated to localized
structure. Additionally, the ease-of-use afforded by automated settings and
drift correction enables rapid collection of high-quality data (high
throughput), even by novice users. The MRI award contributes to the success of
WSUâ€™s diverse student body and enhances the urban Detroit community through
training of students in modern microscopy and the provision of hands-on
educational activities for underserved K-12 students in the city (&gt;80%
African American). The electron microscope is managed by the Lumigen Instrument
Center core facility with a dedicated microscopist on-staff, enabling research
activities and the training of students at six regional academic institutions
(five of which are primarily undergraduate institutions) while advancing product
and technology development at both start-up and established
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI Award supports the acquisition of a
Field-Emission Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (S/TEM) with multiple
energy dispersive spectrometers (EDS) and a High Angle Annular Dark Field
detector. The S/TEM provides: 1) fast and precise EDS chemical composition
mapping and line scanning with spot sizes as low as 0.3 nm and the capability to
detect trace elemental components (&lt;0.1 wt.%); 2) Z-contrast imaging
capabilities at 0.16 nm resolution for chemical distribution analysis; 3) a
large-field, high-speed camera for fast data acquisition; 4) nanobeam
diffraction for localized (single particle) structure evaluation; 5) sample
drift correction for high-resolution imaging; and 6) remote data acquisition for
off-site users. The S/TEM supports research activities focused on (1) the
development of doped nanomaterials for high-efficiency magnetic refrigeration;
(2) establishment of new high energy-density Li-ion battery technologies; (3)
design of electrocatalysts for selective biomass conversion and water splitting
(hydrogen generation); (4) fabrication of up-converting nanoparticles for
biophotonics/imaging; (5) creation of high-sensitivity chemical sensing
platforms for environmental analysis, and (5) Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) of
electropositive metal films for microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.