* 2018010
* Isotopic reconstruction of social networks: geochemistry, ethnoarchaeology, and recent prehistory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrew Zipkin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 189,272.00

A milestone in the evolution of human cooperation was the formation of social
networks linking individuals to others outside of the residential group. This
project will investigate the development of social networks and their
applications in pre-industrial societies by studying the movement of symbolic
objects through gift exchange. Networks broadened spheres of interaction for the
transmission of goods, norms, institutions, beliefs, and ideas, providing the
building blocks for development of ever more complex culture. Understanding
social and exchange networks in recent and ancient hunter-gatherers will shed
light on how human populations were able to adapt to climatic fluctuations in
the past and spread throughout the planet, using networks to buffer risk and
become more resilient. The archaeological component will augment our knowledge
of how ancient pastoral nomads adapted to hyper-aridity by tracking changes in
network configuration in response to availability of natural resources and
competition with neighbors. It will also provide a baseline for understanding
the intended and unintended consequences of radically scaling up networks by
electronic means today. By documenting recent changes in networks, the research
will provide valuable insights for development efforts to assist groups in
acquiring sustainable economic activities and alleviating poverty. Additional
broader impacts derive from the chemical and geospatial data products developed
in this project; landscape-scale models of environmental chemistry can be used
to determine the source of illegally procured plant and animal products. The
project will provide training and international collaborative opportunities for
students and senior researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will apply
analytical chemistry and geospatial modeling to determine the area of geographic
origin, or provenience, of ostrich eggshell (OES) beads relative to their
location of deposition or collection. In desert regions, ancient and recent
hunter-gatherers and pastoralists used OES beads to make valued personal
ornaments that were gifted to underwrite relations of mutual support that
increased resilience to environmental, demographic, and social pressures. The
distance between these origin and deposition points and the diversity in origin
for beads in an object (e.g. a necklace) will be used as proxies for the scale
of social networks. It is possible to determine the provenience of OES by
measuring the ratio of two isotopes of the element strontium (Sr). The 87Sr/86Sr
ratio is transmitted up the food chain from rock to soil and water to plants and
ultimately into animals, creating a chemical signature linking an organism to
the place where it acquired nutrition. This project has three major objectives:
1) construct geostatistical models of 87Sr/86Sr variation across the landscape
in both study areas, 2) determine if well-documented exchange networks among
recent foragers are detectible from 87Sr/86Sr analysis of OES beadwork collected
by anthropologists in the 1950s-1970s, and 3) explore the potential of isotope
analysis of OES for uncovering networks in desert regions over the last 4000
years when there was increasing aridity, plant and animal exploitation, and
ritual activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.