* 2018558
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Bringing Together Diverse Expertise to Understand How to Best Measure Student Acceptance of Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Sara Brownell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2023
* USD 73,269.00

When undergraduate biology students learn about the core concept of evolution,
how do we know whether they have accepted what they have been taught? While a
seemingly simple question, different definitions of evolution acceptance and
different instruments that measure it have made answering this question
difficult. This has resulted in contradictions in the literature, which, in
turn, has hindered progress in increasing acceptance rates. While this topic is
studied in multiple disciplines--e.g., psychology, education, and biology--
researchers in these fields rarely interact with one another. This project aims
to establish a new network of experts with expertise relevant to improving the
way we measure acceptance of evolution that will tackle this challenging
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of progress in helping students recognize
evolution as a credible scientific theory has been cited as one of the biggest
failures of science education in the modern era. To help address this issue,
this project will host a series of virtual and in-person meetings of experts
from different disciplines who all have a shared interest in evolution
acceptance, yet rarely work together on how to measure it. The goal of these
meetings will be to identify how to create and sustain a network to improve our
current suite of instruments to measure evolution acceptance. By doing so, the
project has the potential to broadly increase evolution acceptance rates in the
general public that have been stagnant over the past thirty
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in "Vision
and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.