* 2018642
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining the role of competition in primate dietary morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Tessa Cicak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines how competition affects primate
adaptive processes, testing the central hypothesis that primates respond to
competition over food resources by focusing feeding on underutilized resources.
Using measures of tooth shape to analyze traits, and stable isotope analysis to
examine diet and canopy use, this project looks at differences between primate
pairs by comparing populations that live together to populations that live
separately. The study can provide new information relevant to conservation
management programs to prevent further primate extinction by documenting the
impacts of increased competition due to habitat loss. Data collected for this
project create undergraduate internship opportunities and provide training in
the protocols and procedures of conducting original research. Results from this
research will be incorporated into learning modules based on the themes of
primate diet and conservation. These learning modules will be utilized by a
local non-profit educational programming group that provides scientific
activities to elementary and middle school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project asks two research questions: 1) do closely-related primate species focus
their diet on a few key food items when they live together compared to the same
species when they occur separately? and 2) do closely-related primate species
display morphological traits and isotopic signatures that reflect focus on fewer
key resources when they live together compared to the same species when they
occur separately? These questions will be tested using ecometric measures to
quantify tooth shape and stable isotope data to represent diet and canopy use.
By combining methods to analyze tooth shape and isotopic signatures related to
habitual canopy level occupation, this project will provide new perspectives on
how to reconstruct dietary behaviors and resource
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.