* 2018876
* MRI: Acquisition of Electron Beam Lithography System for  Next-Generation  Nanomanufacturing  and  Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Betty Lise Anderson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,050,000.00

This major research instrumentation project is to acquire an electron beam
lithography system to support research and education activities at The Ohio
State University (OSU) and surrounding regions. The ability to create patterns
precisely and accurately at the nanometer scale is a key enabler for advances in
science, engineering, and medicine. Electron beam lithography systems use
precisely focused beams of electrons to realize patterns only a few nanometers
in size. Such features can be used to study new scientific phenomena, create
novel structures, and to engineer technology solutions. Researchers at OSU and
in the region will research a broad range of topics with the system. Topics
include quantum phenomena in materials, quantum communications, high-performance
electronics, and medical applications. The system will be placed in a
centralized nanofabrication facility that will ensure long-term sustainability
of the equipment, and open access to a broad range of users within and outside
the university. The tool will allow a large number of users to apply state-of-
art patterning technology for education, science, engineering, and product
development. The system will be used to train undergraduate and graduate
students at Ohio State and other educational institutions. An outreach program
will engage students and teachers from schools in the Columbus metropolitan
region with researchers. High school students will learn how fundamental science
concepts in waves, optics and electronics connect to real-life applications
through hands-on projects and tours of clean room facilities at Ohio State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a modern state-of-art electron
beam lithography system would spur research in a range of areas, including
2-dimensional material electronics and mechanics, infrared sensors, integrated
photonics, high-frequency electronics, quantum communication, metallurgy, earth
sciences, and medical research. The impacted research projects would lead to
advances in our understanding of fundamental physical properties of materials
and systems at the nanometer scale, and of novel electronic, magnetic, and
optical phenomena in these materials. A range of technologies and applications
with significant economic and societal impact will benefit from the availability
of the proposed electron beam lithography system, which will enable disruptive
innovation in several directions including next-generation high data rate
communication systems, imaging for medical, security, and space remote-sensing
application, quantum information systems, cell engineering for medical
applications, and new semiconductor materials for energy-efficient power
electronics and computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.