* 2018631
* MRI: Acquisition of an Adaptive Computing Infrastructure to Support Compute- and Data-Intensive Multidisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Elise Miller-Hooks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

A high-performance computing (HPC) system, named Hopper will be acquired by
George Mason University (GMU). This HPC system will support high-impact research
and education across all the multidisciplinary research institutes, and numerous
departments and academic programs at George Mason University (GMU). Among other
areas, Hopper will enable research and education projects focused on advancing
transportation and infrastructure systems, geography and geoinformation
sciences, astrophysics, social media analytics to support disaster informatics,
computational fluid dynamics, materials science, natural hazards research, data
mining, computer vision, automated vehicles, bioinformatics, neuroscience, and
economics. Hopper will also support GMU’s large-scale high-performance computing
users who will develop, prototype, and benchmark their applications locally
before starting production runs on large nationally available systems. The
instrument will support a very diverse community of researchers, educators and
graduate and undergraduate researchers at GMU. It will also enable research
projects by high school students engaged in summer research projects, community
college students whose dreams are to attain their four-year degree, adult
learners seeking their first college degree or to upskill to realize their
professional aspirations. In addition to advancing cutting-edge research
projects, Hopper will be instrumental in preparing the next generation of data
scientists, mathematicians, engineers and scientists to meet the needs of the
Nation’s thriving innovation economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hopper will be
managed centrally and shared with the entire Mason research community. The
proposed system is based on an OpenStack framework and will be reconfigurable to
support a diverse range of user needs at Mason. Hopper will consist of 4
OpenStack management nodes, 35 standard compute nodes, 2 high memory nodes with
3TB memory, and 6 nodes with graphics processing units (GPUs), all connected
through InfiniBand (IB) switches to support low-latency high bandwidth
communication between nodes and storage. The interconnect network will use HDR
IB switches in a fat tree configuration and use port splitters to provide EDR IB
connections to the nodes. There will be a redundant 25Gbe networking
infrastructure with 100Gbe spine switches for node deployment and virtual
machine (VM) access. The system will have 384 TB of Ceph based storage to back
VM deployments, and 300 TB of high-speed low-latency BeeGFS storage for HPC use.
Hopper will support both traditional as well as non-traditional (the long tail
of science) high-performance computing users. This new system will replace GMU’s
current HPC cluster, which is nearing the end of its useful life, is unable to
keep up with growth in the number of users and was not designed to meet the
needs of a diversity of usage modes now being requested by our faculty and
student communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.