* 2018823
* CC* Regional: Advancing Maryland Research and Education Network for Under-Resourced Institutions Through a Science DMZ and 10Gbps Upgrade
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Eric Davidson, University System of Maryland
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 799,767.00

MDREN, the Maryland Research and Education Network, an organization under the
University System of Maryland, provides advanced network services to 40+
education, research, and public service institutions throughout the State of
Maryland and connections to regional and national
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-speed networking infrastructure is vital to
researchers and STEM educators in our community. Smaller/under resourced/rural
institutions like Frostburg State University (FSU), Salisbury University (SU),
the four research labs that are part of University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Sciences (UMCES), the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center (MPRC)
as part of University of Maryland School of Medicine (UMSOM), and HBCUs like
University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) and Morgan State University have
serious limitations in accessing and transferring huge datasets amongst
themselves and collaborators at NOAA, NASA, NIH, USGS, and others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal significantly increases network bandwidth
for 6 institutions including research centers and labs by 10x and adds a Science
DMZ for data transfers from other sites to enable the full potential of these
institutions. These upgrades allow researchers at each institution to reliably
connect to supercomputers and big data repositories, increase computational
capabilities, and increase inter-institution collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;MDREN will a special path from the science DMZ machine to each lab
that will facilitate high speed transfer. This would be significantly faster
than doing transfers through campus firewalls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal helps rural or under-resourced institutions and HBCUs better
collaborate with peer institutions in the greater Maryland region, collaborators
around the world, and key science organizations such as NASA, NIH, and
NOAA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.