* 2018472
* CC* Integration-Small: Integrating Application Agnostic Learning with FABRIC for Enabling Realistic High-Fidelity Traffic Generation and Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Deniz Gurkan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 359,946.00

Novel approaches to networking and application development require high-fidelity
testing and evaluation supported by realistic network usage scenarios.
Furthering the pursuit of these novel approaches, the FABRIC testbed
(https://whatisfabric.net) can store and process information "in the network" in
ways not possible in the current Internet, which will lead to completely new
networking protocols, architectures and applications that address pressing
problems with performance, security and adaptability in the Internet. This
project will provide researchers the means to easily utilize the new
capabilities of the FABRIC testbed through a suite of new tools - smoothing the
transition of existing experiments to the testbed and enabling exciting new
areas of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce three systems
facilitating end to end traffic modeling and generation in the FABRIC
environment. A model repository will be created for the storage and access of
custom models by experimenters, and will be seeded with stock models of some
popular applications for immediate use. The use of the models within FABRIC-
hosted experiments will be advanced through a bespoke matching system that will
align experiment resources with model requirements. Finally, for experiments
developing novel applications, a tool will be provided for creating new models
using data captured with FABRIC infrastructure components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FABRIC users will gain direct low-friction access to the
novel infrastructure capabilities of the testbed, freeing them to focus the bulk
of their time and effort on their own research goals rather than dealing with
the vagaries of resource availability, specialized driver setup, and complex
data formats. As a result, testbed resources can be more optimally shared
between experiments, and individual research tasks will be completed more
quickly. The project will also provide input to future researchers and testbed
implementors on streamlining workflows of high level services in support of
research objectives over advanced testbed
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation for project tools and code, as
well as backing project data, will be located at http://docs.uh-netlab.org, and
it will be publicly available for at least 5 years after the end of substantive
project work. In-development source code is available on an ongoing basis via
public internet resources linked from the documentation
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.