* 2018490
* MRI: Development of a CHIME Outrigger Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kiyoshi Masui, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,762,469.00

The Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME) Outrigger Telescope
will be used to pinpoint the location of thousands of bright radio flashes
coming from far off galaxies. These Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) are among the
brightest sources ever seen on the sky, but their origin remains a mystery. The
new telescope will triangulate source positions by working with the existing
CHIME telescope, half a continent away. Currently, most FRB positions are so
imprecise that astronomers donâ€™t even know which galaxy they came from. The
Outrigger will solve that problem, determining the particular galaxy, and will
go further, localizing the source to a specific region within that galaxy. FRBs
are interesting because of the extreme physics that creates the flash. In
addition, the burst radio waves detected have travelled for billions of years
through ionized cosmic structure. Each burst carries several distinct measurable
signals imprinted during transit, providing unique new tools to study the
cosmos. The CHIME Outrigger program will increase US participation in this
exciting new area, and train the next generation of young scientists in this
novel type of instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Outrigger telescope will
allow use of very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) techniques to achieve
milli-arcsecond angular resolution in the baseline direction. The telescope we
will develop will consist of a single 60 m long by 20 m wide cylinder located at
the Green Bank (WV) Observatory. The focal line will be outfitted with 128 dual-
polarized quad-clover antennas covering the 400-800 MHz band. Performing
untargeted VLBI with this array requires a data recorder capable of storing and
processing terabytes of data from all 256 radio-frequency channels, for which we
will deploy a memory-based ring buffer with triggered readout. This development
program will enable additional outriggers to be built later, allowing even
sharper localization of radio bursts, and will pave the way for future
construction of larger low-cost, high-throughput telescopes for more advanced
transient searches and Intensity Mapping efforts. The program will build
expertise in digitally-driven transit telescopes at one of the premier radio
observatories in the US. The Outrigger also will serve as a standalone telescope
used as an outreach and education platform supporting the broader impacts
aspects of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by MPS/AST, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the OIA/MRI Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.