* 2018561
* MRI: Acquisition of Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer to Support Undergraduate Research in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jason Halfen, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 102,485.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire is
acquiring a benchtop, single-crystal X-ray diffractometer to support Professor
Deidra Gerlach and colleague Jason Halfen. This diffractometer allows research
in a variety of fields of significant economic importance such as catalysis
which is important to advance manufacturing. In general, an X-ray diffractometer
allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure
of a molecule, including bond distances and angles. The instrument also provides
accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to
neighbors. The studies to be performed may impact many areas, including organic
and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument
is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well
other departments. The science enabled by this instrument has the potential to
impact society.Crystallographic studies of compounds prepared by students will
foster students' engagement in the research enterprise and lead to an enhanced
frequency and quality of research products, including student coauthored
publications and extramural presentations. By making in-house structure
determination routine, the instrument will provide a significant boost to
student development and preparation for advanced coursework and entry into
graduate programs. The instrument will promote significant outreach and
collaborative possibilities by providing crystallographic support to the
researchers of nearby campuses providing long-term impact on ongoing
departmental efforts to enhance the recruitment and retention of women, low
income/first generation college students, and members of underrepresented groups
to pursue coursework and careers in the chemical sciences, part of a broader
institutional emphasis to recruit and retain a diverse, inclusive student
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray diffractometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies of
effects of structural variation on organometallic catalysis. The instrumentation
is used to analyze conformation and configuration effects of fluorophores. In
addition, it provides information on benzylidenecamphore organocatalysts. The
diffractometer is also used to study the mechanism of the Vitamin K
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.