* 2018836
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy (CRDS) Water Isotope Analyzer for Interdisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Donald Rodbell, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 182,310.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program grant supports acquisition a
cavity ring-down spectrometer (CRDS) for analysis of stable isotopes of H and O
in water and solid geological and biological materials (e.g., sediments, soils,
wood and plant tissues). The CRDS will support research and research training at
Union College, a non-Ph.D. granting institution. The instrument will support
undergraduate student training in methods of stable isotope analysis and related
hydrological and paleoenvironmental research applications and the investigators
plan regional K-12 outreach and teacher training in the fundamentals of
watershed and isotope hydrology. The CRDS will support the investigations of a
minimum of 22 faculty researchers from 15 institutions, the lab component of 12
courses, and upwards of 25 undergraduate research students annually, with
findings from the proposed research disseminated through presentations at
professional meetings and peer-reviewed publications. Proposed research projects
align with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and advancing
national health, prosperity, and welfare by supporting environmental research
aimed at understanding the water cycle and the Earth’s climate, which have
implications for water resource management and confronting challenges stemming
from a changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CRDS will enable a number of
major research projects on the application of stable water isotopes to: (a)
characterize aquifer systems and surface-water-groundwater interaction with the
aim of assessing risks to water quality (with a focus on arsenic) and
availability, (b) examine non-rainfall water (fog/dew) contributions to aquifers
in coastal and mountains regions, (c) explore the role of catchment
characteristics on streamflow ages and the attending implications for solute and
contaminant fate and transport through watersheds. Other hydrologic research
includes research on geothermal waters in the Caribbean – work that has
important implications for understanding and predicting volcanic unrest. The
CRDS will also advance paleoclimate research, with projects on paleoclimate
archives from the Peruvian Andes (lake cores and stalagmites), the development
of bivalve shell proxies in several environments, and a detailed study on oxygen
isotopes in tree rings. In addition, other research projects involving plant-
soil water dynamics, terrestrial biogeochemistry, and a watershed isotope study
will benefit from the proposed instrumentation. The CRDS system will allow for
the high-volume throughput required of the ongoing and proposed research.
Furthermore, the CRDS will add the capability to measure δ17O, allowing us to
better characterize evaporative processes in the environment – a capability
critical to many hydrologic, ecologic, and climatologic
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.