* 2019995
* The profile of feature-based attention: A new framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Taosheng Liu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 434,706.00

Daily life requires us to navigate an environment that contains much more
information than the brain can process at once. Using attention, we can process
information that is relevant to the task while ignoring information that is
irrelevant to the task. One key component of this type of selective attention is
based on feature information. For example, when keeping track of our child at
the shopping mall we may focus on the color of the child’s clothing. However, in
so doing, we are not completely unaware of other aspects of the environment. How
does attention to a particular feature impact the processing of the relevant and
irrelevant features? Classical studies have supported simple models based on
feature similarity, while more recent work has demonstrated more complex
relationships among the features. In the present project, the investigator uses
a cross-disciplinary approach that integrates methods from psychophysics,
computational modeling, and neuroimaging in order to understand the cognitive
and neural aspects of an attentional mechanism called “surround suppression,” in
which the processing of features near the attentional target is weakened. A
better understanding of this type of attentional mechanism will have
implications for many situations in which humans use visual input to guide
behavior, such as education, communication, and human factors engineering. The
research project will also provide interdisciplinary training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students in brain and cognitive
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator team will conduct behavioral and
neuroimaging experiments to examine the mechanisms underlying the attentional
profile. There are three interrelated objectives. First, the investigators will
examine how the attentional profile for simple features changes with stimulus
context and task demand. To map out the attentional profile, participants are
instructed to attend to a feature to perform a target-detection task while the
target feature is systematically varied. Second, the investigators will measure
the attentional profile for visual objects defined by the conjunction of two
features and examine its sensitivity to task demands. In these experiments, the
general hypothesis is that the attentional profile can be flexibly adjusted
based on stimulus context and task demand, allowing efficient selection of task-
relevant information. In the third objective, the investigators will use
functional magnetic resonance imaging to measure neural activity while human
participants are engaged in the feature-attention task. Model-based neuroimaging
analyses will be used to distinguish between two possible neural mechanisms that
can cause attention-induced surround suppression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.