* 2019465
* CEDAR: Resolving Thermosphere Response Times to Auroral and Solar Energy Inputs and Improving Neutral Density Predictions
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Daniel Weimer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 07/31/2023
* USD 257,836.00

This project is to refine and enhance a new computer model that provides
temperatures in the thermosphere (the atmosphere region from about 80 to 600 km
above sea level). The temperature in the thermosphere varies in response to
solar energy input and auroral events at high latitudes and is also closely
related to the atmospheric density. This improved model will help better predict
the atmospheric temperature and density in the thermosphere. Since the density
is the key parameter that determines satellite drag, this improvement will help
better predict satellite drag and space weather in response to changes in solar
radiation and associated disturbances in Earthâ€™s electromagnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new model is referred to with the acronym
EXTEMPLAR, for EXospheric TEMperatures on a PoLyhedrAl gRid. The method relies
on converting satellite density measurements into exospheric temperatures and
sorting these values into bins based on their location on a geodesic grid. By
fitting the data in each bin to the environmental conditions at the time, maps
of the exospheric temperature can be obtained from the regression coefficients.
These temperatures can be used to obtain neutral densities at any location and
altitude, by substituting for the values in the empirical model of the
thermosphere by the Naval Research Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
activities include: (1) Measuring the time delays between auroral energy inputs
and exospheric temperature response, and how these delays vary around the globe.
(2) Investigating the occurrence of regions having decreasing density during
major heating events. (3) Improving the modeling of the thermosphere's response
to variable solar radiation. (4) Construction of an improved neutral density
prediction model. (5) Validate the neutral density predictions with comparisons
to measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to advance
the knowledge and understanding of how the thermosphere responds on regional and
global scales to energy that is transferred from both solar radiation and
auroral electrodynamic heating. The timings between the energy input and the
thermosphere's response will be established as a function of global coordinates.
The development of methods using triangulated geodesic grids has the potential
to transform modeling and analysis techniques within the space science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful conclusion to this project will
result in an empirical model that will be useful to other research in the
scientific community, particularly those related to the objectives of the NSF
CEDAR program, including simulations of the coupled, ionosphere/thermosphere
system. The research has potential benefits to society at large, such as through
better predictions of the variations in neutral mass density that can change the
orbits of satellites. This capability is important to national security, the
success of commercial space enterprises, as well as the safety of human
spaceflight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.