* 2019088
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Networking Systems Biologists with Community College Educator
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Jennifer Eklund, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2022
* USD 74,897.00

This RCN-UBE project seeks to network community college educators and systems
biologists to promote biological data literacy amongst community college
students. The volume, velocity, and variety of biological data has increased
dramatically. As a result, current and future careers in biology are now highly
dependent on quantitative skills such as sophisticated mathematical modeling,
“big data” analysis, and computer simulation. The implication for education is
that all biology students need educational experiences that build biological
data literacy. However, due to the rapidly evolving nature of skills needed to
interact with increased volume, velocity and variety of data, many STEM
educators lack contemporary data literacy skills. Even fewer have training on
how to use data in the classroom in a way that is accessible to students and
helps them build data literacy skills. This lack of training is more pronounced
for community college faculty who do not regularly interact with researchers who
develop and use these skills. This project pilots an approach that has the
potential to significantly improve undergraduate STEM teaching and learning not
only by increasing faculty comfort with systems biology approaches, but also by
network participants directly engaging diverse undergraduates in cutting-edge
methods in their introductory courses. This approach could serve as a model for
future collaborations between research institutes and primarily undergraduate
institutions that seek to increase minority recruitment, engagement, retention,
and success along STEM pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring
together systems biologists and community college faculty to engage in
professional learning experiences that draw on the expertise of both
populations. Community college faculty will engage in a week of deep learning of
quantitative biology skills supported by the members of the network who are
quantitative biology researchers. The full network will then create curricular
resources that engage students in data literacy modules to complement classroom
based undergraduate research and assist students in building the skills to
interpret large multidimensional datasets founded in authentic research
contexts. The network will partner to implement these resources in community
college courses that serve a broad range of students including populations
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. The project will improve the
preparation of community college students by increasing achievement and learning
of quantitative biology research methods and improve undergraduate biology
learning environments by enhancing undergraduate faculty teaching of
quantitative biology research methods. Further the project outcomes will
generate instructional strategies and curricular resources founded in
contemporary quantitative biology research and an expanded network of
undergraduate biology faculty and scientists at research institutes engaging
students in classroom-based quantitative biology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.