* 2019567
* Emotion as information: Young childrens use of others emotional expressions to guide their inference and exploration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Hyowon Gweon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,994.00

Much of early learning occurs in diverse social contexts. Despite the ubiquity
of emotional expressions in young children’s social interactions with others,
most research on early social learning has focused primarily on imitation and
pedagogy, leaving important open questions about what and how children learn
from others’ emotional cues. The current project aims to understand how infants
and children harness others’ expressions of surprise as learning signals to
guide their inferences and exploration. The results will transform the ways in
which scientists, caregivers, and practitioners think about the role of emotion
in formal and informal educational contexts, and provide new insights into how
impairments in emotion recognition (e.g., ASD) may disrupt learning from others’
emotions. This project will be integrated with public outreach at science
museums and undergraduate (URM) research training, generating findings that are
of interest to disciplines beyond developmental science, including cognitive
science, education, clinical psychology, and AI/machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesizing prior research on children's
inferences in social contexts and development of emotion understanding, this
project tests novel hypotheses on the role of emotion in early learning,
focusing on the expression of surprise as vicarious prediction error. Four
behavioral studies with infants and children (e.g., looking-time, exploration)
are designed to support the following aims. The first aim is to characterize
infants’ abilities to harness others' surprise to infer unobservable states of
the world and modulate their attention (e.g., looking) accordingly. The second
aim is to explore the development of toddlers’ and preschoolers’ abilities to
integrate others' surprise and their knowledge states to actively guide their
own exploration. The third aim is to investigate the development of children’s
sensitivity to the reliability of others' surprise. By the end of the project,
we will have a more rigorous scientific theory of early learning that
incorporates the role of emotion as information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.