* 2019071
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Improved Public Primary Healthcare and Informal Provider Responses
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Janet Currie, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2022
* USD 31,500.00

Understanding the response of those not directly affected by policy changes is a
central part of economic science. This award funds a research on how informal
providers respond to major public health care reforms. The research uses modern
research methods to study how other suppliers respond to changes in public
health policies with particular focus on primary health care. Particularly, the
research focuses on how the policy change affects the quality and quantity of
services provided by informal healthcare providers. This allows researchers to
measure the total direct and indirect effects of the policy changes on both
suppliers and consumers of health care, especially those with low incomes who
are more likely to use informal health care services. The research will use
surveys to collect rich data on patient, provider, and households for the
analyses. The focus of the research will be on the mechanisms through which the
policy changes affect providers that are not directly affected by the policy
change. The results of this research project can provide important inputs into
policies that improve access to better healthcare for low income people, hence
improve their health. The research results are applicable to other parts of the
world, hence establish the US as the global leader in health care
reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use survey
data to estimate a structural model of demand and informal provider behavior to
assess the direct and indirect welfare effects of improved public healthcare
provision. The project makes three contributions to the literature. First, it
exploits the opportunity to collect an extensive set of survey data before and
after a large public health reform to analyze the effects of improved public
healthcare on patient outcomes in a low income environment. Second, the project
constructs a structural model of informal provider behavior that accounts for
price and quality decisions. Third, it uses a novel combination of standardized
patients and provider and household data to identify the key parameters of the
model. Taken together, this framework allows the researchers to examine the
general equilibrium effects of improved public primary healthcare and inform the
design and evaluation of future public health reforms. The research results are
applicable to other parts of the world, hence establish the US as the global
leader in health care reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.