* 2019910
* RAPID: Capture of ephemeral fault slip data from the North Anatolian slow slip event Dec2019 and triggered slip data from the East Anatolian Mw=6.8 earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2021
* USD 12,489.00

This RAPID project responds to two recents events on the Anatolian fault in
Turkey, a magnitude 5.4 slow earthquake and a magnitude 6.8 earthquake in
January of 2020. These events are important to understand because they cause
signifcant loss of life and damage to buildings and infrastructure. In addition,
the fault system is very similar to those in California. Improving our
understanding of this earthquake and slow slip event by collecting data from
instruments that measure deformation immediately before and after these events
is valuable for researchers studying this fault and many others. The lead
investigator will be collaborating with local researchers in Turkey as part of
this data collection effort. The US community will gain access to the data
quickly through the UNAVCO data archive.

This project supports rapid response to two events on the Anatolian fault system
that happened in quick succession. The lead investigator will download data from
5 non-telemetered extensometers along the fault, and map surface expressions of
the rupture. These data will be valuable in understanding slow slip and seismic
fault motion in relation to each other, understanding event nucleation and fault
slip. The slow slip earthquake persisted for a month causing the North Anatolian
fault to slip significantly. The Mw 6.8 earthquake ruptured an 80km segment of
the East Anatolian fault. The broader impacts of the work include collaboration
with researchers at the Kandilli Observatory in Instanbul, improved
understanding of earthquake hazards and rapid data availability to the US
research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.