* 2019104
* I-Corps: High performance sustainable solution to plastic-based materials
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Noureddine Abidi, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
investigate translation of new bioplastic materials as an alternative solution
to petroleum-based materials. The growing environmental concerns regarding the
accumulation of microplastics inspires a need for new alternative materials.
Petroleum-based products (plastics, fibers such as polyester, nylon, etc.) are
notorious for their persistence in the environment because they are not
biodegradable when disposed in landfills. From an environmental perspective, it
is crucial to develop materials based on cellulose. In addition, cotton is one
of the most important cash crops in the United States and most produced cotton
fibers go to the textile industry. However, low micronaire (low quality in terms
of textile spinning) is a recurring problem and can potentially be applied to
other niche markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to explore
applications of biodegradable materials from cellulose biopolymer derived from
low quality cotton fibers. Although considered as waste or discounted for
textile applications, these fibers are a premium source of highly crystalline
and high-molecular weight cellulose. The technology converts cellulose to a
solution and subsequently to commodity products currently produced from
petroleum-derived polymers. Proof-of-concept has been demonstrated through
producing 3D printed materials, bioplastic films (flexible and stiff), and
porous materials. The ability of this technology to dissolve high molecular
weight cellulose (derived from cotton fibers) and its conversion to bioproducts
allows preparation of superior performance and versatile cellulose-based
bioproducts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.