* 2019844
* AI Institute: Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Adam Klivans, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 13,500,000.00

Machine Learning and AI have experienced unprecedented growth over the last ten
years, especially on classical vision and language tasks. Expectations are high
that the next decade of research will continue at the same pace, yielding
transformative discoveries in nearly all areas of science. Complex machine
perception tasks, however, still remain difficult. For example, tools for object
recognition struggle with the dynamic nature and massive size of video data.
What are the key foundational questions that need to be solved so that machine
learning breaks through its current limitations? This institute (a partnership
of The University of Texas at Austin, the University of Washington, Wichita
State University, and Microsoft Research) will develop next-generation
mathematical tools and algorithms with an eye towards major advances on core
perceptual tasks. In the short term, principled heuristics will reduce the
amount of trial and error that is prevalent in the current empirical framework.
In the long term, new algorithms can reshape the landscape of machine learning
with faster and more robust schemes for training and testing. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Singular goals of this institute include integrated plans for
transferring knowledge that links foundational progress with use-inspired
research spanning video, imaging, and navigation. These plans address
outstanding issues in municipalities (e.g., traffic mitigation), the technology
sector (e.g., robust video delivery), and healthcare (e.g., medical imaging).
This institute addresses the intense industrial demand for expertise in machine
learning by developing a new online master’s degree program in AI that caters to
working professionals with complex schedules. Undergraduates will be brought to
the forefront of machine learning research through a sequence of new research
initiatives across several majors including computer science, mathematics,
electrical engineering, and statistics. The institute also focuses on new
internal strategies to dramatically increase the number of women in AI as well
as new enrichment programs in machine learning for educators and students in
high schools to broaden participation in AI for underserved communities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The institute's research program identifies four key
thrusts targeting major open problems in the foundations of machine learning:
(i) Developing advanced algorithms for deep learning. The institute will create
fast, provably efficient tools for training neural networks and searching
parameter spaces. This includes formulating new analyses for gradient-based
methods and applications to hyperparameter optimization and architecture search.
(ii) Learning with dynamic data. Since datasets are constantly evolving, it is
crucial to find algorithms and models that can incorporate changes at training
and test time, including robustness to perturbations. A major emphasis will be
on furthering a new field of efficient robust statistics, where the main
objective is finding provably efficient algorithms for classical (often thought
to be computationally intractable) statistical estimators. (iii) Exploiting
Structure in Data. What characteristics of a dataset help with training and
inference? Simple models involving sparsity often fail to capture modern
training sets. This project will focus on more expressive ways to model the
underlying structure in a distribution using deep networks as priors. Along
these lines, the institute will investigate (both theoretically and
experimentally) how structure can be used to address a fundamental mystery in
supervised learning, namely why overparameterized networks generalize well when
trained on real data. (iv) Optimizing real-world objectives. While black-box
learning methods have improved by leaps and bounds in the recent past, it is
difficult to use them in conjunction with complex loss functions that involve
real-world constraints. For example, common vision tasks involve discriminating
among different types of objects, but, depending on the downstream application,
it may be more important to distinguish certain pairs of objects than others.
For robot planning, mobility speed may be less important than adhering to
certain safety constraints. This thrust will combine the current, optimization-
based approach to machine learning with the expressive power of programming
languages and formal methods. A related focus will be on imitation learning and
interactive machine learning where objective functions can be adjusted based on
real-world feedback from human users.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The institute's four
research thrusts dovetail with three use-inspired research projects in video,
imaging, and navigation. These projects encapsulate frontier challenges in
machine perception and provide a wealth of benchmarks to evaluate theoretical
work. With respect to video, the institute will work with industrial partners to
redesign the whole video pipeline: from recognition and
compression/decompression to training and model design. For imaging, the focus
will be on new algorithms to solve ill-posed inverse problems where novel priors
can compensate for the loss of observed information, especially in the context
of medical diagnostics. The navigation project will consider the algorithmic
challenge of autonomous and safe transportation in highly unstructured
environments and will address policy issues in coordination with local
governments. Altogether, these solutions will expand the scope of machine
learning by moving beyond a black-box model of
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.