* 2019783
* Probing the Adhesion Mechanisms of Hydrogels in Underwater Conditions through Multi-Length and Multi-Time Scale Indentations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yuhang Hu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 304,050.00

This grant will use indentation technique to probe the adhesion properties and
mechanisms of hydrogels across a wide range of length and time scales in
underwater conditions. Hydrogels, a soft gel consisting of a network of polymer
chains with a very high water content, are both important engineering materials
and living components. In both native and engineering settings, hydrogels often
interface with other materials or biological components. Quantifying the
adhesion properties and understanding the adhesion mechanisms of hydrogels are
important for material design and manufacturing control. Adhesion of gels is a
time-dependent process related to many molecular processes. The mechanism of
adhesion is often different in different length scales. This awarded project
will combine a new physics-based theory and a multiscale mechanical
characterization technique to unravel the adhesion mechanisms of hydrogels. From
the technology standpoint, the success of this research will lead to a robust
and high throughput technique capable of measuring the intrinsic interaction
properties of soft hydrogels under a wide range of conditions and provide
general guidelines for quantitative material design and manufacturing. The
research is also in parallel with a long-term educational plan to prepare future
generations of scientists and engineers in the interdisciplinary area of soft
materials engineering, and to popularize science and technology gained in this
field of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
build clear vision into the molecular structures and chemistries of the polymer
network in relation to the macroscopic adhesion properties of hydrogels, which
will facilitate future material and manufacturing design. The objectives of this
project include (1) establishing a physics-based theory that combines the
nonlinear poroelasticity for the bulk and a stochastic cohesive zone model for
the interactions between the indenter and the hydrogels; (2) developing an
indentation method that provides enough information to decouple the bulk and
surface behaviors and allows for extracting intrinsic interface properties from
the theory; (3) exploring the micromechanisms of the time- and length-dependent
adhesion of hydrogels. The following fundamental questions will be answered: (1)
how is the adhesion hysteresis related to the microstructure, bond formation and
breakage, liquid-polymer interaction and fluid flow in hydrogels? (2) what
determines the transition length of adhesion mechanism from bond breaking to
fracture and how is it influenced by the nonlinear deformation and network
topology of the hydrogels? (3) what is the mechanism that determines the surface
property change of a temperature-sensitive gel when it undergoes volume phase
transition? This project will push the boundary of current state of art in
adhesion science and advance the existing knowledge on adhesion of soft
materials and biological tissues in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.