* 2019603
* RII Track-2 FEC: Aquatic Intermittency Effects on Microbiomes in Streams (AIMS)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Caryn Vaughn, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,097,526.00

Understanding of links among microbial communities (microbiomes), stream health,
and water quality relies on studies of perennially flowing streams. However,
more than half of global stream-miles do not flow continuously. These
intermittent streams occur across the entire country--from western deserts to
eastern forests. Despite their ubiquity, research on intermittently flowing
streams is impeded by a lack of: 1) physical infrastructure designed to measure
intermittency, and 2) scientific training that straddles aquatic and terrestrial
ecology. The Aquatic Intermittency effects on Microbiomes in Streams (AIMS)
project will address the first obstacle by creating a network of instrumented
sites designed to generate “Big Data” to quantify flow intermittency, stream
microbiomes, and water quality. AIMS will confront the second obstacle by using
its network to provide training in collaborative science and interdisciplinary
methods to study intermittent streams, and by providing workforce training in
environmental "Big Data" tools through a new On Ramps to Data Science program,
which will focus on data generated by microbiome sequencing, environmental
sensors, and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). This infrastructure and
training will support a team of 18 investigators, including nine early career
scientists spanning five EPSCoR jurisdictions (AL, ID, KS, MS, OK). To build
capacity in team science, 11 graduate students and two postdoctoral associates
will be recruited using a cohort model that will provide cross-jurisdictional
training in scientific communication, inclusive mentoring, data management and
collaboration. Students will be trained through AIMS Undergraduate Program (AIMS
UP), which will recruit participants from regional partners, such as Haskell
Indian Nations University, Alabama A&amp;M, and the Shoshone-Bannock Summer
Youth Program. Our overarching objective is to create research infrastructure
and training capable of integrating big data sources needed to address water
quality at the critical nexus between intermittent and perennial
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our scientific understanding of streams derives
from perennially flowing systems; yet, over half of the world’s streams and
rivers only flow intermittently -- a fraction that is projected to increase with
climate change. These less-studied intermittent channels form the nexus between
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and are a potentially important control point
for influencing downstream water quality. Furthermore, how hydrology,
biogeochemical processes and microbial communities (microbiomes hereafter)
interact to affect water quality is likely distinct in intermittent streams
compared to perennial streams. The Aquatic Intermittency effects on Microbiomes
in Streams (AIMS) project will fill this knowledge gap in order to predict how
intermittent streams influence downstream water quality, which requires
quantifying how microbiomes and hydrology interact to control biogeochemical
cycling and water quality. AIMS will integrate datasets on hydrology,
microbiomes, and biogeochemistry in three regions to test the overarching
hypothesis that physical drivers (e.g., climate, hydrology) interact with
biological drivers (e.g., microbes, biogeochemistry) to control water quality in
intermittent streams. Our solution to build scientific capacity and workforce
development is to: 1) create a network of instrumented sites to quantify and
predict how intermittency controls downstream water quality, 2) educate and
train scientists from diverse backgrounds in collaborative science and
interdisciplinary methods to study intermittent streams, and 3) provide
workforce training in environmental “big data” tools including microbiome
sequencing, environmental sensors for hydrology and water quality, and
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) through a new program On Ramps to Data
Science. The project will support 18 faculty members (50% early-career
researchers; ECR) in five EPSCoR jurisdictions (AL, ID, KS, MS, OK), and will
hire and train one project manager, two postdoctoral researchers, and 11
graduate students in a collaborative environment. ECRs will benefit from
support, mentoring and networking programs, while mid- and late-career faculty
will gain new skills focused on Data Science, new skills and new collaborators.
The AIMS Undergraduate Program (AIMS UP) will recruit two students per summer
from regional partners, such as Haskell Indian Nations University, Alabama
A&amp;M, and the Shoshone-Bannock Summer Youth Program. The overarching
objective is to create research infrastructure and training capable of
integrating data streams needed to address water quality and its links to
microbiomes at the critical nexus between intermittent and perennial stream
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.