* 2019046
* MRI: Acquisition of a solid/liquid-state 700 MHz NMR instrument for the Southeast
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Cynthia Peterson, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,361,751.00

An award is made to Louisiana State University (LSU) to support the acquisition
of a 700 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer with both solid- and
liquid-state capabilities. The instrument provides Louisiana with high-field NMR
capability to enable a variety of biomolecular projects, improve the quality of
research and student training, and establish a regional high-field NMR facility
in the Southeast. The inter-organizational instrument will immediately serve 23
research programs from 5 LSU campuses and 7 regional institutions, bringing
together 189 postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers. This user
base includes 85 female researchers, 21 African American students, and 11 users
from other minorities. A comprehensive program (including user-training and
open-house events, NMR courses, undergraduate research and outreach programs,
and seminars and conferences) will recruit new users and facilitate training in
NMR spectroscopy, chemical and structural biology, microbiology, plant biology,
and biomaterial research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument affords a
significant improvement of infrastructure by a 1.4â€“1.8-fold enhancement of
magnetic field strengths over the existing facility. The tremendous increase in
resolution and sensitivity has immense potential to advance knowledge across
diverse research fields. The projects enabled by the acquisition include studies
of (i) protein-membrane interactions, (ii) protein-protein and protein-ligand
complexes that will reveal the biochemical processes associated with a range of
physiologic processes, (iii) carbohydrate structures in wild-type and transgenic
plants and fungi, and (iv) biomimetic materials. The instrument will encourage
and enable users with varying levels of NMR expertise to embrace NMR as a
valuable component in their research projects. The data collected on the
instrument will be used in course offerings and disseminated in peer-reviewed
journals and at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.