* 2019035
* CC* Compute: Acquisition of a Lehigh University HPC cluster to enhance collaboration, research productivity and educational impact
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Edmund Webb III, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 399,607.00

This project is constructing and deploying high performance computational
capability at Lehigh University that will enable new research collaborations
across Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Computer Science, Engineering. The work
directly supports NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science by also
providing critical infrastructure for broader incorporation of computation in
science and engineering research pursuits. Further, a portion of the new
resources is dedicated to education around computation, including support of
efforts to increase the number of members of underrepresented populations in
STEM-related professions. Finally, a portion of the resources is dedicated to
contributing to the national open science grid (OSG). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new resource combines CPU and GPU nodes to further broaden the applications and
associated research that are supported including electronic structure
calculations, atomistic and coarse-grained molecular simulations, Monte Carlo
simulations, data science, and deep learning models. It also allows researchers
who have traditionally utilized CPU-based architectures to explore GPU-based
computation. Some of the specific scientific drivers around which new
collaborations will be built include (i) understanding fundamental mechanisms of
heterogeneous catalytic processes, (ii) realizing predictive design of bulk
heterojunction organic solar cells, (iii) predicting thermo-mechanical
properties of advanced materials, and (iv) elucidating mechanisms behind flow
responsive proteins in human blood. Work under this support expands the Lehigh
community’s research connections and advances Lehigh’s ability to generate high
impact research, educate the next generation of scientists and engineers, and
expand the usage of high performance computation and simulation-guided science
in research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.