* 2019471
* Collaborative Research: Transcriptional Adaptation and Response to Pressure
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Catherine Royer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 877,261.00

The Earth’s deep oceans are home to an enormous amount and diversity of living
creatures, including ~90% of the microbes, which can experience pressures as
high as 1000 times that on the surface. The protein machines responsible for
critical life processes, such as transcription of the genetic code, must be
adapted to function under such extreme and inhospitable conditions. The
mechanisms of this adaptation remain a mystery. This project is aimed at
understanding molecular mechanisms underlying the response and adaptation to
high pressure of the transcription machinery of surface- and pressure-adapted
microorganisms. Better knowledge of these mechanisms will provide insights into
the evolution and even the origins of life on Earth, and enable new
biotechnological advances in the food science industry, e.g., to improve the
safety of pressure pasteurization. Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
involved in the project will be trained in multidisciplinary research skills,
and have the opportunity to mentor undergraduates and high school students. All
trainees will participate in a Research Coordination Network on Extreme Biology
and Biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the mesophile, Escherichia coli, and in
the moderate piezophile, Photobacterium profundum SS9, the molecular basis of
transcriptional response and adaptation to pressure involves the heat shock
response system. High pressure induces a heat shock response in E. coli, and
conversely, low pressure induces a heat shock response P. profundum SS9. The
research will investigate pressure effects on promoter interactions of the
transcriptional regulators of housekeeping and stress response RNA polymerase
sigma factors, as well as the stability of the sigma factor proteins themselves.
These responses will be characterized in P. profundum SS9 and a pressure-adapted
strain of E. coli for comparative analysis. The ToxR/ToxS transcriptional
regulator system, which is implicated in pressure regulation of the
transcriptional program in P. profundum SS9, will also be examined. The research
will involve direct observation and quantification of transcriptional protein
properties and processes, using newly developed fluorescence microscopy
techniques under pressure, and will employ stochastic modeling for deeper
insights into the pressure sensitivity of specific biochemical steps in these
processes. The project outcomes are expected to provide insights into
evolutionary adaptation to high pressure environments on Earth and may help to
mitigate problems caused by pressure resistant microorganisms in the food
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics programs of the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate, and the Biological
Oceanography program of the Ocean Sciences Division in the Geosciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.