* 2019754
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Advancing Resilience in Low Income Housing Using Climate-Change Science and Big Data Analytics
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Kristin Sznajder, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries to address the
growing need for assessment and reduction of disaster risk, collaborative co-
design of resilience strategies with a breadth of stakeholders, and
scientifically and technologically enhanced responses to disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to enhance the resilience of low-income
communities living in disaster prone areas. The focus is on low-lying coastal
zones that have high risks of droughts and floods in selected parts of Brazil,
East Africa and North America. It develops the geographic and socio-economic
knowledge of persons living in economically depressed and riverbed areas by
gathering georeferenced data on infrastructures and natural heritage of
potential sites. The project team will use machine learning and big data
analytical approaches to identify optimal disaster resilient-housing urban
design and planning packages considering projected climate change related
extreme weather scenarios until 2050. The project will investigate potential
barriers to technology adoption through designing and prototyping an affordable,
disaster-resilient, low-income housing system that use sustainable locally
resourced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.