* 2019254
* Standardized Testing of Adult NIRS Oximetry Sensors using a Modular Phantom and Closed-loop Controlled Saturation System
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Yu Chen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2021
* USD 138,146.00

Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIR) systems for NIRS-based cerebral oximeters
(devices to measure brain oxygen level) represent a powerful and increasingly
common approach for clinical detection of desaturation events (significant drops
in oxygen level) with the potential to adversely impact tissue viability.
Improved methods for standardized testing of adult cerebral oximeters will
complement clinical testing currently required for regulatory clearance. Optimal
test methods could be incorporated into current standards for cerebral oximeters
and developed into a medical device development tool. The availability of a
novel tool for effective, least-burdensome evaluation of adult cerebral oximeter
device performance has the potential to lead to improvements in clinical
performance that will impact patients undergoing surgical procedures where
cerebral impairment is a significant risk. Furthermore, the proposed research
will be seamlessly integrated with educational, mentoring, and outreach
activities to advance the cross-disciplinary program in the field of
Biophotonics Imaging and Regulatory Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
aims to develop and validate a series of novel phantom-based test methods for
adult NIRS oximetry. The components of this work will include: 1) Developing
3D-printed neurovascular module (NVM) incorporating a closed loop blood
circulation system that enables controlled modulation of blood oxygenation, and
silicone-based layers that replicate the geometry and optical properties of
superficial layers in the adult head; 2) Investigating the effect of key
confounding factors, including the thickness of extracerebral layers (e.g.,
scalp/skull, subarachnoid space), epidermal pigmentation level, and total blood
concentration, on saturation measurement accuracy in two clinical cerebral
oximeters; 3) Performing Monte Carlo simulations to elucidate light-tissue
interactions during adult cerebral oximetry, including the effect of confounding
factors.&lt;br/&gt;----&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.