* 2019120
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 3.0 Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging Scanner
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rajesh Kana, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,605,115.00

This award permits the University of Alabama to acquire a 3.0 Tesla Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) system. Establishing an MRI research facility at UA will
be a significant new direction in human neuroscience research at UA as well as
allow for collaboration with other institutions on large multi-site projects. A
neuroimaging facility at UA will provide a much-needed boost to the neuroscience
initiatives (e.g., graduate research in neuroscience, undergraduate neuroscience
minor, undergraduate and graduate programs in educational neuroscience) at UA.
The 3.0T MRI system will have a lasting impact on the field beyond the specific
projects that will be initially supported and advanced. Most importantly,
sharing a critical research tool like the MRI scanner creates a platform to
accelerate conceptual and methodological development across neuroimaging
laboratories, capitalizing on the exceptional pool of talent available at UA and
other universities in the region. Building a neuroimaging research environment
will be a catalyst for training undergraduate and graduate students interested
in neuroscience research, including women and underrepresented minority
students. This will also provide opportunities for training students from
historically black colleges nearby, such as Stillman College and other such
universities in the state of Alabama. Establishing a neuroimaging environment at
UA will, in addition to facilitating neuroscience research, provide
opportunities for the surrounding rural communities to participate in research
as well as students from rural areas in Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed MRI system will stimulate interdisciplinary collaborative research
projects at the basic and translational levels at UA. The following research
projects at UA will utilize the MRI system: 1) Multiscale neural processing and
the neurobiology of language processing and reading comprehension in healthy
individuals and in disorders; 2) Developing brain algorithms to improve natural
language processing; 3) Neurobiological bases of mathematical cognition, with
specific emphasis on embodiment of number and arithmetic; 4) Examining the
cognitive and neural changes associated with healthy aging, memory and
attention; 5) Investigating lifetime stress, brain aging, and the racial
differences underlying brain aging; 6) Biomedical imaging analysis and
development of shape-controlled magnetic nanoparticles for MRI; and 7)
Developmental neurobiology of social brain in healthy individuals and in
disorders. The MRI system will enhance the collaboration across different
schools, colleges and departments at UA, including Psychology, Education,
Communicative Disorders, Biological Sciences, and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Major
Research Instrumentation Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.