* 2019198
* MRI: Acquisition of Structural Testing System to Simulate Earthquake Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Charles Chadwell, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 340,374.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the addition of two
hydraulic actuators to an existing testing facility at Cal Poly to enable
testing of various structural systems subject to extreme loading from natural
hazards such as earthquakes. Much of the work has a high potential to directly
impact codes and standardsâ€”leading to enhanced public safety. The
instrumentation will enable fundamental research in four departments and will
engage undergraduate and graduate students in research activities. The
instrumentation will also be used for K-12 outreach activities in conjunction
with Architecture Summer Career Workshop, Engineering Possibilities in College,
and Design Village.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will enable
fundamental research to enhance the safety of the built environment by enabling
cyclic in-plane lateral testing of structural systems with superimposed dead
loads. The research activities range from large scale testing of reinforced
concrete shear walls, to temperature-activated self-regulating facades and the
response of masonry structures to severe natural hazards. The research projects
will address fundamental knowledge gaps associated with the extreme loading for
structural systems, such as potential fiber-reinforcing retrofits for pre-1980s
reinforced concrete walls, the interaction of dynamic structural cladding with
the underlying structure, stiffness in rigid wall-flexible diaphragm buildings
and the design of new cross-laminated timber rocking shear wall
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.