* 2019386
* Establishing a common function for ferlin proteins in membrane    fusion    using    novel    genetic    code    expansion   and   single   molecule   techniques.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Colin Johnson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 494,197.00

Membrane trafficking is regarded as a crucial and distinctive characteristic of
eukaryotic cells, with both intracellular transport and secretion events playing
an essential role in homeostasis and signaling. While much of what is known
about membrane trafficking comes from studies in yeast, there are important
proteins involved in membrane trafficking in multicellular organisms not seen in
yeast. One family of these proteins are the ferlins, an evolutionarily ancient
family of trafficking proteins linked to an increasingly diverse list of
physiological activities, including fertility, the encoding of sound, muscle
development, and repair of damaged cell membranes. This diversity of
physiological roles has made establishing a common underlying molecular function
for this family challenging. This project will address this gap in our knowledge
of the Ferlin family proteins, and in so doing add to our understanding of
fertility, hearing, and muscle development. The proposed work will also develop
undergraduate laboratory research training opportunities and lab classes focused
on membrane biology and provide graduate students with state-of-the-art training
in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests the idea
that ferlins share a common function as calcium sensitive scaffolds for
regulated exocytosis and endocytosis. Challenges due to the large size of the
proteins, their transmembrane domains, and the high number of endogenous
cysteines typical of ferlins have precluded many of the traditional recombinant
protein assays typically used to test this hypothetical function. To overcome
these challenges a novel single molecule protein-protein interaction assay that
allows for probing the contacts of large multivalent membrane proteins has been
developed. In addition, genetic code expansion techniques will be exploited to
incorporate environmentally sensitive fluorescent unnatural amino acids into the
ferlins. These technologies will be exploited to determine the functions that
underlie ferlin activity. The proposed studies will define a set of underlying
molecular-level functions that unite the ferlins, despite their disparate
physiological roles. This information will allow integrating ferlins into the
larger picture of membrane trafficking and cell signaling. The development of a
novel single molecule fluorescence technique will provide a method for the study
of large multi-domain membrane proteins and thus have applications beyond the
study of ferlins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.