* 2019228
* MRI: Acquisition of a multi-modal laser scanning confocal microscope to integrate research and teaching across spatial, evolutionary and ecological scales at WWU
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lynn Pillitteri, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 681,290.00

An award is made to Western Washington University (WWU) to purchase a microscope
for high resolution quantitative analysis of biological specimens. The
acquisition will facilitate interdisciplinary curriculum development, summer
research programs for undergraduates, and STEM pipeline building between WWU and
K-12 students in the Skagit Valley. Curricular developments will be focused on
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) that will enable ~64
undergraduate students annually to conduct quantitative fluorescence microscopy
research on biological specimens through the Biology, Chemistry, Behavioral
Neuroscience departments and the Shannon Point Marine Science Center (SPMC).
Datasets generated through CUREs will be developed into teaching tools for
lecture courses, which will expose an additional ~400 students annually to
quantitative microscopy data. Summer research programs will focus on training a
diverse cohort of ~16 students annually to employ time-resolved fluorescence
microscopy on specimens ranging in scale from individual proteins to multi-
cellular organisms. The acquisition will expose traditionally underserved K-12
students to cutting edge quantitative microscopy through the Compass2Campus
program. Collectively, this instrument will become a central resource for
quantitative STEM training for the entire Skagit
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific premise for this acquisition is
focused on advancing 11 research programs from three academic departments
(Biology, Chemistry, and Behavioral Neuroscience) and one national marine
science center (SPMC). These research programs work on diverse biological
problems that include: organelle assembly, plant development, cell signaling,
marine larval development, neural synapse formation, endosymbiosis, protein
biophysics, protein trafficking, DNA damage, gene expression, neural
development, and aging. These research emphases span size scales that range from
single molecules to multi-cellular organisms. These research emphases
incorporate evolutionarily distant organisms that include protists, fungus,
plants, insects and animals. The results of the scientific projects facilitated
by this acquisition will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and at
scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.