* 2019275
* EWSHM 2020 Student Travel Grant. To Be Held in Palermo, Italy, July 6-9, 2020
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Piervincenzo Rizzo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

NSF actively promotes the inclusion of students in technical conferences and in
the advancement of scientific research. To this affect the PI requests that the
CCSS program, within the ECCS Division of the Engineering Directorate at the
NSF, sponsor travel of 10 graduate or undergraduate students from U.S.
Institutions for attending the 10th European Workshop on Structural Health
Monitoring (EWSHM 2020), to be held in Palermo (Italy) from July 6-9, 2020. The
NSF support is expected to significantly promote student participation in the
Meetings and to provide a unique opportunity for them to learn about emerging
fields in structural health monitoring (SHM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
EWSHM 2020 Conference is to provide an open and interdisciplinary forum for
researchers from a wide range of areas to discuss the latest advancements and
breakthroughs in the field of SHM. The conference covers many interesting topics
including, (1) Physical principles monitoring: mechanical, acoustic, electrical,
thermal; (2) Signal processing, pattern recognition, modal analysis; (3) Sensors
and sensor networks: nano/micro sensors, MEMS, wireless; (4) Remote sensing; (5)
SHM in action: aerospace, marine, civil engineering, railway, energy generation;
(6) Smart cities and SHM for the IoT; and (7) Autonomous systems, automotive;
and (8) Biomedical applications and human performance monitoring. The topics
represent the forefronts of Structural Health Monitoring research and
applications. The NSF support is expected to significantly promote student
participation in the meeting and to provide an opportunity for them to learn
about emerging fields in SHM. The awardees will be part of a forum that fosters
innovation and entrepreneurship through the work of people from academia and
industry. Therefore, the Workshop will serve as a valuable event for U.S.
students to connect with international experts in SHM in order to gain new
knowledge for their future career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.