* 2019965
* Collaborative Research: Experiment of Sea Breeze Convection, Aerosols, Precipitation and Environment (ESCAPE)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Gregory Roberts, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 517,355.00

This award provides funding for an observational field experiment in the
Houston, Texas area to study clouds and precipitation, and their dependence on
environmental factors including small particulates known as aerosols. The
Houston region represents a unique region of study, where isolated clouds and
thunderstorms are common, there is a sea breeze due to the nearby Gulf of
Mexico, and there are specific sources of aerosol due to urban and industrial
emissions. The research team will deploy research aircraft, ground based radars,
and a variety of other sensors to characterize the environment in and around
growing clouds. The data will be analyzed and incorporated into numerical models
to answer questions about the role of temperature, moisture, winds, and aerosols
in the formation and development of clouds and precipitation. This research will
help to improve high-resolution simulations of extreme or high-impact events in
highly populated coastal regions. The research will also have wide relevance to
climate models, where aerosol/cloud interactions are difficult to simulate.
Early career researchers and students will gain experience in conducting
observational research. Outreach activities will also provide opportunities for
enhanced public awareness of thunderstorm and flooding hazards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Experiment of Sea Breeze Convection, Aerosols,
Precipitation and Environment (ESCAPE) is planned for June and July 2021 in the
Houston metropolitan area. ESCAPE will provide measurements that will be used
symbiotically with high-resolution models to improve simulations of the
lifecycle of isolated convective cells, including the effects of interactive
aerosol, microphysical, and kinematic processes on observable cloud,
precipitation, and electrification signatures. The research team plans to
methodically advance observation-based understanding of fundamental convective
cloud processes and aerosol impacts on these processes by deploying a host of
instruments in a targeted geographic region. The main airborne platform would be
the NSF/National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) C-130 research aircraft
with a wide range of cloud microphysical measurements. On the ground, the PIs
would coordinate multiple radars, radiosondes, swarmsondes, and the Houston
Lightning Mapping Array. The campaign will coordinate with the Department of
Energy deployment of the Atmospheric Radiation Measurement mobile facility and
make use of existing measurements of air quality in the Houston area. The
observational data would be combined with modeling using WRF and RAMS to address
the following science objectives: 1) Investigate the control of meteorology,
dynamics, and mixing on aerosol indirect effects on the early growth stage of
convective clouds, 2) Characterize the environment and physical processes
leading to coastal convective initiation, 3) Determine how mature convective
updraft microphysical and kinematic properties relate to those earlier in the
cloud lifecycle, its initiation mechanism, and heterogeneities of its parent
environment, 4) Quantify environmental thermodynamic and kinematic controls on
convective lifecycle properties under different aerosol conditions, 5) Quantify
how: a) cold pool properties and lifetimes vary as a function of precipitation
amounts and precipitation size distributions, and how are these relationships
modulated by the relative humidity, b) what is the impact of aerosol number
concentration on cold pool depth and intensity, and c) how do different land-
surface types determine the dissipation of cold pools, 6) Characterize how the
lightning flash size and energy depends on the modification of the supercooled
liquid water content, scale and volume of the mixed-phase updraft, and
hydrometeor populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.