* 2019652
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: From Nunavik to Iceland: Climate, Human and Culture through time across the coastal (sub)Arctic North Atlantic (NICH-Arctic)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jason Briner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,997.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
focus on Resilience in a Rapidly Changing Arctic. Integrated teams of scientists
and stakeholders will address key areas of arctic resilience understanding and
action. This collaboration of academic and non-academic knowledge systems
constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that will advance not only
understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but also spur action,
inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for resilience. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to explore and assess environmental and
human resilience and vulnerability in sub-Arctic to Arctic coastal regions over
time. The project will focus on areas where climate conditions and sea ice have
shown large variations and where these variations play a vital role in
accessibility through navigation and livelihood of the cultural communities. The
succession of different cultures within the sub-Arctic and Arctic regions
illustrates a wide range of adaptative strategies to harsh weather conditions,
climatic variations, ocean and sea-ice instabilities and ecological stresses
since early migrations via Alaska about 4500 years ago and the Nordic Seas in
the 9th to 10th centuries. To better understand the impact of change on these
populations over time, the project will combine geological, historical and
instrumental records with narrative information from cultural practices and the
representations of Nordic environments through the literature to understand the
natural variability of sea ice, climate and vegetation; adaptation of local
human populations to their habitat; and cultural representation and perceptions
of the natural environments by local and outside-of-the-region
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.