* 2019480
* Developing paleomagnetic chronologies of, and paleogeomagnetic understanding from, IODP sites U1486 and U1489 in the western Pacific warm pool.
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Robert Hatfield, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 85,407.00

Observations of Earth's magnetic field over timescales from thousands to
millions of years are important for understanding how the geodynamo operates and
shields the Earth from harmful incoming solar radiation. As ocean sediments
accumulate on the seafloor they record the ambient magnetic field and thereby
provide an important record of past geomagnetic behavior. Many of the existing
high quality records that span the last 2-3 million years are from North
Atlantic Ocean sediments, which represents a narrow, and maybe even unique,
magneto-geographical range. To properly represent the global field and its
variability requires records from other regions of the globe for the same time
period. Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expedition 363 to the West
Pacific Warm Pool drilled nine equatorial sites in the Indian and Pacific Oceans
and recovered a total of 7km of ocean sediment core. Preliminary measurements
suggest two of these sites, U1486 and U1489, contain high quality magnetic
records that can be used to investigate and understand the behavior of Earth's
magnetic field over the last 1.25 (U1486) and 5 (U1489) million years. This
project seeks to measure the magnetism of these sediments to develop and refine
high resolution records of Earth's recent magnetic field behavior and compare
them to North Atlantic records. The project will also develop the longest
continuous relative paleomagnetic intensity time-series to date back to the
earliest Pliocene (~5 million years ago). In addition, these paleomagnetic
records will provide a chronological framework for related detailed isotope and
climate studies for the region. In terms of broader impacts and outreach, this
project will directly support the training and development of a post-doc as the
principal investigator and will expose undergraduate students from Oregon State
University to basic research methods and concepts. There will be special
attention placed on undergraduates being involved in original research, the
development of project "ownership" for undergraduate students, and in recruiting
a diverse team of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleomagnetic records
derived from relatively high sedimentation rate marine cores in the North
Atlantic strongly inform and define our current understanding of paleomagnetic
secular variation and relative paleointensity (RPI). Replication of records from
within this basin argue for RPI variations that have a global expression and
reflect stochastic variations in the intensity of the dipolar field. This
assumption is likely true, however, it has never explicitly been tested, in part
due to a lack of records from different regions of the globe that have a similar
resolving ability (i.e. sedimentation rate) to those in the North Atlantic. We
will take u-channel samples from the archives halves of U1486 and U1489 and
measure the magnetic susceptibility and demagnetization behaviors of the natural
remanent magnetization (NRM), anhysteretic remanent magnetization (ARM) and
isothermal remanent magnetization (IRM) at centimeter scale. We will use these
data to generate characteristic remanent directions and generate estimates of
RPI over long Pleistocene and Pliocene timeframes. The 1.25 Myr equatorial
Pacific marine sediment record from Site U1486 can be queried for evidence of
non-axial-dipole structure and regional heterogeneities at a resolution several
times higher than existing records and stacks and is more similar to high
quality North Atlantic records. Site U1489 contains a 5 Myr record of
sedimentation that will be developed into the longest continuous RPI record ever
produced. Preliminary data suggest it is of remarkable fidelity and, when paired
with the d18O benthic foraminifer stratigraphy being developed concurrently for
this site, can potentially become the type record for Pliocene geomagnetic field
behavior. Not only will this record be a magnetostratigraphic tuning target for
the Pliocene, it will also inform inquiries into geomagnetic field evolution and
organization over the scale of (sub-)orbital variations to full chrons and
epochs. RPI-assisted chronologies will be developed for the mid-late Pleistocene
records of both U1486 and U1489 (through correlation to existing global stacks)
that can then be tandemly tuned with d18O records to develop robust chronologies
and the establishment of a strong chronostratigraphic framework to directly
facilitate the science objectives of IODP Expedition 363.