* 2019687
* Workshop: From genes to behavior: Functional genetic tools in diverse organisms, Knoxville, Tennessee, July 30 to 3 August, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Zoe Donaldson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 30,643.00

How do the gigabases of DNA that make up an organismâ€™s genome ultimately yield
an animal capable of dynamic, species-appropriate behaviors? The investigation
of how DNA differences shape behavior within and across species remains a
question of central importance to neuroscience, evolution, behavioral ecology,
and psychiatry. Yet, the experimental means to address the genetic basis of
behavior have traditionally been limited to a handful of laboratory-amenable
species, resulting in focus on a handful of behaviors exhibited by these animals
while the behavioral richness exhibited by other species remained intractable.
However, with the advent of novel functional genetic approaches, traditional
technical barriers are dissolving. As this happens, a new challenge emerges: how
to best bring these technologies to the researchers who focus their efforts on
studying natural behavior. This workshop addresses the need to bring together
functional geneticists developing novel methods to manipulate the genome with
biologists interested in diverse behavioral questions. By enabling the
widespread dissemination of newly developed, agile functional genetic tools to
researchers with expertise in neuroethology and behavioral ecology, we will
facilitate the next era of innovation in the study of the genetic basis of
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizing team will coordinate a workshop,
hosted at the 2020 Animal Behavior Society Meeting. This annual meeting engages
diverse researchers pursuing the study of behavior in the lab and the field, and
employing methods ranging from molecular approaches to population observations.
The organizers will highlight key advances in genetic technologies that enable
genome to phenome mapping across the species spectrum. Our goal will be to make
these emerging technologies accessible to biologists studying the genetic roots
of behavior in diverse species. By incorporating researchers funded through the
Enabling Discovery through GEnomic Tools (EDGE) program who work in mammals,
birds, insects, amphibians, and fish, we will provide a broad overview of
approaches for genetic manipulation with special emphasis on how these tools can
be employed to investigate the genetic roots of behavior and the challenges of
implementing them in diverse species. The goal of the talks and subsequent
break-out groups will be to provide the knowledge and tools to envision new uses
of functional genetic tools, either directly or through collaboration. While not
every species or question will be amenable to functional genetic approaches, the
workshop will serve a wide range of attendees interested in becoming familiar
with these technologies, gaining the ability to critically evaluate the emerging
literature, and potentially instituting novel experimental approaches as part of
their research program. Further, the organizing team anticipates that the
discussion generated among the attendees and presenters will help guide future
technology innovations and spark novel experimental ideas. Finally, the broader
impacts will focus on incorporating attendees from diverse background and
discussing strategies for incorporating functional genetic technologies in a
classroom setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.