* 2019625
* STC: Center for Learning the Earth with Artificial Intelligence and Physics (LEAP)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Tian Zheng, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2026
* USD 10,000,000.00

Projections of future climate change from Earth system models (ESMs) play a
critical role in addressing the threats posed by climate change, especially
given the need to plan for conditions that have no historical precedent. But ESM
projections have large uncertainties which limit their usefulness for decision
support, and the most worrisome forms of climate change are often the ones with
the greatest uncertainties. Such uncertainty is not unexpected considering the
many processes, from cloud formation to carbon cycling to ocean turbulence, that
affect the climatic response to anthropogenic forcing. These processes must be
represented in ESMs but there is no easy way to simulate them. Some, like ocean
turbulence, are hard simply because they involve spatial scales too small to be
simulated at the resolutions accessible to global models. Others, like the
exchange of water and carbon dioxide through a forest canopy, are crudely
simulated due to incomplete scientific
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes which cannot be explicitly
represented in ESMs are instead incorporated through “parameterizations”, which
roughly express their effects on the resolved model state. Such
parameterizations are based on first-principles theory but they also involve
crude approximations and must be “tuned” by assigning numerical values to
parameters which control their behavior. The parameters typically lack
observational and theoretical constraints, and their values are manually
adjusted to improve the simulation of present-day climate. Even after tuning
models still exhibit substantial bias, and the complexity and computational
expense of ESMs has increased to the point where traditional hands-on tuning is
becoming impractical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial Intelligence (AI),
particularly in the form of Machine Learning (ML), offers a new way forward for
improving parameterizations and reducing uncertainty in climate projections. AI
is a compelling complement to traditional parameterization development, which
begins with theory and physical principles and uses observational data somewhat
sparingly. In contrast, the methods of AI are data driven and thus a perfect
match for the explosive growth in earth system data that has occurred in recent
years. This includes data from satellites, in situ networks, and field
campaigns. For some processes, particularly cloud formation and ocean
turbulence, small-scale process models have become sufficiently realistic that
they can provide surrogate observations to drive AI-based
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Learning the Earth with Artificial
Intelligence and Physics (LEAP) applies the power of AI to the wealth of
available earth system data to overcome the limitations of traditional
parameterization development and tuning, thus creating a new pathway to better
ESMs and better guidance to decision-makers. The AI methods are novel in that
they build physical constraints such as conservation laws into data-driven
algorithms. AI methods are also used to find more discriminating ways to use
observational data to evaluate model performance. LEAP works with the developers
of the Community Earth System Model to ensure that its advances are made
available to the worldwide community of climate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to promote effective climate
adaptation, LEAP fosters equitable training of the next generation of diverse
learners across multiple scales by supporting post docs, graduate students,
high-school students, parents, and teachers. Furthermore, the Center supports
bidirectional knowledge transfer with the public and private sectors to develop
tailored and relevant climate-related information for stakeholders so that they
can better adapt to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.