* 2019083
* MRI: Development of a Sub-diffraction Limited Microscope for Imaging Ultrafast Dynamics from the Visible to Mid-infrared Spectral Range
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Carlos Baiz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,005,604.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation program, and the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging program in the Division of Chemistry, and the Major Research
Instrumentation in the Division of Materials Research. With this award,
Professors Sean Roberts and Carlos Baiz at the University of Texas Austin and
Professor James Batteas at Texas A&amp;M University are developing a sub-
diffraction Time-resolved Super-resolution Microscope (TSM). This instrument
enables measurement of dynamics unfolding over femtosecond-to-millisecond
timescales with spatial resolution approaching 10 nanometers. The super
resolution approach can be used to view fast processes such as electron motion
in semiconductor nanostructures or dynamic restructuring of biological
membranes. The TSM is designed to achieve three demanding needs, sub-diffraction
spatial resolution, femtosecond time resolution and spectral resolution, from
the near-UV to mid-IR. This can critically enable key insights into the inner
workings of biological systems and creation of new materials for energy
conversion and quantum information science. The microscope construction provides
training of student researchers who work with the faculty. After commissioning,
the instrument is to be made available via its integration into the Center for
Dynamics and Control of Materials (CDCM), a Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) based at the University of Texas at Austin. The
project provides graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who use the
instrument in their research the opportunity to develop a background in both
ultrafast science and super-resolution microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TSM
is configured to employ laser pulses tunable from the near-UV to mid-IR to
follow dynamics involving electronic, nuclear, and molecular motions. An
integrated atomic force microscope (AFM) allows in situ mapping of sample
topography and near-field tip enhancement of signals produced in the region
beneath the tip. The research enabled with the microscope will be directed by
the principal investigators at studies of electronic dynamics at junctions
formed between low-dimensional semiconductors and structural fluctuations within
heterogeneous soft matter such as lipid membranes and polymer blends. Other
research directions to be explored with the new TSM instrument include energy
and charge migration in solar energy materials, exciton dynamics in van der
Waals heterostructures, energy and phonon conduction in thermoelectric and mid-
IR photonic materials, ion migration in batteries and smart windows, biomolecule
motion in cell membranes, nonequilibrium dynamics of photoactive polymers, and
nanoscopic control of materials under intense electric
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.