* 2019427
* ADVANCE: Catalyzing Gender Equity at a Research Institution in the Deep South
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Stacia Haynie, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,996.00

Louisiana State University (LSU) will implement an ADVANCE Catalyst project to
conduct an institutional self-assessment to investigate gender inequities in
academic leadership and research and to develop a meaningful equity strategic
plan to address those inequities. The regional characteristics of LSU confound
the experiences of women from diverse backgrounds and provide an important
institutional context for understanding and advancing approaches to address
systemic gender inequities within a research university, located in one of the
most diverse regions of the country. The LSU ADVANCE Catalyst project will focus
on understanding micro-climates within the university, communicating an
inclusive and innovative plan for faculty success through institutional data
analyses and strategic communication, and developing an inclusive five-year
equity action plan. The LSU project will also investigate strategic
communication as an institutional change lever for advancing change in diverse
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU ADVANCE Catalyst project will build on
gendered organizations theories and use the human performance technology (HPT)
model, which provides a systematic and comprehensive approach to improving the
work performance of individuals in an organization by investigating the lived
experiences of workers (i.e. faculty members), the work that they do, and the
environment in which they conduct their work. Drawing on this model, LSU will
examine the inequities in the faculty experience and organizational practices.
Overall, the LSU ADVANCE Catalyst will lay the groundwork for engaging the
campus at multiple levels in an equity strategic plan with a focus on advancing
faculty productivity and innovation. This institutional context also provides a
unique intersectional lens from which to study these problems and develop
interventions that promote the success of all faculty regardless of their
diverse identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at an academic, non-profit institution of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.