* 2019304
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO:Collaborative Research: Phage host range evolution in spatially structured microbiomes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* William Harcombe, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,508.00

Bacteriophages, the viral parasites of bacteria, are major agents of bacterial
death in microbial communities or microbiomes. Previous work has shown that
phage host range, the type of bacteria a given phage can successfully infect,
can evolve rapidly. This evolution alters the impact that phage have on the
composition and function of microbial communities. However, this previous work
has focused on bacteria growing in well-mixed conditions while many bacteria in
microbiomes exist in aggregations known as biofilms. In biofilms not only is the
spatial arrangement of bacteria different, but also their physiology or
lifestyle. In this project, which is a collaboration between researchers at the
University of Minnesota (US), Dartmouth College (US) and the University of
Exeter (UK), research will pair state of the art computer simulations with
cutting edge experimental approaches to develop and test theory for predicting
the impact that bacteriophage have on bacterial communities. This work will
improve our ability to manage microbial communities that are vital for human
health, agricultural production, and industrial applications. The project will
help train the next generation of scientific leaders by working with
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students to carry out the research.
Additionally, it will develop teaching modules to engage high school students
with the power of computational biology, preparing them to drive the bio-economy
of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the abundance of phage and the
prevalence of biofilm growth, little is known about the interaction between
phage and biofilms. Specifically, there has been a paucity of investigation on
how biofilms influence the evolution of phage host range. In addition to
developing knowledge on a process that is critical to understanding microbiome
behavior, the proposed work will also improve understanding of the evolution of
generalist and specialist strategies more broadly. It will connect individual
parasite movement to the dynamics of infection waves in heterogeneous
environments. Additionally, it will quantify how host heterogeneity that arises
from biotic and abiotic factors alters the evolution of parasite host range. The
work will integrate a variety of models that span different length scales, with
a powerful model system involving Escherichia coli and the bacteriophage T7. The
research will develop and test theory to understand the impact of spatial
organization, including the abundance of different hosts in a structured
environment, the size of patches of hosts and the connectivity of these patches.
The research will also develop and test theory to understand the consequences of
bacterial matrix production, metabolic heterogeneity of hosts, and host mixing
in biofilms. This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National
Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.