* 2019049
* RCN-UBE: Youth Environmental Alliance in Higher Education
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Gillian Bowser, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,756.00

Scientific inquiry and environmental policies increasingly depend on
international research networks. Environmental challenges cannot be approached
from one discipline alone, but require creative solutions developed across
boundaries of discipline, country, and sector. This project uses an integrated,
interdisciplinary, and international approach to train undergraduate life
science students to be future leaders at the science-policy interface. The Youth
Alliance in Higher Education Network is a new multi-institutional network
focused on providing students with real-world experience in collaborative,
evidence-based approaches to global sustainability. Participating students will
be part of an on-line virtual classroom network that reaches across the U.S. and
around the world. Students will learn how scientific principles are applied in
national and global decision-making followed by the opportunity to participate
in international environmental negotiations. This project will advance the
health and security of U.S. citizens through educating students to work
effectively on critical scientific issues on the international stage and prepare
them for career paths in research, education, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector, and/or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Network will
build an open network of institutions of higher education to provide authentic,
real-world experience in global environmental governance. The network will build
and test virtual classrooms, build a library of course modules and tools for
teaching students in undergraduate life science majors, and engage entry level
and early career professionals through the Network Fellowship program. The
Network will develop future change agents, with the multicultural and
transdisciplinary perspectives, policy awareness, scientific inquiry, and the
national and international networks necessary to address the global challenges
of our time. The Network activities will result in (1) improved life science
education with multicultural and project-based learning teams, (2) increased the
scientific literacy and public engagement with science and technology for
students in the life sciences, (3) broadened participation among
underrepresented minorities, and (4) improved well-being and retention of these
students through multicultural and interdisciplinary training. To improve STEM
education, the network will facilitate new cross-institution virtual modules
that train students in international scientific diplomacy. Students will
directly increase public scientific literacy by sharing the results of their
cross-institutional team projects in their local communities and at the annual
UN Conference of the Parties climate meeting.&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.