* 2019537
* Collaborative Proposal: RUI: Understanding the context-dependent roles of HOXA5 in cell fate and patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Mansfield, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 862,799.00

In animals, the overall body plan as well as most organs and tissues arise
during embryonic development. The Hox genes are among a core set of
evolutionarily conserved genes that activate and coordinate developmental
processes such that each structure forms correctly, and in proper relation to
the rest of the body. Hox genes are redeployed multiple times and in numerous
tissues, raising the question of how specificity of developmental outcome is
achieved for each gene, and the extent to which their molecular targets are
dependent on cellular context or shared across contexts. This work will test
this question using the Hoxa5 gene in the mouse model, by characterizing and
comparing its molecular targets across selected musculoskeletal and respiratory
tissues. The scientific and educational goals of this work are intertwined. The
research will be conducted in collaboration with undergraduates at Barnard
College, a liberal arts college for women, including students in a laboratory
course, as well as graduate students from Universit√© Laval. Course-based
research has been shown to increase participation of undergraduate students,
including those from underrepresented groups, in STEM and to increase the
pursuit of postgraduate STEM training. This course engages undergraduates in
substantive original research while providing them with training in current
molecular genetics and bioinformatics approaches. &lt;br/&gt; Hoxa5 is an
excellent model for addressing questions of HOX context-dependence due to
several non-redundant phenotypes in different tissue and organ systems, and a
wealth of genetic tools available. We hypothesize that Hoxa5 regulates both
context-dependent and shared effectors across tissues. Here, we will examine a
shared role in interaction with PDGF signaling components, producing distinct
outcomes in different tissues. We will also assess the role of Hoxa5 in the
development of dermomyotome lineages including skeletal muscle and brown adipose
tissue. Finally, we will use unbiased whole-genome approaches to directly
compare Hoxa5 target genes and genetic pathways across tissue types. The work
leverages the established collaboration, shared interests and combined expertise
of the Mansfield and Jeannotte labs in the musculoskeletal and respiratory
systems. Results from the Hoxa5 model will apply generally to understanding Hox
gene functions in vertebrate development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.