* 2019285
* FMitF: Track I: ADVERT: Compositional Atomic Specifications for Distributed System Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,943.00

Distributed systems are difficult to verify due to their inherent complexity
from handling concurrency and network asynchrony. Significant advances have been
made in formally specifying and verifying distributed systems, but existing
approaches focus on reasoning about specific instances of distributed systems
and do little to expose the common high-level behaviors while hiding the
implementation details. As a result, verifying individual distributed systems
today requires redundant reasoning, and the absence of a high-level model makes
it difficult to address the new challenges that modern applications are often
composed of multiple distributed systems. This project's novelties are a
compositional atomic distributed object model that facilitates reasoning and
verification of both individual and composition of distributed systems, and a
formal verification tool, ADVERT, that can be used to build large-scale
certified distributed systems. The project's impacts include new tools to
significantly improve the reliability and security of large-scale software
infrastructures, such as the cloud, and applications that run on top of the
infrastructure, and also new courses on distributed-system design and
verification that will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atomic distributed object model encapsulates
the key safety properties of individual distributed systems. The project
develops multiple network-based specifications that capture the common network-
level behavior of similar classes of distributed systems. A network-based
specification helps individual systems to verify their refinement relation to
the atomic distributed object model, provides reusable proofs that are derived
from common system behaviors, and acts as a verification template that
establishes the safety properties encapsulated in the atomic object model for
free. Once individual distributed systems are verified to be correct and safe
based on the atomic distributed object model, the high-level abstraction of the
model can be used to reason about multiple distributed system interactions. The
project develops a distributed system verification framework, ADVERT, based
around the atomic distributed object model, to verify individual distributed
systems and their interactions. The investigators demonstrate through concrete
examples that proving properties even of composite distributed systems can be
straightforward with the atomic distributed object model due to the elegantly
simple object interface. Finally, the investigators verify real-world cutting-
edge distributed systems written in C. One of the target systems is a
distributed shared memory that uses a programmable switch, a low-latency
network, and multiple sharded distributed components that run consensus
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.