* 2019129
* MRI: Acquisition of FASTER - Fostering Accelerated Sciences Transformation Education and Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Raymundo Arroyave, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,090,000.00

The project funds the acquisition of a composable high-performance data-analysis
and computing instrument, named FASTER (Fostering Accelerated Scientific
Transformations, Education, and Research). FASTER will enable transformative
advances in scientific fields that rely on artificial intelligence and machine
learning (AI/ML) techniques, big data practices, and high-performance computing
(HPC) technologies. The FASTER platform removes significant bottlenecks in
research computing by leveraging a technology that can dynamically allocate
resources to support workflows. It will support researchers from across the
Texas A&amp;M University System and their collaborating institutions. Thirty
percent of FASTER’s computing resources will also be allocated to researchers
nationwide by the National Science Foundation (NSF) XSEDE (Extreme Science and
Engineering Discovery Environment) program. FASTER’s composable interface allows
it to simultaneously support both emerging and traditional workloads in research
computing. Transformative research projects benefiting from FASTER will include
the development of AI/ML models, cybersecurity, health population informatics,
genomics, bioinformatics, computer-aided drug design, agricultural sciences,
life sciences, oil and gas simulations, de novo materials design, climate
modeling, multi-scale simulations, quantum computing architectures, biomedical
imaging, geosciences, and quantum chemistry. In addition to supporting a wide-
range of fields of research, the project contributes to code development,
education, and the workforce development goals of several NSF Big
Ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FASTER adopts the innovative Liqid composable
software-hardware approach combined with cutting-edge technologies such as state
of the art CPUs and GPUs, NVMe (Non-Volatile Memory Express) based storage, and
thigh speed interconnect. Workflows on FASTER will be able to dynamically
integrate disaggregated GPUs and NVMe to compose a single node, allowing them to
scale beyond traditional hardware limits. The composable and configurable
techniques will allow researchers to use resources efficiently, enabling more
science. Best practices gathered from managing the resource will be shared with
the community. FASTER will coordinate a three-pronged effort to effectively
broaden participation in computing by focusing on training, education and
outreach. FASTER will leverage existing efforts that promote STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) and broaden participation in computing
at the K-12, collegiate, and professional levels to have a transformative impact
nationally. FASTER activities are designed to expand the participation of
traditionally underrepresented groups in computing and STEM, particularly at
minority-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.