* 2019869
* Role of TGF-B signaling molecules as regulators of host immune and metabolic response to parasitic nematode infection factors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ioannis Eleftherianos, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 809,656.00

Parasitic nematode infections represent a major threat to human health
worldwide. Currently, there are no vaccines available for parasitic nematode
infections in humans. Development of new drugs and vaccines will require a
better understanding of host factors that participate in the immune response to
parasitic nematode infection molecules. The requirement of a suitable host and
the lack of good animal models have limited investigations into the defense
mechanisms that animals activate to oppose parasitic nematode attacks. This
project will employ a system consisting of two model organisms: an insect,
Drosophila and the insect parasitic nematode Heterorhabditis to provide
mechanistic insight into parasitic infection processes and their effect on host
immunity. We will focus our attention to the activity of a pathogenicity factor
that is produced in Heterorhabditis nematodes during infection to investigate
its interaction with host anti-nematode immune functions. Results from this
research will generate novel information on the role of host components in
orchestrating an effective response against parasitic nematodes. Such findings
are expected to contribute considerably to the development of innovative tactics
to restrict parasitic nematode infections in humans. High school students from
Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology (TJHSST; Alexandria, VA)
will receive hands-on lab training and they will be actively involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Despite important progress in the innate
immunity field, host immune responses to parasitic nematode infection are
currently understudied. Drosophila and the entomopathogenic nematode
Heterorhabditis form an outstanding system to elucidate host innate anti-
nematode immunity. Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-β) signaling
participates in several important biological processes. The hypothesis of this
proposal is that host TGF-β signaling activity regulates tissue-specific immune
and metabolic mechanisms against parasitic nematode infection factors. The goal
of this project is to explore the effect of Heterorhabditis serine peptidase
(SP) on TGF-β signaling regulation and immunometabolic function in Drosophila.
We will analyze the Drosophila tissue-specific transcriptional regulation of
Activin signaling upon injection with Heterorhabditis recombinant serine
peptidase (rSP) and the interrelationship between TGF-β signaling and NF-κB
innate immune signaling. Also, we will examine whether Activin signaling in
Drosophila modulates cellular immunity and whether the latter interacts with
humoral immunity in response to Heterorhabditis rSP. Finally, we will
investigate the interaction between Activin signaling and lipid metabolism in
Drosophila upon challenge with Heterorhabditis rSP. Results from this research
will generate novel information on the role of Activin in the host
immunometabolic response against entomopathogenic nematodes. Such findings may
expose a previously unknown regulator of the host innate anti-nematode immune
system and therefore are expected to contribute to the development of innovative
approaches for controlling harmful insect pests. High school students from
Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Technology (TJHSST; Alexandria, VA)
will be trained in the lab to participate in all aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.