* 2019194
* CC* Compute: Central Computing with Advanced Implementation at San Diego State University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Guadalupe Ayala, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,328.00

This project establishes a computing system that assists researchers at San
Diego State University to accelerate their work through ongoing developments in
computer processing hardware. Faculty and students will develop code, most of it
currently running on traditional processing units, to take advantage of the
enhanced computing power of graphical processing units and field programmable
gate arrays, which effectively allow the circuitry of the computer chip to be
optimized for specific computing tasks. Applications hosted on this system
include simulations of subterranean carbon dioxide sequestration, the
development of new computer programs to identify disease-causing and other
organisms in biologically diverse environments, and studies of nuclear
structure, brain imaging, the motion of viruses, and engine design. One of the
PIs directs the training of new users, and the infrastructure is incorporated
into several courses available to undergraduates and graduate students. External
users can access the resource through the Pacific Research
Platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new, high-performance computing cluster offers
advanced processor hardware to researchers at San Diego State University and
throughout the region. The cluster is optimized to support transfer of existing
software developed in-house to processors that promote distributed computing
and/or electronic design automation. While accelerating projects and modernizing
training in computational methods, this work also informs the University’s long-
range cyberinfrastructure acquisition plans by quantifying the enhancement of
research possible with advanced hardware. 20% of the cluster capacity is
reserved for extramural use through the Pacific Research Platform, and 5% for
training and coursework to advance workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.