* 2019541
* Engaging Doctoral Students in Autonomic and Self-Organizing Computing Systems Research
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Miaoqing Huang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 7,500.00

The new IEEE IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self-
Organizing Systems (ACSOS) Conference, a merger of The IEEE International
Conference on Autonomic Computing (ICAC) and the IEEE International Conference
on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems (SASO), is a premier conference in
the fields of autonomic computing, self-adaptation and self-organization. The
conference, to be held online in August 2020, brings together researchers and
industry practitioners to develop self-adapting, self-organizing, and automatic
systems for addressing a number of challenges in the field, for example
developing novel modeling techniques for interactions between local and global
behaviors. The project will support a diverse array of students to participate
in the doctoral symposium at the conference, to engage deeply with the ACSOS
research community. The students will also have the opportunity to participate
in all other conference activities, which are being modified to an online
format. The project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to
promote the progress of science as it provides a forum to disseminate research
efforts, connect researchers, and train the next generation of
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will focus on various
underrepresented groups in science and engineering. For the doctoral symposium,
students will attend oral and poster presentations of research projects, and
participate in a professional training and career development session to receive
advice from experts in the field. That session will include tips on conducting
research efficiently and ethically, writing and presenting research papers,
seeking jobs in leading industry and academia after graduation, and realizing
long-term professional and academic objectives. The funding provided by NSF will
have a significant impact on the careers of the future generation of researchers
in autonomic computing, while encouraging diversity in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.