* 2019856
* Evaluating links between primordial mantle domains and deep mantle structures using 182W and 3He/4He
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 337,814.00

Many mantle plume-derived ocean island basalts entrain multiple mantle
components, representing recycled, ambient, and primordial isotopic domains. The
mixtures of these components, sampled by intraplate volcanoes, define isotopic
mixing arrays unique to each plume. One of these components, FOZO (“Focal
Zone”), is unusual in that it is common to many mantle plumes. The FOZO
component is characterized by a specific and relatively narrow compositional
range in lead, neodymium, strontium, and helium isotopes, where isotopic
compositions of most plumes overlap. Notably, FOZO-type reservoirs retain
primordial helium isotopic compositions that have not been as significantly
modified by subsequent processes compared to other parts of the mantle. While
the strontium-lead-neodymium compositional definition of FOZO has undergone
several revisions since it was first identified, primordial helium isotopes have
remained an important defining characteristic of this reservoir type. Primordial
helium ratios have recently been linked to seismically-detectable structures in
the deep mantle as well as parameters in plume systems such as material buoyancy
and temperature, suggesting that reservoirs with elevated primordial helium are
seismically, thermally, and chemically distinct from “typical” lower mantle
material. The findings from this study will improve our understanding of the
geochemical evolution of the early Earth. In collaboration with geophysicists
and geodynamicists, this study will provide constraints on the size, shape, and
development of primordial mantle domains that frequently contribute to deeply-
sourced volcanism. In addition, this project will provide two years of support
for the PI and broaden her expertise in isotope geochemistry to include short-
lived isotope systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, variations in tungsten
isotopes, driven by the decay of an extinct isotope of hafnium, were discovered
in plume-derived volcanism. In plumes, anomalous tungsten is found in samples
with primordial helium, implying that a second primordial isotopic constraint
may exist for FOZO-type melts. Tentatively, FOZO-type material carrying
anomalous tungsten and helium have been linked to ultra-low velocity zones
detected near the core-mantle boundary. Other compositions thought to sample
ambient mantle domains found in plumes lack distinct helium and tungsten
anomalies, but additional data are needed to fully test the links between
seismic structures and isotopic composition. To test this scenario, plumes that
lack evidence of any recycled crustal material, a possible contaminant, will be
analyzed for helium and tungsten isotopes. The Louisville, Juan Fernandez,
Bowie, Cobb, and Caroline plumes have been selected for their lack of recycled
componentry and variable helium isotopic compositions. The new data will then be
linked to spatial correlations (or lack thereof) with seismically-resolved lower
mantle structures to determine the relationship of FOZO-type melts, ambient
lower mantle compositions, and the structure of the deep
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.