* 2019379
* Constraining earthquake stress drop and mantle attenuation from teleseismic body-wave spectra
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yihe Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 258,832.00

Most earthquakes occur within plate-tectonic convergence zones. Earthquakes
which occur at depths larger than ~50 km (30 miles) result from rupture events
in oceanic plates that are sinking into the Earth’s mantle. These deep
earthquakes have similar characteristics than shallow earthquakes, yet they are
different. Observations suggest that deep earthquakes involve frictional sliding
along planar faults, as the shallow ones. Yet it is still unclear how faults can
break at the extreme pressure prevailing in the seismogenic mantle, reaching up
to 250,000 times the atmospheric pressure. The mechanisms responsible for deep
earthquakes have thus been debated for decades. Here, the researchers
investigate these mechanisms using new analyses of seismic waves. Seismic waves
travel away from the earthquakes that generated them, through the Earth’s mantle
and crust. When they reach the surface, they can be used to investigate events
in the deep Earth. Here, the team analyze the wave spectra, analogous to how
astronomers analyze the electromagnetic spectra of stars. It tests the
hypothesis that deep earthquakes rupture small fault planes with high rupture
speeds. The researchers document the differences in shear-stress states of
faults in the crust (at shallow depths) and in the mantle (at large depths).
This project leverages national investments in seismological infrastructure,
such as the IRIS Global Seismic Network (GSN) and the Earthscope USArray. It
provides support for an early career female scientist and a female graduate
student. It also provides training in seismology, geophysics, scientific
computing, and big-data analytics for several undergraduate students at
University of Michigan - Ann Arbor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the analysis of
the earthquake rupture process and seismic wave propagation are tightly linked,
as both the earthquake source complexity and the heterogeneous properties of
rock along the wave paths shape seismic wave spectra. The team follows a new
two-step spectral-ratio approach aimed at optimally separating the source and
propagation effects in teleseismic P-wave and S-wave spectra. Using the four-
decade long IRIS database, the researchers select pairs of nearby earthquakes to
determine rupture durations and stress drops of several hundred large
earthquakes in the crust and mantle. From pairs of GSN and USArray ground-motion
recordings, they estimate how seismic wave attenuation and scattering affect
wave spectra. By processing the spectra consistently in both steps, they can
compare the source characteristics and chart with robust statistics how stress
drop varies with earthquake depth, magnitude, and tectonic plate boundary.
Furthermore, they quantify wave propagation along several well-travelled paths
to add new constraints on variations of wave scattering and attenuation in the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.