* 2019712
* Seeing the Wind: Leveraging flow-structure interactions for visual anemometry
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* John Dabiri, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 320,000.00

Accurate measurements of wind speeds are crucial for many engineering
applications, including wind energy, weather forecasting, drone navigation, and
mitigation of dangers such as air pollution, wildfires, and airborne pathogens.
Most wind-measuring devices used today are fixed in space and have high
deployment costs. However, the built environment is already naturally
instrumented with a variety of structures that move in response to the wind,
from swaying trees to flapping flags. The principal aim of this project is to
develop a physics-based understanding of those flow-structure interactions and
to combine that knowledge with machine learning techniques to achieve
unprecedented wind measurement capabilities. The project will incorporate
laboratory measurements of vegetation exposed to controlled wind conditions in a
large wind tunnel, and also field measurements in naturally occurring winds.
K-12 engagement will be facilitated by emphasizing the timely applications of
this research, especially firefighting and pollution monitoring, both of which
are pressing challenges in southern California where the students live.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An initial proof-of-concept has demonstrated the
feasibility of using visual measurements of flow-structure interactions of
vegetation to resolve wind speeds using a neural network. The goal of this
project is to enable generalization beyond the initial training data set by
incorporating a physics-based understanding of flow-structure interactions into
the network architecture. The first objective is to determine which physical
properties of the flow-structure interaction can be extracted by the model and
are necessary for accurate wind speed predictions. Then, a broader training set
and physics-based constraints will enable wind speed inference from classes of
vegetation not used to train the model. A formal post hoc analysis of the neural
network will further elucidate the salient flow physics. This project can
improve the physical understanding of flow-structure interactions through
development and subsequent analysis of the physics-based, machine learning
approach to visual anemometry. The physical insights that will be gained from
the data-driven approach will be considered along with a purely physics-based,
first-principles approach to generalize the model and better understand its
limitations. Moreover, because physics-informed machine learning is of broad
interest in basic research, the approach to visual anemometry in this project
can provide a template for similar efforts toward other research questions. A
main outcome of this project, in addition to new knowledge regarding fluid
dynamics and development of physics-informed machine learning, will be creation
of a robust, quantitative visual anemometry technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.