* 2019511
* RII Track-2 FEC: Precise Regional Forecasting via Intelligent and Rapid Harnessing of National Scale Hydrometeorological Big Data
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nian-Feng Tzeng, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,770,322.00

Global warming has emerged as a stark problem of national importance, as it
results in more frequent extreme weather and climate events that cause rising
economic loss and adverse societal impacts on numerous sectors, such as
agriculture, transportation, water resource management, urban planning, among
others. For better observations and numerical models on weather and climate
parameters to improve forecasting accuracy, this project addresses precise
regional forecasting via intelligent and rapid harness on national scale
hydrometeorological Big Data. It aims to improve meteorological and hydrologic
forecasts at target regions of interest by integrating massive atmospheric data
sets with gathered surface data for finer temporal and spatial predictions,
containing both fundamental research and experimental activities. Its solution
approach is innovative by leveraging the actual gathered data as feedback to
make prediction models generate better products with multiple near-term time
horizons. Better regional prediction results from harnessing Big Data
intelligently and rapidly via utilizing (1) a collection of proposed simple
neural network models (called modelets) and (2) multiple accelerating
methodologies developed or under development by the research team members. The
modelet-based solutions for improving weather prediction spatially and
temporally are applicable to all regions in the nation, with easy portability.
They are being undertaken synergistically by jurisdictional collaboration across
five universities in Louisiana, Alabama, and Kentucky, plus U.S. Geological
Survey, enabling broad engagement at the frontiers of discovery and innovation
in science and engineering related to accelerating data analytics, meteorology,
and hydrology. Besides promoting the progress of science, this multidisciplinary
project advances the national prosperity and welfare by curbing potential
disruption due to global warming. The project also includes comprehensive
efforts for (1) building future leadership through collaboration and supervision
of junior investigators for their career advances, (2) enriching educational
materials on the focused disciplines and strengthening student research to boost
workforce development, and (3) aggressively recruiting and engaging
underrepresented participants to support diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better
observations and numerical models on weather and climate parameters improve
forecasting accuracy, able to suppress the uptrend in economic loss and societal
impacts caused by disasters pertinent to extreme weather and climate events, as
a result of global warming. This multidisciplinary project involves both
fundamental research and experimental activities, built upon and expanding
earlier work of team members in the disciplines of computer science and
engineering, meteorology, hydrology, and electrical &amp; computer engineering.
It deals with the technical challenges of intelligent and rapid harness on
national scale hydrometeorological Big Data for precise meteorological and
hydrological forecasting regionally, with anticipated outcomes likely to push
the frontiers of intelligent bigdata harness by NNs (neural networks) and of
speedy data processing through various methodologies. Intelligent bigdata
harness results from proper end-to-end simple NN models (called modelets), which
are trained inventively by huge datasets obtained continuously from both near-
ground observations (via Mesonet stations or water gauges) and geo-gridded
predictions based on computing physical atmospheric equations (via the Weather
Research and Forecasting model with High-Resolution Rapid Refresh). Various
methodologies for accelerating bigdata harness are under development and to be
evaluated thoroughly during the project years, including (1) effective computer
system DRAM expansion, (2) execution resilience enhancement, and (3) high-
compute density support by SC (stochastic computing)-based accelerators and by
GPGPUs with desirable scheduling policies for modelet training and inference.
The modelet-based solutions for precise regional forecasting via intelligent and
rapid (PREFER) bigdata harness improve weather prediction spatially and
temporally for wide applications to all regions in the nation, with easy
portability to offer short-term and fine spatial resolution prediction. They aim
to address the important problems of meteorological forecast applications (e.g.,
landfalling of severe thunderstorms or tropical systems), flood warning alert
enhancement, backwater wetland storage capacity investigation for river flood
mitigation, among others. This PREFER work inspires and nourishes cross-
disciplinary research and jurisdictional collaboration across five universities
in Louisiana, Alabama, and Kentucky, plus U.S. Geological Survey, helping to
integrate research and education while advancing discovery and understanding in
the scientific contents of interwoven project activities. It contains
comprehensive efforts for (1) lifting career development of junior investigators
to build future leadership, (2) enriching educational materials on the focused
disciplines and supporting student research to spur workforce development, (3)
engaging active participation from underrepresented groups, and (4)
disseminating project outcomes and software tools
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.