* 2019239
* FMitF: Track I: Focusing Incremental Abstraction-based Verification on Neural Networks Input Distributions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Matthew Dwyer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 510,000.00

The promise of machine learning is that it will improve the operation of systems
across a variety of domains, such as agriculture, transportation, and medicine.
With that promise comes the risk that such systems will not operate as intended,
which may lead to harm to individuals or society. The project's impacts are in
mitigating these risks by developing practical methods for assuring the correct
operation of machine-learning systems. While risk is not unique to systems that
incorporate machine learning, such systems present additional challenges to
assuring their correct operation. Consider a camera-based driving system that
aims to recognize a stop sign. Such a system must correctly identify a sign from
among the enormous number of possible images while considering variables, such
as, angle, lighting, distance, and any obstructions. Assuring such a system is
correct requires evaluating the system on all such images, but it would take
many years to evaluate each in turn on even the fastest computer. The project's
novelties are in assuring correct behavior for groups of inputs collectively,
which promises to make the assurance process
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops techniques to accelerate
verification algorithms for assuring the correct operation of machine-learning
models. First, these techniques exploit the fact that the system will only ever
be required to consider a small fraction of the set of all possible inputs.
Those inputs can be described symbolically and considered in groups to
accelerate verification. Second, these techniques exploit the fact that a system
may respond to different inputs by performing identical processing. Focusing
verification on the processing performed by the system, rather than the inputs
that are processed, allows verification to group sets of inputs to further
accelerate assurance. The project develops a series of prototype implementations
and benchmarks that demonstrate the utility and cost-effectiveness of the
research, and that can be leveraged by the broader community for comparative
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.