* 2019072
* MRI: Development of a Broadband Spectrometer with Multiple Antenna Detection and Chiral Coherent Quantum Control for Rotational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kristen Donnell, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging programs.
Professors Garry Grubbs II and Kristen Donnell of Missouri S&amp;T, along with
collaborators Stephen Cooke of SUNY-Purchase, Paul Raston of James Madison
University, and Galen Sedo of the University of Virginiaâ€™s College at Wise, are
developing a state-of-the-art Chirped Pulse Fourier Transform Microwave (CP-
FTMW) spectrometer. This instrument is utilized in the collection of rotational
spectra for gas phase molecules. Rotational spectra provide some of the most
detailed information available about the structure of molecules. This multi-user
spectrometer offers a significant increase in sensitivity and sourcing
capabilities for research in a variety of fundamental gas phase physical
chemistry and chemical physics fields. Moreover, this instrument promotes
discovery and the progress of science in the areas of laboratory measurements of
interstellar detection, experimental benchmarking for newly synthesized
materials, gas phase molecular interactions, absolute molecular structure
determinations inclusive of chirality, and actinide-element chemistry, among
others. The development of the instrument also establishes a pipeline program
for chemistry students of the primarily undergraduate and Hispanic Serving
Institution, University of Texas-Rio Grande Valley, to apply for the Missouri
S&amp;T Chemistry PhD program, thereby supporting diversity in the sciences. In
addition, this award supports training for undergraduate students and graduate
students from underrepresented groups, and facilitates training and mentorship
for postdoctoral fellows. The postdocs and student researchers have frequent
opportunities to interact with senior researchers and other students in
chemistry and physics, providing both networking opportunities and an enriched
learning environment for next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
new, state-of-the-art instrument for gas phase molecular structure rotational
spectroscopy measurements is being developed. This instrument possesses both
Chirped Pulse Fourier Transform Microwave (CP-FTMW, relative structure for bond
lengths and angles) and microwave three-wave mixing (M3WM, absolute structure
for chirality) capabilities. The instrument implements a state-of-the-art
approach of multiple-antennae detection, along with multiple sample introduction
nozzles, to increase instrument sensitivity. The nozzles are supersonic
molecular beam sampling systems that possess heated laser ablation capabilities,
and direct current discharge capability for the investigation of many chemical
problems associated with exotic/unstable or nonvolatile species. The degree of
system improvement particularly of the novel multiple-antennae detection
approach is being studied and quantified as part of this research. The
scientific advancements offered by the new instrument enable research from a
group of users known as the Midwest Microwave Consortium (MWMC) - a group of
nine mostly primarily undergraduate universities that share time on and
participate in the development of the instrument. The final, commissioned
instrument features remote access, control, and scheduling through a website,
allowing both national and international scientific community access throughout
its lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.