* 2019870
* EAGER: Intra-Clay Trapping of Organic Molecules – A Key Step in the Chemical Evolution of Life?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Alberto Perez-Huerta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,121.00

About 4 billion years ago, Earth was an inhospitable environment for the
formation and evolution of life. There was no ozone layer like we have today
protecting us from violent, harmful UV radiation. Temperatures likely were
extremely high given the presence of excessive volcanic activity. Under these
conditions, the chemical reactions that lead to the formation of life could not
have occurred. So, what happened to make life possible on our planet? Some
scientists agree with Nobel Prize winning biochemist Roger Kornberg in stating,
“life is only chemistry.” However, to understand the formation of life as simply
the process of complex molecular interactions does not adequately account for
the early Earth's harsh conditions. Nor does it explain what changed to suddenly
make it possible for life to form under those severe conditions. Today, it is
known that RNA and DNA, the building blocks of life, are protected by a cell
membrane that shields them from potentially harmful environments, but those cell
membranes were not present on Earth 4 billion years ago. One scientific
hypothesis, based on geology rather than chemistry, suggests that clay minerals,
typically found in sediments and rocks, functioned like cell membranes,
protecting the molecules that would eventually form the RNA and DNA that are
essential to life. Investigators propose to examine the capacity of clay
minerals to function like cell membranes that housed those early organic
molecules. In short, they want to study the role of geology in the emergence of
life. Understanding better the geological dimensions of life formation can
change how one thinks about the beginnings of life on this planet and possibly
alter the ways one looks for and define life beyond Earth. This scientific goal
is at the core of NSF's mission to promote the progress of science. The Broader
Impact component of this proposal is to explore a new venue to increase
diversity and the participation of underrepresented groups in Geosciences
graduate programs. Investigators propose to partner with Stillman College, a
HBCU institution in Tuscaloosa (AL), to incorporate undergraduate students from
Chemistry and Biology, as laboratory research assistants, to do research in
geobiology and low-temperature geochemistry. This will expose these students to
a different type of geology than the common perception of “just looking at
rocks”, and to an academic research experience similar to that found in a
graduate program. The ultimate goal is to establish a long-term collaboration
between UA and Stillman College and to facilitate the access of African American
students to graduate programs in Geology, and other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the chemical evolution of life is
a fundamental interdisciplinary research topic in Natural Sciences. A
fundamental aspect of this research is the understanding of how primitive
biomolecules “survived” the harsh environmental conditions present on early
Earth. Minerals, especially clays, have been long suggested as effective
adsorption surface to promote the accumulation and polymerization of
biomolecules to support the evolution of life. A more recent hypothesis even
suggests that clays could have acted as confinement structures, similar to cell
membranes, protecting these primitive biomolecules while promoting biochemical
reactions ultimately leading to the development of RNA and DNA. This would imply
that biomolecules had to be occluded within clays inter-layer spaces; however,
there are no direct observations of this trapping mechanism. The Intellectual
Merit of this proposal is that for the first time, the team proposes to
visualize in three-dimensions whether organic molecules can be present within
the interlayer regions of clays minerals using the state-of-the-art atom probe
tomography (APT) technique. If these organics “penetrate” the clay structure,
they would have demonstrated that the hypothesis of clays acting as "cell
membranes" was a possibility during the life origin in the late Hadean or early
Archean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.