* 2019621
* Collaborative Research: Use of Wearable Sensors to Track Muscle-Tendon Loading during Exosuit Assisted Locomotion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Darryl Thelen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,358.00

Advances in exosuit technologies are enabling the use of powered assistance to
enhance walking performance in healthy individuals and assist individuals who
exhibit gait pathologies, e.g. individuals with stroke. Unlike rigid
exoskeletons, exosuits are lightweight and use soft materials that provide a
comfortable and unobtrusive fit with the body. A pack worn at the waist uses
battery-powered motors to generate forces that are transmitted to the ankle and
hip. In spite of demonstrated success in decreasing the energy needed to walk,
it remains challenging to tune exosuit assistance patterns for individual users.
Thus, the long-term goal of this work is to enable individualized assistance
that can adapt in real time to a user’s unique gait patterns and to the
environment. To do this, novel sensors, termed shear wave tensiometers, will be
used to track adaptations in knee and ankle muscle loading that arise when
assistance is provided by a powered ankle exosuit. Studies will be performed to
determine how different exosuit assistance control patterns modulate internal
muscle loading under varied walking conditions, including with and without
exosuit assistance, with and without carrying a load (backpack) and walking in
an outdoor/real-world environment (declines, inclines and variable walking
speeds.) Theses studies will enhance the fundamental understanding of
neuromuscular responses to exosuit assistance and thus enable human-in-the-loop
implementations that adapt assistance based on the needs of an individual.
Educational and outreach impact will be achieved by using fundamentals
underlying the robotic, biomechanics and sensor technologies developed in this
project as a platform for engaging K-12 students in STEM. Simplified versions of
the exosuits and sensors will be incorporated into the annual engineering
outreach event at the University of Wisconsin-Madison which reaches thousands of
K-12 students and their teachers every year. Also, the Soft Robotics Toolkit
hosted by Harvard will be used to create engaging content that describes human-
machine interaction, biomechanics, physiology and gait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to use novel tissue load sensors, termed shear wave
tensiometers, to investigate biomechanical adaptations to exosuit assistance
within and beyond the laboratory environment. Though current exosuit
technologies have been shown to lower the metabolic cost of walking in healthy
subjects and improve propulsion, ground clearance, and symmetry in stroke
survivors, the extent of these benefits varies widely across subjects. The
project builds on a new collaboration between the lab that invented the
tensiometer method to directly gauge tendon loading by measuring the propagation
speed of shear waves along the tendon’s axis (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
and a lab that is recognized for leadership in developing the next generation of
soft exosuits (Harvard.) The Research Plan is organized under three aims, with
each aim being evaluated in 10 human subjects. The FIRST Aim is to develop and
incorporate a wearable shear wave tensiometer into an ankle exosuit to
continuously monitor Achilles tendon loading during prolonged treadmill walking
trials. Ankle joint torque determined from tensiometer measurements will be
compared to measurements based on motion capture. The result of this aim will be
a validated wearable sensor for quantifying changes in tendon tissue loading
induced by exosuit assistance. The SECOND Aim is to evaluate relationship
between ankle exosuit assistance magnitude and change in muscle-tendon loading
during walking with and without added mass. Results of this aim will provide
novel insights into the relationship between exosuit assistance and biological
soft tissue loads, with expectations that the tested variables (exosuit force,
exosuit timing, and added mass) will have various effects on the user’s muscle-
tendon load. The THIRD Aim is to evaluate the effect of ankle exosuit assistance
on muscle-tendon loading while walking in an outdoor circuit that includes
inclines, declines, comfortable speed and fast walking. Measurements include
tendon loading with the mobile tensiometer, muscle kinematics with ultrasound,
and biomechanics and suit data with suit IMUs and load cells. Results of this
aim are expected to demonstrate that, similar to how a motion capture and force
plate setup in a lab environment allows for estimating joint moments, the suit
sensors and tensiometer will allow for evaluating joint kinematics and tendon
kinetics in outdoor environments. Success of the project is expected to lead to
a new design of exosuits with integrated tensiometer sensors, produce new
understanding of biomechanics with exosuits, and potentially inform optimization
of personalized wearable exoskeletons for clinical and/or aged
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.