* 2019302
* FMitF: Track I: Formally Verified Sandboxing for Packet-Processing Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Santosh Nagarakatte, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,356.00

Modern computing applications process vast amounts of data
by&lt;br/&gt;collaboratively employing many thousands of server machines
residing&lt;br/&gt;in computing clusters. To support such applications, the
network&lt;br/&gt;interconnecting servers and the packet-processing software on
the&lt;br/&gt;servers should be fast (supporting high data rates and low
delays),&lt;br/&gt;flexible (enabling diverse data-processing applications), and
safe&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., programs must run without crashing). Berkeley Packet
Filter&lt;br/&gt;(BPF) has emerged as a mechanism to meet these goals and
accelerate&lt;br/&gt;novel high-performance packet-processing applications. BPF
is&lt;br/&gt;currently deployed in many production systems. BPF
achieves&lt;br/&gt;flexibility and performance by running user-developed
programs in the&lt;br/&gt;context of the operating system. To ensure safety of
such applications, this project will&lt;br/&gt;develop provably-correct static
analyzers for BPF programs, protecting&lt;br/&gt;the operating system from
security vulnerabilities, denial-of-service&lt;br/&gt;attacks, and crashes. This
project will advance the state-of-the-art&lt;br/&gt;in the static analysis,
program synthesis, and testing of networking&lt;br/&gt;applications such as load
balancers, packet filters, and performance&lt;br/&gt;monitors. This project will
also educate graduate, undergraduate, and&lt;br/&gt;high-school students on
foundational techniques for reasoning about&lt;br/&gt;correctness, network
monitoring, and filtering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three technical
goals. The first is to develop a&lt;br/&gt;verified Berkeley Packet Filter (BPF)
static analyzer based on an abstract interpretation that is&lt;br/&gt;correct by
construction. The project will address key intellectual&lt;br/&gt;challenges
involving the formalization of the BPF instruction set and&lt;br/&gt;modeling of
domain-specific sandboxing properties. Currently, an&lt;br/&gt;in-kernel BPF
static analyzer checks the safety of loaded BPF programs&lt;br/&gt;by performing
range-tracking, memory safety, and freedom from&lt;br/&gt;information leaks.
However, this analyzer has deficiences, resulting in the&lt;br/&gt;execution of
unsafe programs and exploitable vulnerabilities. The&lt;br/&gt;second goal of
this project is to develop an analyzer in the C&lt;br/&gt;programming language
that can be usable as part of the kernel, by&lt;br/&gt;leveraging differential
analysis, program synthesis, and testing. The&lt;br/&gt;final goal is to design
a verified BPF toolchain based on LLVM, by&lt;br/&gt;developing validated
translators from C to BPF bytecode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.