* 2019238
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Improving Incremental Sheet Forming by Ultrasonically Enhanced Material Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Xun Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2024
* USD 298,067.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
research that contributes to the understanding of ultrasonically-enhanced
incremental sheet forming with funding from the Advanced Manufacturing Program
in the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation Division and from the
Metals and Metallic Nanostructures Program in the Division of Materials
Research. Despite the rapid development of ultra-high strength materials, their
readiness to use is limited by limitations in the associated manufacturing
processes, especially in the field of sheet metal forming. One promising
solution is to temporarily soften the material during the forming process, which
can be achieved with the assistance of ultrasonic energy. However, the
underlying principles of this softening phenomenon remain elusive. Another
benefit of applying ultrasonic energy is improved tribological behavior. Among
forming technologies, incremental sheet forming is advantageous in rapid
prototyping based on its universal tooling and high flexibility, which meet the
increasingly competitive market demands of product updates and customization.
However, achieving high geometric accuracy and surface finish quality are
challenging. In this aspect, both the ultrasonic softening and modified friction
can be harnessed as a unique process and property enhancement solution. The
fundamental research of ultrasonic effects on material behavior facilitates
effective incorporation of ultrasonic energy into incremental sheet forming,
which greatly benefits sheet metal applications in industries such as aerospace,
automotive and biomedical. Students involved in the project gain
multidisciplinary knowledge and research experiences in materials, mechanical
engineering and manufacturing. Students, particularly women and underrepresented
minorities, have the opportunity to interact with GOALI partner Boeing
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the fundamental
knowledge of ultrasonic softening mechanisms on material deformation behavior.
The research is to effectively utilize ultrasonic energy to enhance the
incremental sheet forming (ISF) process based on both its bulk softening and
modified surface tribological behavior. First, an innovative ultrasonically
assisted (UA) micro-tensile testbed, equipped with an in situ high speed optical
microscope imaging system, is developed. This enables digital image correlation
analysis on the transient inter and intragranular strain field within the
ultrasonic vibration cycle. Post mortem multiscale microstructure
characterizations are then performed. A dislocation density-based crystal
plasticity constitutive material model is developed to reveal the physical
principles that are beyond experimental observations. Second, the UA-ISF process
is comprehensively studied, in which relationships between the reduced forming
force, increased forming accuracy, improved surface finish and the ISF and
ultrasonic parameters are established. Finally, a coupled acousto-mechanical
process model for UA-ISF is developed, which incorporates the ultrasonically
affected material constitutive model developed in the first task. With
experimental validations, this model would be utilized to optimize UA-ISF in
forming parts with complex free-form geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.