* 2019762
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Managing Future Risk of Increasing Simultaneous Megafires
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Alison Cullen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,936,595.00

Megafires are fires that are unusually large for their location or that require
a complex and aggressive firefighting response because they pose a dramatic
threat to lives, property, and/or infrastructure. When multiple megafires occur
simultaneously in the U.S., national firefighting resources may be strained
beyond capacity. A convergent team of researchers with expertise in decision
science, climate science, statistics, and fire science in collaboration with on
the ground decision makers and stakeholders, including fire managers, fire
ecologists, and land managers for tribes and government agencies will work
together to push the frontiers of fire science and management at the
intersection of natural and human systems. Their goal is to inform management
decisions about the risk posed by catastrophic wildfire events with improved
short and long term climate projections. The research will support decisions
about land use, as well as fuel management (thinning and prescribed burning),
and wildfire suppression policy, thereby helping to safeguard society against
the future loss of life, property, infrastructure, and natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will model
future patterns and uncertainty in the simultaneous co-occurrence of megafire
events to inform fire risk management. In doing so, it aims to address two
central questions: (1) How will climate change alter future patterns of
wildfire, particularly co-occurring megafires? (2) What implications does this
hold for risk management decisions? The project will include development of
statistical models to represent relationships between biogeophysical and human
factors (e.g., ignitions, suppression policy, land and fuel management), and
firefighting resource demand at geographical scales relevant to firefighting
management decision-making. These resource demand and risk management models
will be based on wildfire characteristics, climate, weather and land history
covariates. The research will consider three hypotheses as they relate to future
wildfire activity. First, the researchers hypothesize that ignition efficiency
will increase further with warming, facilitating increased lightning-ignitions,
and consequently increases in simultaneous wildfire events. Second, they
hypothesize that a positive feedback may occur where fire suppression resources
at the national level become strained, reducing the efficacy of managing active
fires and new ignitions, and further increasing resource strain and relative
burned area. Third, they hypothesize that short term fire management decisions
(e.g., both fuel management and fire suppression) have significant delayed
impacts, and demand new scientifically supported decision tools that explicitly
account for the continuing interaction of natural and human
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.