* 2019828
* AGS-PRF: A Continuum Kinetic Study of Heliospheric Collisionless Shocks
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2022
* James Juno, Juno, James L
* Fellowship Award
* Lisa Winter
* 01/31/2022
* USD 130,000.00

Collisionless shocks are ubiquitous in space and astrophysical plasmas, and the
heliosphere is no exception. The 2013 National Research Council Decadal Survey
for Solar and Space Physics identifies collisionless shocks as a universal
process that facilitates the transition from supersonic to subsonic flow, heats
the plasma, and accelerates energetic particles. Planetary bow shocks provide a
route to converting the supersonic and super-Alfvenic solar wind bulk kinetic
energy into other forms of energy: plasma heat, particle acceleration, and
electromagnetic energy. The Earth’s bow shock in particular has been a treasure
trove of data on the means by which collisionless shocks energize the plasma,
with an increased flurry of study in recent years due to the Magnetospheric
Multiscale (MMS) Mission. During this 2-year Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(PRF) project, the PI will utilize in-situ data of bow shock crossings from the
MMS to study collisionless shocks. Recently developed diagnostics, such as the
field-particle correlation, when applied to the distribution function data from
MMS, will allow the PI to confirm directly the presence of resonant energization
processes in magnetosheath turbulence. He will deploy the field-particle
correlation on simulations inspired by recent MMS bow-shock crossings. The PI
will determine the energization processes present in these collisionless shocks
by utilizing the continuum Vlasov-Maxwell solver developed by him, which
provides a much higher fidelity representation of the distribution function
compared to traditional particle-based methods. The research work will comprise
continuum kinetic simulations, which would provide unprecedented resolution of
the particle distribution function, thus allowing careful diagnosis of the
kinetic processes present in the collisionless shocks. Using the results of the
simulations as a “Rosetta Stone,” the PI will apply the field-particle
correlation to the corresponding MMS data, and completely characterize the
energetics of the plasma in these bow-shock crossings. During the project,
alongside the research investigations, the PI will continue to serve as a
steward of science, using his previous outreach and leadership experience. He
will volunteer for the Hawkeyes in Space and Science programs at the University
of Iowa and participate in the public outreach events organized by the programs.
Likewise, he will work with fellow junior scientists in the American Physical
Society’s Division of Plasma Physics (APS DPP) to grow and develop new programs
aimed at students and early career scientists, such as the Student Day and
Dissertation Talks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the large volume of data
coming out of space missions like the MMS, and complementary kinetic
simulations, our understanding of the evolution of a collisionless shock as a
function of Mach number and shock geometry, i.e., the angle between the shock
normal and upstream magnetic field, remains incomplete. Kinetic instabilities
upstream of the shock launched by reflected particles and wave-particle
interactions in the plane perpendicular to the shock significantly complicate
the energy transfer. The primary aim of this 2-year PRF project is to leverage
cutting edge techniques for numerically integrating the kinetic equation, as
well as novel diagnostics, to illuminate the energy conversion mechanisms of a
collisionless shock. The project addresses questions of fundamental importance
to the Solar-Terrestrial Research program, such as “processes by which energy is
generated by the Sun, transported to the Earth, and ultimately deposited in the
terrestrial environment.” The research and EPO agenda of this PRF project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.