* 2019368
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Bacterial and host genetic factors contributing to microbiome acquisition and homeostatis in mosquitoes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Kerri Coon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2025
* USD 844,000.00

Insects and other animals harbor intestinal microbial communities (or ‘gut
microbiota’) that play important roles in their biology. However, the processes
underlying how these communities assemble in the gut remain largely unexplored.
In this collaborative project between researchers at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison (US) and the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (UK),
advanced molecular techniques and experimental approaches will be used to
identify the genetic factors contributing to gut microbiota assembly in the
mosquito Aedes aegypti, an insect of significant interest because adult females
can transmit Zika, dengue, and other arboviruses that cause severe disease in
humans. Results from this work will therefore significantly enhance our
understanding of mosquito biology with applied relevance to disease transmission
in humans and other vertebrates. Results will also expand fundamental knowledge
of how animal hosts control gut colonization by bacteria and, conversely, how
bacteria adapt to the gut to form stable associations with their animal hosts.
Broader impacts of this project to society include the scientific training of
postdoctoral researchers and students at the graduate and undergraduate levels
to become the next generation of STEM leaders. Educational programming will also
be developed for use by the general public and students at the middle, high
school, and undergraduate levels. This collaborative US/UK project is supported
by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks a mechanistic
understanding of host-microbiota interactions during gut microbiome assembly. To
date, co-evolution has been investigated largely in bacterial partners of highly
stable, long-term associations such as obligate human pathogens. The central
hypothesis of this project is that host-microbiota co-adaptation can also occur
over repeated interactions spanning very short time scales and is mediated by
genetic factors of both hosts and bacteria. Three specific aims will address
this hypothesis in the mosquito Aedes aegypti, which harbors simple gut
bacterial communities that can be experimentally manipulated. Both A. aegypti
and its associated gut bacteria are also genetically tractable. In Aim 1,
transcriptome sequencing and functional studies in mosquitoes colonized by
defined microbiomes of varying genetic complexity will identify mosquito genes
and pathways that control microbiome acquisition and homeostasis. In Aim 2,
experimental evolution and transcriptome sequencing of bacteria during gut
colonization will identify how bacteria adapt to the mosquito gut environment
and establish mixed communities. Finally, studies in Aim 3 will establish
whether and to what extent observed host-microbiota interactions are conserved
across different host mosquito species. Results will improve understanding of
host-microbiota gene interactions during gut colonization and provide valuable
long-term genomic and transcriptomic resources to the broader scientific
community. This research will also be integrated with education and outreach
through the training of postdoctoral and graduate researchers and the
development of an undergraduate capstone research project and citizen science
toolkit. Results will further be shared through publication in peer-reviewed
journals and presentation at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.