* 2019435
* STC: Science and Technologies for Phosphorus Sustainability (STEPS) Center
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Paul Westerhoff, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2026
* USD 9,999,146.00

Phosphorus, a major component of DNA, is one the fundamental elements of life.
Phosphorus is vital to the productivity and sustainability of food systems,
where it is used in fertilizers to improve crop yields that feed a growing
population. Unfortunately, inefficiencies in phosphorus management result in
phosphorus release into rivers, lakes, and oceans, leading to harmful algal
blooms and poor water quality that threaten drinking water supplies and aquatic
life. Unlike other elements critical to life, such as carbon and nitrogen,
phosphorus is not recycled through atmospheric processes. The phosphorus needed
for agriculture is lost to the Earth’s oceans once it is released and more must
be mined from non-renewable rock phosphate deposits to replace this loss. These
current phosphorus management practices pose serious direct threats to national
food and water security. The Science and Technologies for Phosphorus
Sustainability (STEPS) Center, a partnership between North Carolina State
University, Arizona State University, University of Florida, RTI International,
Appalachian State University, Marquette University, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, the Joint School of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering at North
Carolina A&amp;T State University, and University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, has a vision to achieve a 25% reduction in human dependence on mined
phosphates and a 25% reduction in losses of phosphorus to soils and water
resources within 25 years. To realize this “25-in-25” vision, center researchers
will discover new science and develop new technologies and techniques that will
increase the level of recycled phosphorus and reduce the dependence on mined
phosphorus. The outcomes of the center’s activities will lead to the enhanced
resilience of food systems and improved environmental conditions. This center
will broaden the participation of women, underrepresented minorities, and
persons with disabilities in STEM disciplines. Education researchers in STEPS
will investigate factors that influence students’ education and research
experiences in a convergence research environment. STEPS will develop publicly
available, transdisciplinary educational modules for students and offer
continuing education classes on phosphorus sustainability. The center will also
organize an annual Research Experiences for Undergraduates program, including a
Research Experience for Future Farmers track to guide the integration of STEPS
research outcomes with the future generation of farmers. A STEPS Stakeholder
Community Group, comprised of individuals from industrial, municipal,
agricultural, regulatory, and other sectors, will inform the direction and
prioritization of research activities, interact with students, and facilitate
the dissemination of research products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a convergence
research center involving academic researchers and stakeholder groups, STEPS
integrates contributions across the physical, life, social and economic
sciences, and engineering to address wicked challenges in phosphorus
sustainability. At the atomic to materials scale, STEPS will generate new
fundamental knowledge about phosphorus capture and accelerate the development of
novel techniques to reclaim organic and inorganic phosphorus. At the scale at
which humans interact with technology, STEPS will develop new materials and
technologies for both aqueous environments and plant-soil-microbial systems that
will be studied in laboratories, greenhouses, surface waters, and fields. At
length scales up to global dimensions, STEPS will use integrated modeling and
social network analysis to identify intervention portfolios that enable the
realization of the 25-in-25 vision and are resilient to socio-economic, policy,
and environmental changes. The center researchers will use evidence-based
approaches to assimilate new information and co-refine research questions
through strategically designed interactions and processes among researchers and
stakeholders. STEPS will use specific geographical sites representing urban,
agricultural, and aquatic systems as conceptual anchors to provide technological
constraints, potential impact scenarios, and connections to stakeholders.
Convergence research approaches, transformative educational integration, and
coordinated broadening participation strategies, combined with stakeholder
participation, will foster new solutions to reduce the nation’s dependence on
mined phosphorus and result in sustainable management of the phosphorus cycle to
ensure the nation’s future food and water security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.