* 2019144
* MRI: Acquisition of Pinnacles -- Raising Research Computing to New Heights in California's Central Valley
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Scientific computing plays a central role in knowledge discovery and scientific
advancement. This award will result in the acquisition of a shared high-
performance computing (HPC) cluster named Pinnacles at the University of
California, Merced (UCM). Building on an increasing strength in scientific
computing at UCM, the nation’s first new research-intensive university of the
21st century, this project will deploy a new state-of-the-art HPC to enable
exciting cutting-edge science and facilitate advanced research training that
will promote the progress of science. UCM, an Hispanic Serving Institution, is
also uniquely positioned to leverage the new HPC to provide access and training
opportunities for students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pinnacles will serve as a centerpiece for high-
impact work in three scientific research pillars: (1) modeling and simulation of
complex systems; (2) data enabled science; and (3) numerical optimization. This
shared HPC cluster will be used by researchers to advance a broad array of
conventional disciplines. Indeed, senior personnel involved in the project span
all three of UCM’s academic schools, with work ranging from quantum chemistry to
cognitive science. With a central focus on HPC and serving as a collaboration
incubator, the Pinnacles cluster will facilitate knowledge discovery by
supporting researchers working in their individual research areas and enhancing
interdisciplinary collaborations to strengthen advancements at the boundaries of
traditional disciplines. In addition to exciting broad scientific opportunities,
Pinnacles will support early career researchers and advance learning and
research experience opportunities for a diverse and underserved student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.