* 2019267
* FMitF: Track II: Lifting the SMACK Verifier to Production Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Zvonimir Rakamaric, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Software is ubiquitous nowadays. Software systems run devices ranging from
pacemakers, phones, and computers, all the way to trucks, airplanes, and smart
power grids. These systems are extremely complex and hard to implement
correctly, and errors in them can have very serious consequences. Therefore,
developers need readily available tools to help them ensure the correctness of
software systems. This project aims to improve and extend one such tool, called
SMACK, and enable for it to be used as a part of the regular software-
development practice to help developers create better
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SMACK is used both by researchers in academia and
industry practitioners. Researchers use it since it enables easy experimentation
with new verification algorithms and techniques. Practitioners use it since it
is a stable software verifier that works on small- to medium-sized software
systems. The proposed features and additions will further increase SMACK's
capabilities to drive novel software-verification research and the adoption of
software verification in industry practice. The project will also increase the
reproducibility of software-verification research by producing a large number of
benchmarks, and promote software-verification education through the development
of teaching modules and tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is split
into three main tasks: supporting more source-language features, verifying large
software systems, and enabling adjustable scalability and precision of
verification. Supporting modern source-language features, such as special
parallelism- and security-related instructions, requires inventing models for
them that are appropriate for verification. Verifying large software systems
leads to the development of novel verification algorithms and implementations,
such as the ones that leverage massive parallelism available in machines
nowadays. Finally, having adjustable scalability and precision requires
empirical exploration of various options in this space, which furthers the
understanding of which verification techniques work on real-world software
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to build an industry-
strength software verifier that keeps up with the development of verification
technology and software practices. Hence, the approximate lifetime of SMACK is
expected to extend far beyond the scope of this project, into the range of 10-15
years. SMACK has been available as a permissively-licensed open-source project
on GitHub (https://github.com/smackers/smack) for eight years already, and it
also leverages popular open-source projects such as the low level virtual
machine (LLVM) compiler infrastructure. The plan to ensure its longevity is to
continue embracing the open-source community through public bug reports,
development subtasks, and peer code reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.