* 2019195
* MRI: Development of a Mobile High-speed Dual Frequency Comb Spectroscopy User Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Scott Diddams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 725,173.00

Laser light has long been a preferred tool for studying chemical processes in
systems ranging from combustion engines, to the atmosphere, to biology.
Molecules in these systems absorb light in a specific pattern of colors, and
thus can be detected without disturbing the process by shining different colors
of light through the sample and quantifying the light pattern that emerges. The
frequency comb is a laser source that emits hundreds of thousands of distinct,
closely spaced colors of light. When interfered with a second frequency comb in
a special process called "dual frequency comb spectroscopy", the light source
offers unparalleled potential to probe chemical processes with a combination of
color and time resolution that is not available with any other instrument. This
grant will create the first mobile frequency comb user facility – a mobile
laboratory that will bring frequency comb technology directly to scientific
experiments across the country. The new capabilities of the frequency comb will
enable scientific discovery that benefits human health, the environment, and
national security while training a new generation of frequency comb laser
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will build the first portable and robust
high-speed dual-comb spectrometer based on broadband mode-locked frequency combs
shifted to the mid-infrared using difference frequency generation. The dual-comb
will be able to simultaneously measure across large portions of the mid-infrared
spectral region with tens of thousands of individual wavelength elements and
time resolution as low as 10 microseconds. This will enable in situ, microsecond
time resolution movies of chemical dynamic processes unraveling across a
multitude of species with unprecedented bandwidth and precision. The
spectrometer will be incorporated into a mobile user facility that will put the
dual comb system at the hands of researchers who have never before had access to
this technology. We have assembled a group of 9 initial users and projects at
two national labs and four universities that will pilot the user facility to
enable scientific breakthroughs across multiple fields spanning chemical
kinetics to microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.