* 2019123
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap LC/MS System to Facilitate Trace Quantitation and Complex Mixture Analyses at the University of Alaska Anchorage
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jason Burkhead, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The University of Alaska-Anchorage is acquiring a
high-performance benchtop quadrupole system that combines a quadrupole, an ion
routing multipole and an Orbitrap analyzer and a liquid to support Professor
Patrick Tomco, Jason Burkhead, Aaron Dotson, Colin McGill, and other colleagues.
In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
samples. An instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of
compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. In a quadrupole mass
spectrometer, there are four cylindrical rods parallel to each other, that serve
as the mass analyzer (the component of the instrument responsible for selecting
sample ions based on their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)). Ions are separated in a
quadrupole based on the stability of their trajectories in oscillating electric
fields that are applied to the rods. In this instrument, this capability is
coupled to an ion trap mass analyzer consisting of an outer barrel-like
electrode and a coaxial inner spindle-like electrode that traps ions in an
orbital motion around the spindle. The image from the trapped ions is detected
and converted to a mass spectrum using the Fourier transform of the frequency
signal. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving
diverse students with this modern analytical technique. It is also used in
outreach activities involving the University of Alaska-Fairbanks (UAF) and the
University of Alaska-Southeast (UAS) as well as agencies such as the Alaska
Department of Fish &amp; Game and the Alaska State Crime Lab and collaborators
from the University of New Orleans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this mass
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels across
the University of Alaska system. It especially impacts understanding the fate of
the insecticide rotenone isoflavone in the changing climate of southcentral
Alaska. The instrumentation is also used for exploring environmental oil spill
damage mitigation in the Artic and Sub-artic and for the study of metabolomics.
In addition, it contributes to the analysis of the impact of climate change on
plant-herbivore dynamics in the Artic and Boreal ecoregions, and the study of
medicinal properties of Alaskan botanicals. The mass spectrometer is also used
to understand essential amino acid metabolism in the microbiomes of hibernatic
Artic ground squirrels using 15-nitrogen-labeled nitrogen
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.