* 2019835
* EAGER: spatio-temporal variability of microplastics in ocean and river cores using fluorescence microscopy
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Marco Tedesco, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 69,095.00

During this project, how microplastics accumulate within sediments along the
eastern U.S. coastal setting will be investigated. This study will be the first
of its kind to use fluorescent microscopy techniques to quantify plastic
deposition over time in sediment cores from the Hudson River and Long Island
Sound to farther offshore. Results will provide information about how
microplastics get transported from their sources to the ocean and how fast they
accumulate in sediments. With a better understanding of microplastic
accumulation, more reliable computer models can be constructed to predict how
sediment layers are generated as well as the future distribution of
microplastics and their impact in the coastal environment. This project will
promote the training and professional growth of junior scientists and graduate
students from Columbia University as well as nearby high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the spatio-temporal
variability microplastics accumulating in sediments within a transect of cores
from the Hudson River, Long Island Sound and nearshore ocean within 50 km of the
coast. Microplastics will be identified through fluorescence microscopy after
staining with a lipid soluble fluorescent dye. Chronostratigraphic data already
available on these cores will be used to constrain age estimates and allow
quantitative comparison of microplastic accumulation during the last century. In
particular, the following hypotheses will be tested: a) vertically-integrated
concentrations of microplastics differ for samples collected nearby large urban
environments (e.g., cities) vs. those collected in open ocean, with
concentrations increasing as we get closer to cities; and b) microplastic
concentrations began accumulating around 1950 and have been increasing at an
exponential rate over the past few decades. Results from this project will
provide basic data needed to understand natural processes that control the
transport and distribution of microplastic particulates over time and to develop
models that predict their future microplastic concentrations in the oceanic
sedimentary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.