* 2019308
* The Inclusive Engineering Consortium Workshop &amp; travel support for Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering Department Heads Association (ECEDHA) Conference March 18-21, 2020, Orl
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Ben Oni, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,975.00

The Inclusive Engineering Consortium is a novel collaboration among the 15
accredited Electrical and Computer Engineering programs at the nation’s
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and 2 Hispanic Serving
Institutions. The overall Consortium vision is to be a collaboration of Minority
Serving Institutions working as one to advance the Electrical and Computer
Engineering enterprise. It is organized as a virtual multi-university super
department with broadly based strengths in education, scholarship and service.
Collectively, the Consortium can function as the equal of any Electrical and
Computer Engineering program, accomplish more and have a greater impact on its
students, faculty and staff through access to resources and opportunities not
available to its members individually. Thus, the Consortium enables research and
educational collaboration of teams from its partners working as peers with
faculty, staff and students from the largest research-intensive universities in
the United States. A full-day workshop at the 2020 annual meeting of the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association in Orlando,
Florida, brings Consortium members together with academic leaders in Electrical
and Computer Engineering throughout the country. This workshop is a major step
in testing strategies developed within the Consortium to more fully and
productively engage joint cross-institutional teams in the US education and
research enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of Inclusive Engineering
Consortium members participated in the National Science Foundation-funded
Experimental Centric Pedagogy project. Through this experience, Consortium
member institutions have developed a culture of collaboration with effective
methods of implementation. This initial collaboration is being leveraged and
extended. The hypothesis is that there are windows of opportunity open through
the establishment of research and educational collaborations between Consortium
members with research-intensive institutions. This is especially true since its
member institutions serve a unique population of minority students. The
Consortium is developing the infrastructure and programs to facilitate
collaborations between faculty, students and staff among its member departments
based on lessons learned from the successful Experiment Centric Pedagogy
educational program and, more generally, the science of team science. It is also
addressing how best to build a different type of team structure with research-
intensive universities, industry, and other external constituencies. Preparation
for the workshop includes defining and refining a process and set of tools for
successful collaboration with each type of partner, especially research-
intensive universities. The workshop activities are structured to test the
collaboration process and tools for research-intensive universities by actively
engaging Consortium partner faculty with department heads from research-
intensive universities and other faculty attending the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department Heads Association meeting. This is an important step in
creating the organizational support structure and activities necessary to
realize the Consortium’s grand vision of graduating more and better prepared
minority engineers, increasing efficiency and productivity at Minority Serving
Institutions, and developing a sustainable and effective infrastructure to
support minority students, faculty and staff at all universities. In time, as
the Consortium grows beyond the disciplines of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, this model can be replicated and implemented for other areas of
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.