* 2019647
* Downgradient Energy Transport and the Atmospheric Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2023
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 729,263.00

The earth’s atmosphere operates as a heat engine, transporting energy from
regions of surplus to regions of deficit. The heat transport varies remarkably
smoothly with latitude despite the atmosphere having very different circulation
patterns across the globe. Emerging research suggests that this heat transport
appears to be well-described as a diffusive process that depends on the equator-
to-pole energy contrast. If so, such a simple concept may offer a fundamental
explanation for many aspects of the observed climatology and climate change
(past and future). This research addresses: (i) why this conceptual model of
energy transport works so well despite the highly complex atmospheric motion and
(ii) the model’s ability to explain the hydrology and global distribution of
temperature and atmospheric constituents of past climate states. The description
of heat transport as a diffusive process is so fundamental in science that this
research has the potential to significantly improve the public understanding of
climate science. In addition to mentoring a young research scientist, the
researchers will train a graduate student and heavily involve undergraduates in
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers seek to
understand how the atmospheric circulation adjusts to maintain a nearly linear
downgradient energy transport as the climate state changes. Using observations,
they will determine how the near-linear relationship between the meridional
enthalpy gradient and the atmospheric heat transport emerges as a function of
space and time. Furthermore, they will perform numerical experiments that vary
the dynamical transport mechanisms (e.g., changing the Earth’s rotation rate and
orography) to probe the limits of the near-linear relationship. Finally, the
researchers will analyze existing paleoclimate simulations, as well as carefully
targeted new simulations, to evaluate how well this simple heat transport model
characterizes past climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.