* 2019094
* MRI: Acquisition of a Near-Field Optical Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education at Louisiana State University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Louis Haber, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 665,000.00

Understanding how nanomaterials function is critical to enabling
transformational advances in quantum computing, nanomedicine, energy, and
optoelectronics. But studying nanoscale processes is particularly challenging
because they are typically very fast with very small spatial dimensions. This
project enables researchers to study functional nanomaterials in both ultrafast
time and nanoscale space regimes through the awarded multimodal near-field
optical microscope. The microscope measures the reflected light from a
femtosecond (one quadrillionth, or one-millionth of one billionth, of a second)
laser focused onto a metal tip ten-thousandth of a human hair in diameter while
the tip scans the surface of a nanomaterial. Beyond advancing discovery and
understanding, the microscope also promotes teaching and training at Louisiana
State University (LSU). The instrument is housed at the Center for Advanced
Microstructures and Devices (CAMD), which has served as the training ground for
hundreds of science and engineering undergraduate and graduate students in its
nearly 30 years of operation. Installing the microscope at LSU-CAMD introduces
synchrotron scientists to near-field optical microscopy and vice-versa,
improving the overall depth of research training for both parties. Acquisition
of the microscope also augments four upper-undergraduate and graduate-level
courses in science and engineering as well as NSF sponsored Research Experience
for Undergraduate sites at LSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale chemical
processes in solid-state materials occur on time scales of attoseconds to
nanoseconds with spatial dimensions below 100 nm. To better understand
functional nanoscale materials, scientists must be able to measure and observe
their materials properties and dynamic phenomena on their respective space and
time scales. The awarded multimodal near-field optical microscope meets these
needs by correlating scan probe microscopy with a suite of synergistic optical
spectroscopy techniques, beating the diffraction limit, and allowing researchers
to uncover the steady-state and dynamic properties of complex nanoscale
materials with 10 nm spatial resolution and femtosecond time resolution. The
multimodal microscope provides scientists correlated near-field spectroscopy
with the following suite of experimental techniques: 1) atomic force microscopy,
2) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and mapping with 10 nm spatial
resolution, 3) Raman and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, 4) amplitude and
phase-resolved near-field imaging, 5) near-field pump-probe spectroscopy and 6)
fluorescence lifetime imaging. The interconnectivity of the research team and
users makes this multimodal near-field microscope a central unifying instrument
at LSU, allowing for the development of new materials, and observation and
engineering of novel phenomena, to explore applications in the fields of quantum
computing, energy, optoelectronics, and nanomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(CBET).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.