* 2019184
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogenic Testbed for Advancing Gravitational-Wave Observation Technology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Joshua Smith, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 159,934.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. By
discovering gravitational waves from merging black holes and neutron stars, the
NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) has opened
a new window on the universe. But today’s observatories are only just sensitive
enough to probe the gravitational-wave sky. LIGO Voyager, a potential upgrade to
maximize the potential of the LIGO facilities, and Cosmic Explorer, a 40km
baseline next-generation US concept, would greatly expand humanity’s access to
the gravitational universe and observe all star-sized black hole mergers, by
leveraging advanced technologies, chiefly crystalline silicon optics operated at
very low (cryogenic) temperatures. Key challenges for the cryogenic operation of
these observatories include: fabricating large, pure silicon crystals with
excellent optical properties; identifying high-quality optical coatings; and
noiselessly holding the optics to stable low temperatures. This project will
support the acquisition of a flexible cryogenic testbed to enable researchers at
California State University Fullerton to address some of these challenges,
particularly those regarding optical properties of the silicon and coatings and
temperature and vibration control. This acquisition will provide opportunities
for hands-on experience with cryogenic hardware to a generation of students at
primarily undergraduate and Hispanic-serving institutions: CSUF and nearby
community colleges (through established research programs). Scientific results
made possible by this acquisition will expand the discovery space of
gravitational-wave science by making essential contributions to the design of
Cosmic Explorer while informing potential upgrades to current
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIGO Voyager and Cosmic Explorer would peer
deep into the gravitational universe reaching observation rates of tens per
hour, signal-to-noise ratios in the thousands, and observing all neutron star
and stellar-mass black hole mergers. The use of cryogenic crystalline silicon
optics and suspensions to reduce noise is a cornerstone for Voyager and Cosmic
Explorer. Silicon has zero thermal expansion at 123 K, eliminating thermoelastic
noise and thermal aberrations from light absorption, and the lower temperature
reduces thermal vibrations. Key challenges for the cryogenic operation of these
optics include: fabricating large, pure silicon crystals with low optical
scattering and absorption; identifying optical coatings with excellent optical
and material properties; and noiselessly holding the optics to target
temperatures. This project will support the acquisition of a flexible cryogenic
testbed to enable California State University Fullerton to address these
challenges, particularly optical characterization and temperature and vibration
control of coated silicon optics. The acquisition will enable research on the
material and optical properties of crystalline silicon optics, crystalline
AlGaAs/GaAs coatings, and amorphous silicon and silica coatings, each of
interest to the optics and materials communities. It will provide opportunities
for hands-on experience with cryogenic hardware to a generation of students at
primarily undergraduate and Hispanic-serving institutions: CSUF and nearby
community colleges (through established research programs). Scientific results
made possible by this acquisition will expand the discovery space of
gravitational-wave science by making essential contributions to the design of
Cosmic Explorer while informing potential upgrades to current
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.