* 2019669
* Testing Adaptive Hypotheses of Plio-Pleistocene Hominin Craniofacial Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Karen Baab, Midwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 330,021.00

This project addresses the evolutionary divergence of major groups of extinct
hominins from one another, with a particular focus on morphological changes
associated with diet and cognition. The results will advance knowledge about
evolutionary processes, shedding light on how diet-driven natural selection can
interact with existing patterns of morphological integration to produce
evolutionary change. The project will support a female Investigator and expand
scientific infrastructure. It will also generate opportunities for training in
3D scanning, feeding biomechanics and evolutionary modeling for a postdoctoral
researcher and an undergraduate student from an underrepresented group, thus
broadening participation in science. The investigators will use the NSF-
supported CREATE approach to produce an undergraduate teaching module using the
results of this project. The research will also result in the collection and
archiving of many 3D surface models and biomechanical measurements to be used by
other researchers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
test hypotheses about the role of natural selection in hominin evolution,
including that: 1) selection for processing hard or tough foods drove skull
evolution in australopiths, a group of early human ancestors, and 2) selection
for complex cognition led to large brains (and thus neurocrania) in early
members of our own genus, Homo. The researchers will take advantage of existing
quantitative genetics tests that can distinguish between natural selection and
neutral evolutionary processes using morphological data that are informative
about chewing biomechanics and brain size. The researchers will measure 3D
models generated from surface scans of fossils from three major groups of Plio-
Pleistocene hominins: Paranthropus, Australopithecus and early Homo. In
addition, measurements from extant species will be used to model population
patterns of trait variation and covariation as proxies for the extinct species.
The extent of trait variation and covariation are key parameters influencing the
ability of a population to respond to natural selection, as well as the manner
in which populations change due to random processes like genetic drift.
Innovative aspects of the research include the use of biomechanically
informative variables to test hypotheses about selection and assessment of how
sensitive tests are to choice of living proxy for the
fossils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.