* 2019310
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Property-specific Hardware-oriented Formal Verification Modules for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Xiaolong Guo, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With the Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems being used in a broad
range of applications such as smart homes, smart infrastructure, and smart
health, a rigorous analysis of both hardware and software became critical in
ensuring safety and security of these systems. Recently discovered micro-
architectural side channels in Intel processors has demonstrated the need for a
deep understanding of the interaction between software and hardware. However,
hardware/software co-verification is challenging due to the complexity of both
hardware and software. The project novelties include a property-directed co-
model extraction and a property-specific run-time validation methodology to
achieve scalability and precision in detecting bugs due to hardware/software
interactions. If successful, the developed methodologies and automation tools
will empower embedded-system vendors with tools that can detect security and
safety vulnerabilities early in design. The project’s impacts on workforce
training and broadening participation in formal methods and embedded-system
security will be achieved through the investigators’ courses on formal
verification and embedded-system development and security, outreach events, and
collaborations with industry. The project will result in a set of system-level
benchmarks to demonstrate various cases of hardware software interactions
leading to security and safety violations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
these goals, the project will be built on three research thrusts. 1) Property-
driven Hardware/Software Co-Model Extraction: A failure property is decomposed
into hardware- and software-relevant parts to drive localization of the software
and hardware features relevant to the property. State exploration on the
combined state space of the hardware and software will be performed only when
required directly by the property. The result of this incremental and property-
directed search is the extraction of failure conditions that describe the
software contexts in which certain hardware and software properties should be
monitored. 2) Low Overhead Property-Specific Hardware Monitors: An off-chip
dynamic information-flow tracking module will be implemented leveraging an open-
source RISC V processor core. The collected run-time data will be used for
enforcing user policies as well as for detecting user-specified failure
properties. 3) Reconfigurable Hardware Decision Modules: A configurable
interface will be developed for the data exchange between the off-chip dynamic
information-flow tracking module and the main processor. The failure conditions
generated by the co-model extraction tool will inform the configuration of this
interface. The instruction-set architecture will be extended to define new
instructions for guiding and configuring the run-time
checker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.