* 2019518
* Collaborative research: Defining the scope and consequences of ectomycorrhizal fungal control on forest organic matter decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Peter Kennedy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 788,341.00

Fungi play an essential role in forest ecosystems, breaking down leaf litter and
woody debris that has fallen to the forest floor. As this organic matter is
decomposed by fungi, much of it is incorporated into soils, adding to the
significant carbon and nitrogen pools they harbor. There is growing recognition
that ectomycorrhizal fungi, which form nutritional symbioses with many forest
trees, can slow the breakdown of organic matter and stabilize soil carbon. This
research seeks to critically assess how ectomycorrhizal fungal suppress organic
matter decomposition, and to characterize the impacts of this suppression on
soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics. Determining how ectomycorrhizal fungi mediate
carbon and nutrient fluxes during the decomposition of organic matter will be
useful for forest management focused on carbon retention in soils and on tree
health. In addition, defining the scope of ectomycorrhizal fungal suppression of
organic matter decomposition across diverse temperature and moisture conditions
will be important for accurately formulating carbon and nitrogen dynamics in
Earth system models. This project provides support for science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) graduate and undergraduate mentoring, K-12
experiential learning, and public engagement through collaborations with the
Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve, Minute Earth, California Academy of
Sciences, and the Florida Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
capacity of ectomycorrhizal fungi to modify organic matter decomposition is
hypothesized to depend on three factors: organic matter chemistry,
ectomycorrhizal fungal community composition, and environmental conditions. This
hypothesis will be tested with a series of field-based experiments at research
sites in Minnesota, Florida, and California. By utilizing a single research site
in Minnesota in which a wide range of organic matter types are concurrently
deployed across forest stands differing in ectomycorrhizal fungal community
composition, the independent and interactive roles of organic matter chemistry
and ectomycorrhizal fungal community composition can be determined while holding
multiple environmental variables constant. At the same time, by deploying a
common organic matter type across multiple sites varying in temperature and
precipitation (in Minnesota, Florida, and California), the extent to which
variation in edaphic conditions influence ectomycorrhizal fungal suppression of
organic decomposition can also be assessed. Additionally, detailed analyses of
the carbon held in various soil fractions will provide a critical missing link
between ectomycorrhizal fungal-induced changes in organic matter decomposition
rates and retention of carbon in soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.