* 2019745
* Center for Theoretical Biological Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Jose Onuchic, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2025
* USD 8,800,000.00

Theoretical physics has become increasingly important in understanding complex
living systems and plays a key role in addressing phenomena and behavior on the
cellular and multicellular level. This Physics Frontiers Centers award to the
Center for Theoretical Biological Physics (CTBP) builds on the extensive
research, education, and outreach successes achieved during previous awards to
both expand the reach and accelerate the rate of scientific progress on critical
issues in biological physics, and extend the scope of training and outreach
activities. The goal of the work is to further our understanding of : (1) living
systems by combining soft matter approaches with molecular biophysics, (2)
information rich network-based computations with stochastic nonlinear dynamics,
and (3) self-organization with design through Darwinian evolution. Topics to be
studied include: the structure and function of the genome; phenotypic decision-
making via nonlinear information processing in biological networks; and the
physical architecture of the cell and its control by incoming signals.
Collaborations with many contacts at the Texas Medical Center and a new
association with faculty at the Harvard Medical School will continue CTBP's
training of students and postdoctoral fellows in the information rich areas of
theoretical biological physics. The CTBP outreach includes a pioneering program
that brings undergraduates from underrepresented groups to the Center for
intensive summer experiences and provides them with mentoring research and
career guidance, following up through the academic year. This effort will be
expanded and also extended to a new remote CTBP site at Northeastern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program includes four main
research areas: 1) Developing a theory-based strategy to create quantitatively
predictive models of genome structural ensembles applicable to a broad range of
cell types and states of the cell cycle; 2) Creating a new set of experimental
and analytic tools for obtaining and interpreting data regarding genome
structure and dynamics; 3) Utilizing tools from statistical physics, soft
condensed matter physics, polymeric materials, and non-linear dynamical systems
to further understanding of regulatory networks involving genomic
transcriptional regulation; and 4) Studying the structure of the living cell,
the active cytoskeleton, which determines basic cellular architecture and also
serves as a conduit of signals running between different subcellular regions.
The planned research utilizes the unique scientific capability provided by the
Physics Frontier Center. Crucially, it continues the strategy of both developing
and using concepts and techniques from physics and applied mathematics to tackle
otherwise intractable problems in the science of living matter and conversely to
use biological problems to motivate new concepts of broad applicability
throughout physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Physics Frontiers Centers award
is co-funded by the Division of Physics and the Division of Materials Research
within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems within the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.