* 2019648
* Variable Stiffness Compliant Mechanisms and Robots Based on Layer Jamming
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hai-Jun Su, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 494,409.00

This research will promote the progress of science by developing computational
tools to support the modeling and design of variable stiffness mechanisms based
on layer jamming materials. Layer jamming materials can switch between soft and
hard modes on demand and can be used in the structures of compliant mechanisms
and soft robots. The specific deliverables of this research include: (a) novel
sophisticated models of layer jamming materials; (b) synthesis theories to
support the design of compliant mechanisms and robots made of layer jamming
materials; and (c) experimentally validated computational design tools. The
theoretical innovations and computational tools will be applied to practice by
developing open hardware platforms of robotic grippers and continuum robots with
tunable stiffness. This research will enable the construction of soft robots
that are highly adaptive to complex environments while still being strong enough
to complete demanding tasks. These robotic systems will benefit numerous fields,
including minimally invasive surgery, inspection and maintenance in
manufacturing, and surveillance for the defense industry. Additional
deliverables of this project include engineering education and research
experiences for K-12 students, new engineering curricula at the college level,
and outreach initiatives for under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
develop, validate, and test a theoretical framework for design analysis and
synthesis of compliant mechanisms and robots with variable stiffness, enabled by
layer jamming materials. These robots can transform into task-specific
configurations through variable kinematic topology via their changing stiffness.
The research outcomes will include a set of computational design tools that
encompass frictional models of layer jamming materials, pseudo-rigid-body
models, and synthesis theories for the design of variable stiffness compliant
mechanisms. The new theoretical framework will significantly enhance our ability
to design layer jamming-based variable stiffness compliant mechanisms and robots
that address competing requirements for high flexibility and high performance.
To broaden participation and outreach in K-12 education, this project will
leverage several local outreach programs, including the Metro Early College High
School (MECHS) internship and the Translating Engineering Research to K-8 (TEK8)
program at the Ohio State University, both of which provide opportunities for
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.