* 2019077
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing System for Scientific Research and Education at NDSU
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Dinesh Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 884,596.00

This award to North Dakota State University (NDSU) funds the acquisition and
commissioning of a high-performance computing (HPC) instrument that will
significantly expand and update the resources at NDSU and in the state of North
Dakota for scientific research and education. The HPC system will provide a
state-wide regional resource giving faculty and students of the North Dakota
University System (NDUS) appropriate infrastructure to engage efficiently in
challenging research that requires parallel computing. It will facilitate hands-
on training in HPC techniques for large-scale compute- and data-intensive
analyses. The new computing facility is essential to the growing spectrum of
research and training activities and will be used to foster collaborative
relationships with research and education partners within North Dakota as well
as nationally and internationally. At NDSU and beyond, the new HPC system will
enable cutting-edge research in multiple areas, including fluid dynamics,
biomedical engineering, physics, chemistry, materials science and engineering,
precision agriculture, plant sciences and plant pathology, artificial
intelligence, health care, and financial and business analytics. Beyond NDSU,
the new instrument will provide HPC resources to researchers and students at the
tribal colleges (TCs) in the state of North Dakota and the primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) and Masterâ€™s colleges/universities (MCUs)
within NDUS. Continuing present outreach activities is planned to stimulate
interest in science and engineering within the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide a new instrument that consists of a fast, tiered storage
subsystem with a parallel file system and a distributed memory hybrid HPC
cluster (CPUs, GPUs, big-memory nodes, and high speed interconnect) specifically
designed to efficiently process massive amounts of data as well as handle
compute-intensive applications. The compute nodes will be capable of a combined
theoretical peak performance of 98 TFLOPS whilst using 64-bit double precision
GPUs will lead to a combined theoretical peak of 140 TFLOPS. This gives a total
peak performance of 238 TFLOPS for the compute cluster. The research projects
undertaken by the research groups will contribute to multiple fields, including
those listed above. Consequently, more than 15 NDSU lead computational
researchers and their groups (100+ scientists and students) have joined in this
project to use an extensible HPC instrument architected for enhanced support for
modeling, data collection, generation, analysis, storage, provenance, curation,
and sharing. The PIs of the project will integrate students into their research
projects and incorporate HPC into several graduate and undergraduate courses.
Training workshop series and internship opportunities to train students and
research staff in computational research using HPC will also be provided and
supported by the commissioning and operations of this instrument. This will
provide an excellent opportunity to train the next generation of HPC systems
specialists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) is jointly funded with the Division of Materials
Research (DMR), part of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.