* 2019235
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next Generation Noble Gas Multi-collector Mass Spectrometer System to Support Fundamental and Applied Geochronology Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Martin Truffer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 561,870.00

This award will fund the acquisition of a next generation instrument to measure
noble gases in rock material for geochronology constraints. Geochronology can be
applied to the breadth of anthropology pursuits, planetary sciences and earth
process systems from the surface to the deep earth. This University of Alaska
Fairbanks laboratory will be a multi-user facility to facilitate the research
goals of students, researchers, Alaska’s first people corporations, government
agencies, and private economic geology entities. We will pursue many avenues of
study including making detrital 40Ar/39Ar geochronology more readily available
to the scientific community, investigating some of the problems with dating
young (younger than 10,000 years old) volcanic rock products, and increasing the
precision of dating the timing of mineralization to assist economic geology
interests. The overall project will increase student access to geochronology
data sets and train students in advanced geochronology laboratory methods and
instrument operations. Student will also be prepared for careers in the earth
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve the installation,
calibration, and operation of a next generation 40Ar/39Ar noble gas multi-
collector sector mass spectrometer system. The system includes a custom
extraction line, a CO2 laser, and a resistance furnace for degassing rock
samples and cleaning up the extracted gases before measurement on the mass
spectrometer. The noble gas mass spectrometer will be able to measure the five
main argon isotopes concurrently leading to a 10X increase in precision over
peak-hoping measurements on a single detector. The high-sensitivity and high
resolution capabilities of the new instrumentation will allow measurements to be
made on smaller samples sizes with a preference for single-grain applications.
The instrument system will be used to further pursue the presence and causes of
excess 36Ar in young volcanic rock products. The capabilities of the instrument
system will also allow increased single-grain dating throughput allowing for
more precise and more time efficient 40Ar/39Ar dating of detrital samples. The
modern instrumentation will not only allow more access to geochronology data for
students, but will provide a facility designed to enable training of future
generations of geochronologists. This project is jointly funded by the EAR
Instrumentation &amp; Facilities Program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Major Research Instrumentation
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.