* 2019470
* RII Track-2 FEC: Harnessing Spatiotemporal Data Science to Predict Responses of Biodiversity and Rural Communities under Climate Change
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Gotelli, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,996,723.00

Policy efforts are increasingly focusing on climate adaptation rather than
mitigation. We seek to understand how communities of plants and animals,
including forest plants and wildlife, diseases and their vectors, and
agricultural crops, will respond to climate change. We will do this by building
some of the first mechanistic models of shifts in species ranges in response to
climate change. We further seek to model how farmers and rural human societies
in the U.S. that depend on these organisms will adapt in response. To do this,
we will develop novel approaches and software tools for modeling, visualizing,
and forecasting spatial and temporal data. We seek to provide our model results
to farmers to improve their ability to adapt to climate change, to better
understand what kinds of data farmers need, and how scientists can better
communicate complex spatiotemporal data with farmers. We will use our research
framework to provide curriculum and training sessions at the high school,
undergraduate, graduate, and faculty levels in data science, a rapidly expanding
job market in New England. We will also increase research capacity in these
fields at the University of Maine, University of Vermont, University of Maine at
Augusta, and Champlain College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant climate change
over the next century cannot be fully avoided, and is now inevitable. We know
that one of the main responses of plants and animals to climate change is that
populations of species will move to new locations where the climate is more
hospitable. Where will these species end up, and how will that affect farmers
and rural communities in the U.S.? We aim to produce detailed predictions of
where wildlife, forest plants, disease and their carriers, and agricultural
crops in New England will shift to live over the next 100 years. We will also
analyze how farmers will respond to these shifts in which crop plants are
potentially viable on their land. To do this, we will first develop new software
tools for scientists working with data on patterns changing in time and space
simultaneously. We will work closely with farmers to understand what data they
need to adapt to climate change, to communicate our results, and to improve how
scientists communicate complex data. Finally, we will provide significant
training in data science, a rapidly growing job market, at multiple age levels.
We will also increase research capacity in these fields at the University of
Maine, University of Vermont, University of Maine at Augusta, and Champlain
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.