* 2019682
* Research and Educational Activities at IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) 2020
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) addresses research
issues in designing, building, managing, and evaluating advanced data-intensive
systems and applications. It is a leading forum for researchers, practitioners,
developers, and users to explore cutting-edge ideas and to exchange techniques,
tools, and experiences. The 36th ICDE will be held in Dallas Texas, April 20-24,
2020. This award enables diverse US students to participate in ICDE-2020,
provides opportunities to the students to interact with other attendees and
attend the educational events being offered. The students' participation in
ICDE-2020 is important to the students research training and will develop the
future generation of leaders and workforce in the increasingly critical data
management field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported students will have
opportunities to showcase their research results, learn about the cutting edge
research conducted by others, and interact with experts at a premier data
engineering conference. ICDE-2020 includes a comprehensive program including
research papers presentations, tutorials, panels, industrial papers, and
technical demonstrations that provide a platform for exchange of research
results and ideas, interaction and education. The program also includes
workshops that demand dedicated coverage due to their relevance to the current
data management research and development, industrial exhibits, and keynote talks
by leaders in academia and industry. The students will also have an opportunity
to participate in a PhD Symposium, which provides a forum for PhD students to
present their research ideas, and interact with and receive feedback from senior
members of the research community in academia and industry. The focus of the PhD
Symposium is on mentorship and providing constructive feedback to the students.
These opportunities will have a long lasting impact on the future career of the
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.