* 2019425
* Changing Land Use of Neotropical Montane Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Anna Guengerich, Eckerd College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 175,049.00

The goal of this project is to determine how incorporation into pre-modern
empires impacted land-use practices and ecosystems in environmentally fragile
regions. The project explores how expansionary states that developed in past
societies pursued environmental practices such as resource extraction and
agricultural intensification as well as contemporary forces of globalization and
industrialization. Did different ideologies or different forms of economic
organization produce lighter environmental footprints relative to modern empires
and economic forces? The use of a long term perspective offers two advantages.
First, it provides comparative case-studies from the past for determining
whether sustainable, intensive resource use may be possible in a particular
ecosystem. Second, it supports a recent and widespread recognition among
ecologists that all modern landscapes on earth are anthropogenic (human-made),
even those that are ostensibly “pristine,” and therefore contemporary solutions
to mitigate environmental damage must take into account long-term histories of
use. The project will build on the research team’s strong existing relations
with local communities and regional institutions to develop portable,
collaborative modules for sustainable development that address intersecting
concerns around cultural heritage, biodiversity, conservation, and local
economic well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
characterize changes in local land use following an upheaval in a tropical
montane forest region, an area considered a “global biodiversity hotspot” of
exceptional biological richness and ecological vulnerability. Today this region
is caught up in broader economic forces as a source of pharmaceutical and other
globally marketable plant products, but past societies also exploited its
tropical forest resources. This project will evaluate whether incorporation into
an expanded economic and political context entailed major social and
infrastructural changes, including agricultural expansion and destruction of
montane forests, or whether incorporation entailed a laissez-faire approach
premised on the selective extraction of forest products via existing, local
economic institutions. Research will focus on an urban cluster of interacting
villages within a millennial context. The project will evaluate land-use changes
in this setting by combining a domestic perspective based on household
activities and a landscape perspective based on the spatial organization of
people and production infrastructure, particularly agricultural terraces. The
project includes an interdisciplinary research team which will address these
questions through a variety of complementary analytical methods that include
micro- and macro-botanical analysis of preserved plant remains, aerial
documentation of agricultural and hydraulic infrastructure, archival study of
previous land-use practices, botanical survey of contemporary plant communities,
and ethnobotanical interviews documenting traditional plant
uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.