* 2019216
* CC* Compute: GPU-based Computation and Data Enabled Research and Education (G-CoDERE) at PSU
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Christof Teuscher, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 395,926.00

Data and computationally intensive research and education is increasingly
important at Portland State University (PSU). Scientists and students at PSU are
producing massive quantities of data and investigating machine learning and data
science approaches to research problems in many different fields. Graphics
processing units (GPUs) excel at large-scale parallel computing and are critical
for analyzing and visualizing such massive quantities of research data and
developing data-driven technologies. This project establishes PSU's first GPU
computing infrastructure and will support PSU research groups in a wide variety
of fields, including Computer Science, ECE, Physics, Chemistry, Statistics, and
Speech &amp; Hearing Science, and benefit researchers in partner universities,
including Oregon Health and Science University and Lewis &amp; Clark University.
It provides undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers new
training opportunities for data-driven research; enables the creation of new
machine learning, data analytics, and visualization courses; and supports
upgrading existing courses with emerging data-driven paradigm. It facilitates
the K12 outreach programs such as Oregon Mathematics, Engineering, Science
Achievement and Saturday Academyâ€™s Apprenticeships in Science and Engineering
with GPU-enabled project and internship opportunities. This infrastructure
allows PSU, Oregon's most diverse public university, to provide the state-of-
the-art GPU facility and learning opportunities to students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes PSU's
first GPU computing infrastructure by acquiring twenty GPU servers with the
related high-performance data storage. This GPU infrastructure complements PSU's
Coeus high-performance computing cluster to support GPU-enabled research and
education at PSU and share with external users through the Open Science
Grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.