* 2019405
* Multiphase Chemo-Fluid Dynamics in the Stomach: Computational Models with Applications to Gastric Digestion in Health and Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Pankaj Pasricha, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 469,883.00

Human digestion is a complex process wherein ingested food is broken into
nutrients that can be used by the body for growth, cell maintenance, and fuel.
The stomach plays a pivotal role in digestion since it receives and stores
ingested food, mixes, softens and breaks it down via mechanical and chemical
processing, and then undergoes digestion in a regulated manner for absorption.
The goal of the current project is to develop a suite of advanced computational
tools to model the digestion process in the stomach and to employ these tools to
conduct a comprehensive investigation of the coupled chemo-fluid dynamic
mechanisms that underlie gastric digestion. Gastric digestion is implicated in
some of the most important health issues of our time: nutrition, food borne
illnesses, obesity and diabetes mellitus. Together, these illnesses affect
hundreds of millions of people around the world and the research conducted here
will have direct application to these health conditions. The computational tools
developed here will also find use in other arenas of mechanical, chemical and
biomedical engineering. Student training will contribute to a cadre of
scientists and engineers who are well-equipped to tackle the increasingly cross-
disciplinary nature of research and engineering. Outreach to the K-12 community
will leverage local connections with the Baltimore high schools, including women
and minority serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
computational tools that couple multifluid flows with biochemical reactions in
dynamically deforming domains as well as first-of-their-kind models for
dissolution of solid food particles via chemo-fluid mechanisms. Using these
tools, new and important insights into the flow physics that drives gastric
digestion in health and disease, will be generated. The physics of gastric
digestion is driven by three equally important factors – stomach motility,
multifluid/multiphase fluid dynamics, and gastric chemistry and the research
project tackles all three of these factors. In particular, the research will
answer the following key questions: how does stomach motility determine the
mixing, transport, chemical processing and emptying of multi-fluid food mixtures
in the stomach? How does the pH-sensitivity of enzymatic activity combine with
mixing-induced pH ``microclimates`` to modulate the chemical breakdown of
carbohydrate, lipid and protein rich foods in the stomach? How are solid foods
processed in the complex chemo-fluid dynamic environment of the stomach and what
role do particle-fluid and particle-wall interactions play in this
process?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.