* 2019346
* Neuroendocrine mechanisms regulating drinking behavior in females
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jessica Santollo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 07/31/2024
* USD 975,322.00

Maintaining adequate body fluid levels is essential for life. Mammals, including
humans, experience continual water and electrolyte loss through urine,
defecation, and the evaporation of fluids during sweating and breathing. To
replace these lost fluids, water and electrolyte consumption is necessary.
Failure to replace lost fluids results in fatigue, headache, cognitive
impairments, and ultimately will result in death. Therefore, understanding how
the body controls fluid intake is critical for understanding how animals
survive. Importantly, there is overwhelming evidence that the ovarian hormone
estradiol regulates fluid balance, and specifically fluid intake, in females.
However, how estradiol controls drinking behavior is not well understood. This
project addresses this fundamental question and thereby will contribute
critically to understanding of how estradiol controls fluid intake in females.
This question is important also because elucidating how estradiol controls
drinking is key to understanding how whole-body fluid balance is maintained in
females. The demand for fluid changes dramatically across the female
reproductive lifespan, both during pregnancy and lactation, and is coupled with
marked fluctuations in estradiol secretion during these times. Therefore,
research investigating how estradiol regulates intake is also necessary for
understanding cardiovascular physiology in females. An additional part of this
project is the dissemination of this work, and more generally information about
research in neuroendocrinology and hydration, to the public. Toward this goal,
the investigators of this project contribute to events at the University of
Kentucky, such as Expanding Your Horizons and BioBonanza. Finally, inclusion of
university students in this project provides training in scientific research and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how
estradiol inhibits fluid intake in female laboratory rats. Toward this goal, the
investigators test the overarching hypothesis that estradiol signaling in the
brain decreases angiotensin II-stimulated water and saline intake through
distinct actions of various estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes. The project
examines this question at multiple levels of analysis, from gene expression to
behavior, to determine the roles of estrogen receptor alpha, estrogen receptor
beta, and G protein estrogen receptor 1 in the regulation of fluid intake by
estradiol. Aim 1 use AAV-mediated shRNA knockdown of ER subtypes and parenchymal
injections of ER agonists to determine which areas of the brain and ER subtypes
are necessary and sufficient for estradiol’s inhibitory effect on water and
saline intake. Aim 2 quantifies gene and protein expression to determine if ER
subtypes differentially influence angiotensin type 1 receptor intracellular
signaling in areas of the brain that control fluid intake. Aim 3 uses
immunohistochemistry to determine if estradiol modulates excitatory and/or
inhibitory cells in fluid-relevant brain areas to inhibit fluid intake. In
addition to identifying how estradiol controls fluid intake in females, this
work will advance more generally understanding of how ovarian hormones signal in
the brain and influence behavior. This project is jointly funded by the
Modulation Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Biology and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.