* 2019959
* Visuospatial modulation of bimanual touch perception in real and virtual environments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Yau, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 379,229.00

In order to use our hands to manipulate objects, the nervous system must be able
to coordinate and interpret a large amount of disparate sensory information
about the position of our hands, the arrangement and positioning of the fingers,
and what each is contacting. The computations are complicated by the fact that
the information from the two hands must be interpreted relative to their spatial
position. For example, the left and right index fingers occupy adjacent spaces
when the hands are held together but the fingers can occupy vastly different
spaces when the arms are spread apart. In these different situations, we can
conceivably rely on our sense of vision to help interpret our sense of touch.
Vision can provide information about where our hands are in space as well as
what objects we touch and manipulate. Despite the obvious importance of vision
for interpreting touch information from the hands, the specific ways in which
the visual influence occurs remains poorly understood. This research is aimed at
investigating the effects of simple and complex visual cues on touch information
from the two hands in bimanual tasks. Understanding bimanual touch processing
will facilitate effective nonverbal physical communication between people and
intelligent machines and it will support the development of highly dexterous
robotic systems, advanced neuroprosthetics, and sensorimotor rehabilitation
strategies. Establishing how vision influences our perception of our body in
real and virtual environments has clear implications for society’s use of
immersive and interactive technologies. The project will also promote the
participation and education of young women in neuroscience and related STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research program uses rigorous
psychophysics, virtual reality technologies, and computational modeling to
elucidate the effects of simple and complex visuospatial cues on the perception
of bimanual touch. Behavioral experiments will be performed to quantify the
effects of simple light flashes on tactile perception and learning. Neural
network models will be fitted to the behavioral data to make inferences about
how the nervous system mediates visuotactile and spatial interactions and how
neural circuits may be modified through learning. The effects of complex visual
cues on proprioception and bimanual touch will also be examined by performing
psychophysics experiments in virtual reality. Specifically, visual
proprioception cues and virtual object information will be altered in a virtual
reality design, allowing the investigator to test hypotheses regarding
multisensory integration for proprioception and causal inference processing.
Collectively, the research program will yield novel insight into how visual
information modulates the perception of tactile cues experienced over the two
hands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by the M3X (Engineering) and PAC (Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences) Programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.