* 2019574
* RII Track-2 FEC: Data-Enabled Discovery and Design to Transform Liquid-Based Energy Storage (D3TaLES)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,988,194.00

From the deployment of portable electronics and sensors to electric and hybrid
vehicles and the reliability and security of the nation's electrical grid, there
is tremendous need to accelerate the ability to develop and deploy scalable,
reliable, safe, and location-independent energy storage. The mission of the
Data-enabled Discovery and Design to Transform Liquid-based Energy
Storage(D3TaLES) Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR
Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) is to create new domain knowledge in materials
science. This project will also capitalize on the large-scale creation,
collection, analysis, and modeling of curated data to design materials for next-
generation batteries that meet these technological challenges. Our work is
enabled by an interdisciplinary and diverse network of collaborators with
expertise in materials design, characterization, and deployment, autonomous
experimentation, data analytics, and machine learning, and program evaluation
and assessment. D3TaLES will broaden participation in science and engineering by
recruiting and training students from predominantly rural communities to be
leading energy scientists, cross-training physical scientists and data
scientists to enable the development of discipline-informed models, and
fostering the development of early-career faculty to lead large-scale research
centers. This team includes faculty, students, and staff from the University of
Kentucky, Eastern Kentucky University, University of Iowa, Iowa State
University, Cornell College, and the University of Northern Iowa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rational design of liquid-based energy-storage (LES)
materials is a considerable challenge due to the high dimensionality of the
chemical and physical spaces involved. To confront this problem, Data-enabled
Discovery and Design to Transform Liquid-based Energy Storage(D3TaLES)
establishes an interdisciplinary, collaborative team that combines domain
knowledge in materials creation and characterization with emerging best
practices in data science and machine learning (ML) to advance LES discovery and
design paradigms. The four technical objectives of D3TaLES are to (i) create a
database of vetted, published LES characteristics and automate experimentation
for more efficient generation of LES property data, (ii) evaluate changes in the
solution behavior and solvation environment of redox-active molecules as a
function of their molecular structure and charge state, (iii) link analyte
solubility and solvation at high concentrations to fundamental chemical
interactions as it impacts solvent and analyte structures and phase transitions
in traditional and ionic liquids (IL), and (iv) develop and deploy robust,
intuitive ML models to predict chemically novel LES materials. D3TaLES also
presents opportunities for extensive training and workforce development that
will have wide-ranging impact. The Academy for Collaborative Leadership (ACL)
will prepare early-career faculty to build and lead diverse groups of
researchers and serve as the next-generation of academic research-center
directors. Project personnel will be trained beyond their core disciplines,
bridging expertise between chemistry and data sciences, ML, and autonomous
experimentation. Training opportunities for undergraduate students that connect
fundamental research with social context will be designed to increase
participation and retention in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.