* 2019163
* CC* Integration-Small: Error Free File Transfer for Big Science
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Anton Betten, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 470,384.00

Scientific data transfers have gotten so large that previously rare transmission
errors in the Internet are causing some scientific data transfers to be
corrupted. The Internet's error checking mechanisms were designed at a time when
a megabyte was a large file. Now files can contain terabytes. The old error
checking mechanisms are in danger of being overwhelmed. This project seeks to
find new error checking mechanisms for the Internet to safely move tomorrow's
scientific data efficiently and without errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses two fundamental issues. First, the Internet's checksums and
message digests are too small (32-bits) and probably are poorly tuned to today's
error patterns. It is a little-known fact that checksums can (and typically
should) be designed to reliably catch specific errors. A good checksum is
designed to protect against errors that it will actually encounter. So the first
step in this project is to collect information about the kinds of transmission
errors currently happening in the Internet for a comprehensive study. Second,
today's file transfer protocols, if they find a file has been corrupted in
transit, simply discard the file and transfer it again. In a world in which the
file is huge (tens of terabytes or even petabytes long), that's a tremendous
waste. Rather, the file transfer protocol should seek to repair the corrupted
parts of the file. As the project collects data about errors, it will also
design a new file transfer protocol that can incrementally verify and repair
files.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the Internet's ability to
support big data transfers, both for science and commerce, for decades to come.
Users will be able to transfer big files with confidence that the data will be
accurately and efficiently copied over the network. This work will further NSF's
Blueprint for a National Cyberinfrastructure Ecosystem by ensuring a world in
which networks work efficiently to deliver trustworthy copies of big data to
anyone who needs it. Additional information on the project is available at:
www.hipft.net&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.