* 2019751
* 2020 Multiscale Plant Vascular Biology GRC/GRS, Newry, Maine, June 7-12,2020
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Brent Helliker, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2023
* USD 41,895.00

The June 2020 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) “Multiscale Plant Vascular
Biology” concentrates on the subtopic “Assessing Plant Vascular Function Through
Optical Approaches.” Conference speakers will highlight novel optical approaches
that are currently being deployed to assess plant acquisition and movement of
water from the scale of gene expression through cellular, tissue, whole plant,
landscape, and global levels. The conference draws together researchers from the
full spectrum of perspectives on water use by plants and allows interaction
between researchers who typically do not attend the same conferences. The
conveners will share cutting-edge state of knowledge research advances and
attendees will learn about resources (people and ideas) to advance their own
research. Preceding the primary conference, there will be a Gordon Research
seminar (GRS) aimed at early career scientists and students to help them develop
professional networks and learn new scientific developments in the field. Both
the GRC and GRS advance a science that is of basic importance to all organisms
and social and political institutions on Earth in an era of rapid global change.
All life on Earth depends on plants for fixing solar energy in a usable form, as
well as for regulation of climate, water, and carbon cycles that affect human
well-being and survival. The conferences will facilitate deep thought on the
water and carbon cycles on Earth, and the roles of plants within them. The
primary GRC program includes members of underrepresented groups in science and
presenters from a range of career levels. Of the thirty-one speakers, four are
at the associate professor rank, seven at the assistant professor rank, and four
are postdoctoral associates. Sixteen of the speakers are women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across an exceedingly large range of environmental
variation, vascular plants must replace water lost from leaves during
photosynthesis, and supply sugars to growing organs. Plants accomplish this by
maintaining xylem and phloem transport in coordination with stomata using a
complex array of anatomical properties, cell processes, and by coordinating
vascular traits in leaves, stems and roots. The recognized importance of plant
water transport has increased research efforts over the last several decades,
and the multitude of scales over which transport can be studied means that
researchers gather at separate conferences; thus impeding information exchange
across specialty areas. With this in mind, this conference brings together
researchers who examine plant hydraulics from gene expression through to global-
scale fluxes. This conference aims to 1) forge interdisciplinary interactions
across the range of fields and biological scales encompassed by vascular plant
biology and 2) broaden participation of underrepresented groups at all career
stages. The conference has a strong track record of gender balance and diversity
relative to the field as a whole. The meeting is structured to encourage
interaction and discussion. It features a discussion on women’s issues in
science, a social program, and an opportunity for junior and senior scientists
to pair up with the aim of mentoring and establishing professional
contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.