* 2019240
* Collaborative Research:FMitF:Track 1: DOPaMINe: Distributed Opportunistic Platform for Monitoring In-Situ Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sandip Ray, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Given the importance of emerging wireless networks that utilize dynamic spectrum
allocation to the future national economy, it is critical to find protocol
shortcomings that can result in failures as well as determine mechanisms for
detection and defense against attacks that exploit protocol vulnerabilities
either in the protocol specifications or their implementations. This research
will develop a distributed opportunistic platform for monitoring deployed
wireless networks and formal verification tools that use this data to certify
safe and robust protocol operation in the field. Measurements of 4G LTE networks
using a software-defined radio (SDR) platform will provide the runtime traces
and channel information for new verification algorithms. New tools for rapidly
verifying correct protocol operation in a variety of real-world operational
scenarios will be developed. The research results will be integrated into next-
generation protocol design. Consequently, this work will have a transformative
societal impact by dramatically increasing the robustness and security of
emergent wireless protocols. A key impact will be early identification of
protocol and implementation weaknesses, which will be communicated to industry
and standards organizations. All aspects of the framework, including
architectures, tools, and case studies, will be made publicly available. Hands-
on training modules will be developed to illustrate key concepts of wireless
protocols and their security implications, which will be integrated into
graduate/undergraduate classes. These courses will provide a key pathway for the
dissemination of the research results. Female and minority students will be
engaged through interdisciplinary research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach being pursued is to apply formal-verification methods to wireless
networks, where runtime traces are used to verify the correctness of operation
against a specification. These methods are well understood and have been applied
extensively in many hardware-software platforms with demonstrated success.
However, they typically are used for systems with complete knowledge of runtime
behaviors. In cellular systems that are distributed, there are not necessarily
complete traces and complete instantaneous system states (e.g., interference
data at different locations or mobile users who encounter different channel
states). Therefore, this research will seek to extend formal-verification
methods to the wireless-network domain, where there are incomplete and changing
states and incomplete traces. The outcome of the work will be tools for
collecting runtime traces and cell states and verification algorithms that can
then verify correct operation or quickly detect failures caused by improper
implementation or attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.