* 2019609
* RII Track-2 FEC: Leveraging Big Data to Improve Prediction of Tick-Borne Disease Patterns and Dynamics
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Frederick Harris, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,954,183.00

Tick-borne diseases (TDs) account for a staggering 94% of human illnesses due to
vector-borne diseases in the U.S. The mission of this project is to assimilate
disparate datasets with spatio-temporal, environmental and human predictors and
to leverage cyberinfrastructure and data science to enhance forecasting of TDs
in the western US. The core members of this project are from universities in
three EPSCoR jurisdictions: University of Idaho, University of Nevada, Reno, and
Dartmouth College (New Hampshire). The collaboration will build capacity across
traditional boundaries of research and practice, with an aim to change the way
people tackle TDs. Building upon the best practices and standards for open data,
the findability and reusability of the assimilated datasets will be improved to
enable new analyses and findings. Accordingly, the contributions of this project
will have broad and sustained impacts on TD, a public health issue of national
importance. With the early-career faculty mentoring activities, this project
will increase the pool of academics and practitioners in a collaborative network
for improved prediction and informed response to TDs in the western US. The
digital games and demos released by the project will help improve the awareness
of TDs among the general public. The efforts of this project will also support
underserved and largely rural populations at high risk of TDs. All the training
programs, including postdoc and graduate student positions, will give priority
to women and underrepresented minority groups. Through the national Big Data
innovation ecosystem, this project will add a new community of practice via
shared deliverables, datasets and complementary knowledge to improve monitoring
and forecasting of TDs across US and the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to NSFâ€™s big ideas on Harnessing the Data Revolution and
Growing Convergence Research through data-intensive research for improved
prediction of TDs. The central scientific hypothesis is that, climate change
will increase the prevalence of TDs throughout the western US, both through
altering the geographic and seasonal distributions of ticks as well as
interacting factors of environment, ecology, socioeconomics, and human behavior.
The project team will collect and develop application-level datasets, knowledge
graphs, tools, and innovative data science methods to advance the understanding
of factors, patterns, and risks for TDs in the western US. The research includes
three focused scientific objectives: (1) An advanced framework for TD research:
Sparse data collection and FAIR framework, workflow provenance, and algorithms
for a data life cycle; (2) Identify the changing patterns in tick importation
routes, pathogens, and TD dynamics in the West; and (3) Develop spatio-temporal
models of tick dynamics that link TDs to climate, environment and socioeconomic
factors. The team will incorporate expertise in complementary disciplines to
generate enriched open data, promote innovation and capacity in big data
analytics, and develop training, education and outreach programs for sustained
impact. Through the teamwork, the research will produce fresh understanding of
the interacting factors in TD dynamics. Resources and mentoring to support
early-career professionals will build towards sustained productivity. We will
bring state-of-the-art knowledge and skills to postdocs, students and other
practitioners to nurture a new workforce. This collaborative project will engage
academic, state, federal and local partners to create a connected and smart
network to tackle TDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.