* 2019014
* MRI: Acquisition of a femtosecond laser system for time-resolved studies using Arizona State University's (ASU) Compact X-ray Light Source (CXLS)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Alexandra Navrotsky, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 771,919.00

An award is made to Arizona State University (ASU) to acquire a state-of-the-art
Coherent Astrella, high power, ultrafast laser system (Astrella) that will be
used to trigger dynamic processes in natural, engineered and quantum materials
as imaged using ASU’s first-of-its-kind compact X-ray light source (CXLS). A
postdoctoral associate will help integrate the Astrella laser with the CXLS
providing a rich training opportunity using world-class tools (CXLS is a
national laboratory-level tool at a university), interdisciplinary topics, and
building diverse collaborations that may lead to high ranking publications and
career networking. Undergraduate and graduate students from biology, chemistry,
physics, data science, and engineering will play key roles during commissioning
and laser-driven X-ray science experiments by assisting with accelerator and
beamline engineering and maintenance, beamline configuration, sample preparation
and delivery, data collection, data analysis and structural
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capabilities of the Astrella-CXLS system will
attract a large user community—primarily from the Southwestern US, but also
leading experts across the world—including 33 users committed from eight
domestic universities, two international universities (Spain, Germany) and one
national lab. This will enable researchers to conduct cutting-edge experiments
to 1) unravel the secrets of photosynthesis with important impacts in
agriculture, forests, and oceans, as well as light-sensing in bacteria and human
vision; 2) develop completely new science for human engineered proteins and
synthetic catalysts, which have not been previously studied at national X-ray
laser facilities, and will enable next generation technologies for converting
solar energy to fuels; 3) initiate light-driven changes in novel quantum
materials with the ultimate goal of manipulating superconductors and spin-based
quantum computers. The potentially transformative results from the research
enabled by the Astrella-CXLS system will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
publications and at scientific meetings across a broad range of scientific
fields, including biology, chemistry, quantum physics, materials science, and
the earth and planetary sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.