* 2019719
* STC: Center for OLDest Ice EXploration
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 10,056,950.00

Cores drilled through the Antarctic ice sheet provide a remarkable window on the
evolution of Earth’s climate and unique samples of the ancient atmosphere. The
clear link between greenhouse gases and climate revealed by ice cores underpins
much of the scientific understanding of climate change. Unfortunately, the
existing data do not extend far enough back in time to reveal key features of
climates warmer than today. COLDEX, the Center for Oldest Ice Exploration, will
solve this problem by exploring Antarctica for sites to collect the oldest
possible record of past climate recorded in the ice sheet. COLDEX will provide
critical information for understanding how Earth’s near-future climate may
evolve and why climate varies over geologic time. New technologies will be
developed for exploration and analysis that will have a long legacy for future
research. An archive of old ice will stimulate new research for the next
generations of polar scientists. COLDEX programs will galvanize that next
generation of polar researchers, bring new results to other scientific
disciplines and the public, and help to create a more inclusive and diverse
scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of Earth’s climate history
is grounded in the geologic record. This knowledge is gained by measuring
chemical, biological and physical properties of geologic materials that reflect
elements of climate. Ice cores retrieved from polar ice sheets play a central
role in this science and provide the best evidence for a strong link between
atmospheric carbon dioxide and climate on geologic timescales. The goal of
COLDEX is to extend the ice-core record of past climate to at least 1.5 million
years by drilling and analyzing a continuous ice core in East Antarctica, and to
much older times using discontinuous ice sections at the base and margin of the
ice sheet. COLDEX will develop and deploy novel radar and melt-probe tools to
rapidly explore the ice, use ice-sheet models to constrain where old ice is
preserved, conduct ice coring, develop new analytical systems, and produce novel
paleoclimate records from locations across East Antarctica. The search for
Earth’s oldest ice also provides a compelling narrative for disseminating
information about past and future climate change and polar science to students,
teachers, the media, policy makers and the public. COLDEX will engage and
incorporate these groups through targeted professional development workshops,
undergraduate research experiences, a comprehensive communication program,
annual scientific meetings, scholarships, and broad collaboration nationally and
internationally. COLDEX will provide a focal point for efforts to increase
diversity in polar science by providing field, laboratory, mentoring and
networking experiences for students and early career scientists from groups
underrepresented in STEM, and by continuous engagement of the entire COLDEX
community in developing a more inclusive scientific
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.