* 2019297
* CIBR: BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Next generation Protein Data Bank - FACT infrastructure with value added FAIR data supporting diverse research and education user communities.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* John Westbrook, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,612,028.00

This US RCSB Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB)/Protein Data Bank in Europe (PDBe)
collaborative project aims to improve data deposition, delivery, and management
of three- dimensional (3D) macromolecular structure information stored in single
global public data resource known as the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The PDB
currently houses ~160,000 experimentally determined 3D structures of proteins
and nucleic acids. It is managed according to the FAIR Principles on an open
access basis by the Worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB) partnership, which
includes RCSB PDB, PDBe, Protein Data Bank Japan, and BioMagResBank. This
project will transform the relatively static PDB archive into a living data
resource composed of 3D structure information integrated with up-to- date
annotations and metadata that relate each structure to its biochemical,
cellular, or organismal context. Accurate data integration will help basic and
applied researchers coming from agriculture to zoology, who are not experts in
structural and computational biology, better understand and more fully utilize
3D structures in their day-to-day work in wet and dry laboratories. This new
data repository will also enable 3D structural comparisons of proteins from
different with similar or identical biochemical and biological functions thereby
improving our understanding of protein evolution at the atomic level. The wwPDB
maintains an information portal describing PDB global resources at
https://www.wwpdb.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses significant
software engineering challenges, resulting from growth in the number and
size/complexity of newly deposited macromolecular crystallography (MX) and
single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (3DEM) structures, and the need to
manage groups of related structures coming from serial femtosecond X-ray
crystallography (SFX) using X-ray Free Electron Lasers (XFEL) and 3DEM. The
project will improve the fidelity and completeness of 3D structure data
deposited into the PDB by harvesting data automatically from structure
determination software packages, and streamlining the wwPDB data deposition,
validation, and biocuration system known as OneDep. The project will improve the
accessibility of PDB data for researchers, educators, and students by extending
chemical metadata for small-molecule ligands (e.g., bound cofactors and
inhibitors), incorporating enhanced descriptions of macromolecular assemblies,
grouping related PDB structures into investigations for more efficient, parallel
data delivery; and creating a “Next Generation” PDB data repository with up-to-
date metadata. Finally, the project will modernize wwPDB information technology
infrastructure to futureproof PDB data management and weekly PDB archive release
to the public domain by developing new application programming interfaces (APIs)
and microservices infrastructure, and updating existing mechanisms for
synchronization of data and software across wwPDB data centers in the US,
Europe, and Asia. This work will directly benefit researchers, educators, and
their students across the natural, physical, and engineering
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.