* 2019074
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer at Idaho State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rene Rodriguez, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,085.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Idaho State University is acquiring a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with an automatic sample
changer to support Professors Andrew Holland, Rene Rodriguez, Caryn Evilia,
Courtney Jenkins, Srinath Pashikanti and other colleagues. This spectrometer
allows research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical
reactions of significant economic importance, as well as permitting study of
biologically relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of students in chemistry and biochemistry
including underrepresented students and those with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. It especially facilitates studies of the
structures of peptides produced by microorganisms that grow in or can tolerate
saline conditions (halophiles) and for preparing chiral aminobutenolide synthons
derived from the aminoacid L-serine. The instrumentation is also used in
investigations of molecular precursors for earth-abundant semiconducting
nanomaterials of relevance to manufacturing. In addition, it provides
information to aid analyses and modifications of polysulfide materials and for
replacing chalcogens in new metal and hydrogen bonding organic frameworks. The
spectrometer is also used to characterize natural products found in the
indigenous flora of the intermountain west.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.