* 2019674
* STC: Center for Research On Programmable Plant Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Rebecca Mosher, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2026
* USD 10,000,000.00

This NSF Science and Technology Center aims to devise a two-way communication
system between humans and plants that will dramatically enhance the ability to
predict, design, and mediate biological behavior in crop-based agriculture. This
transdisciplinary effort brings together plant sciences, engineering, computer
science, and science and technology studies to establish an enabling framework
for the systematic discovery of the rules that govern biological behavior of
plant systems in field environments. The team’s approach couples genetic,
biochemical, cellular, organismal and ecological principles with environmental
and socio-economic considerations. In parallel, the Center's research drives
innovation in systems and synthetic biology, biotechnology, nanotechnology,
automation, robotics, computing, and communication. The Center educates students
through new curriculum and research engagements that integrate computer science,
engineering, and public engagement with knowledge in biology and the life
sciences for undergraduate, master's, and Ph.D. students. The Center integrates
public engagement throughout all activities to drive continuous, iterative
dialogue between the Center's researchers, stakeholders in the agricultural
sector, and the general public. The Center strives to engage the full diversity
of our society and broaden participation in its mission by creating pipelines
into STEM fields and sustained mentoring for students and young professionals
from rural and underrepresented minority communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
pursuit of its scientific and technological goals and its aim for broader
impacts, the Center organizes research across an innovation engine with four
technological thrusts and a discovery engine with four research themes called
living laboratories. These interlinked teams engage in continuous cycles of
design-build-test-learn across disciplines, technical challenges, and scientific
and social goals. The innovation engine focuses on building and integrating the
elements of an Internet-of-Living-Things (IoLT) through the following Thrusts:
(1) Biotransducers give rise to programmable plants through synthetic biological
gene circuits that enable bidirectional communications between molecular
processes in plants and digital sensors. (2) Nanotransducers improve and
complement molecular biological transducers to enable communication between
plants and digital systems. (3) Digital interfaces develop agile and cooperative
robots, communications technologies, and edge-computing capabilities to mediate
efficient communication between programmable plants and cloud-hosted models. (4)
Digital systems develop integrated multi-scale models of plant systems that
integrate data and orchestrate actuation across the IoLT with hybrid mechanistic
and data-driven strategies. Furthermore, the Living Laboratories of the
discovery engine interact with all thrusts in pursuit of the following research
themes: (1) Resource use and growth optimization deploy programmable plants to
dissect the pathways that define water and nitrogen use and plant development,
and modulate these processes for improved outcomes in productivity and
sustainability. (2) Predictive modeling and germplasm improvement use the IoLT,
programmable plants, and integrative multi-scale models to predict emergent
phenotypes in complex environments and accelerate the process of breeding crops
with improved performance. (3) Plant-microbe interactions apply technologies
from the innovation engine to access the physical, chemical, and microbial
dynamics of the near-root zone or rhizosphere and integrate plant-microbiome
characteristics into systems biology models, breeding strategies, and crop
management. (4) Public engagement permeates all Center activities to facilitate
and study productive interactions among researchers, stakeholders, and general
publics around the development, understanding, and communication of scientific
and technological goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.