* 2019263
* FMitF: Track I: Vayu: Verifying Infrastructure for Safe and Performant Tunable Consistency
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This project considers new ways to ensure the safety and correctness of
database-backed applications that execute on modern-day cloud platforms.
Applications developed for these environments must deal with a host of important
concerns, ranging from fault-tolerance to scalability. These issues complicate
how to reason about their correctness, especially with respect to proving they
exhibit desired behavior as defined by their specifications. The particular
directions that are explored in this project synergistically combine ideas from
formal methods, probabilistic reasoning, and runtime systems to alleviate this
shortcoming by providing an automated verification
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of the project is understanding
the implications of non-opaque system-level implementations of database state
such as sharding and quorum replication, used to improve availability and
throughput, on application correctness. While these approaches have proven to
work well in workloads that have high data volumes but are predominantly read-
only, their semantics becomes complicated when applied to applications that
support many short-lived frequently-updated transactions. Understanding how the
weakly-consistent distributed state supported by this system model affects
correctness is an important problem in these environments. The project has two
main research thrusts to address these concerns. The first considers the use of
formal methods to characterize desired application behavior. The second devise
probabilistic models that capture average-case behavior, and uses these models
to guide the creation of new runtime protocols that guarantee correct operation
even when average-case assumptions are violated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
growing interest in using cloud-based platforms for executing database-backed
applications. The solutions that are explored in this project balance the need
for scalable, high-throughput performance with strong correctness guarantees,
thus offering the ability to lower the risk, effort and cost of application
development and maintenance without compromising performance. Given the
significance of these platforms in commercial, government, and academic research
and development, the implications of offering highly-assured and efficient
database applications in this setting are noteworthy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
project repository housing papers, code, tools, data, and experimental results
will be maintained by the PIs at
URL:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/suresh/projects/vayu. This URL
will be available indefinitely and serve as the main source for dissemination of
ongoing project efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.