* 2019004
* MRI: Development of a 50-Tesla Ultrabroadband Magneto-optical Spectroscopy System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ming Yi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,519,461.00

This project develops a unique facility at Rice University that houses an
ultracompact pulsed magnet combined with an arsenal of state-of-the-art
instruments for materials research. A distinctive feature of this system is the
combination of a strong magnetic field with ultrashort laser pulses covering a
broad spectrum. This unconventional coupling of magnetism and optics can produce
new scientific knowledge and exciting breakthroughs, advancing the frontier of
materials physics and chemistry. With current collaborations with Japanese and
French researchers, the novel facility positions Rice University as an
international hub for materials researchers. The project also features a
multifaceted workforce development plan run through the facility wherein
graduate students receive hands-on experience in developing, fabricating, and
disseminating miniature magnet models during classroom demonstrations. Workforce
impact extends beyond the current project reaching an anticipated ~50 Ph.D.
students over 10 years, thereby producing a new generation of rigorously
educated and trained material scientists and engineers who are equipped with the
technical expertise to advance fundamental and applied research well into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is the development of
a 50-Tesla ultrabroadband magneto-optical spectroscopy system, a unique facility
that houses an ultracompact pulsed magnet combined with an arsenal of state-of-
the-art instruments for modern materials, which has the potential to impact
numerous technologies, including computation, communications, and sensing, in
ways never before possible. The system combines a mini-coil magnet, an ultrafast
ultrabroadband laser, and photodetection systems to develop various magneto-
spectroscopic capabilities that will allow scientists to conduct transformative
research. The system and research conducted therein provide new insights into
the states, dynamics, and behaviors of electrons in unique materials that
exhibit novel properties in high magnetic fields, including the spontaneous
appearance of macroscopic coherence of excitons; nonequilibrium dynamics of
Dirac fermions in a quantizing magnetic field; spin dynamics of strongly-
interacting, one-dimensional electrons; states in high temperature
superconductors; and magnon-polaritons. Team members are world leaders in an
array of research areas: magneto-optical and ultrafast optical studies of low-
dimensional systems, terahertz spectroscopy of nanomaterials, and theoretical
and experimental condensed matter physics. The system is operated and maintained
for Rice University researchers and external collaborators from around the
world, making Rice a hub for an international network of materials
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.