* 2019507
* Viscoelastic Characterization of Multicellular Tissues in Physiologically Relevant Conditions through Probe Indentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Kausik Sarkar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 492,497.00

This award will produce new knowledge about the mechanical behavior of cancer
tissues. Specifically, microscopic measurements of mechanical behavior will be
made as the disease progresses. In this project, the focus will be on skin
cancers. However, the findings will be applicable to other diseases for which
tissues undergo mechanical changes such as arteriosclerosis. The project will
deliver the new methods and sensors capable of use in the native liquid
environment of biological materials. Establishing a link between cancer
progression and mechanical changes in tissues could ultimately have applications
to human health. For example, the results of this work could enable the
development of patient-specific disease databases, and standards for mechanical
tissue behaviors. These might eventually allow classification by individual
patient history and information. This could have a transformative effect on
medicine and biology research, as mechanical information is not yet broadly
considered, much less classified in engineering terms. This research involves
several disciplines, including medicine, biology, materials science and
mechanical engineering. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biological materials are
viscoelastic and may respond according to multiple characteristic timescales
which are generally not captured in existing mechanical characterization
methods, especially micro- and nanoscale approaches. Such methods often reduce
the mechanical response to elastic quantities, such as the Young’s modulus, or
combinations of a few quantities that empirically combine dissipative and
elastic behaviors. This project will develop viscoelastic property inversion
methods, whereby the sample is probed using a microscale indenter, and the
measured response is translated into a generalized viscoelastic model containing
an arbitrary number of characteristic times. This approach will allow
quantification of material behaviors in engineering units, which will allow
comparison of different specimens measured on different instruments by different
researchers. The project also includes development of the indentation apparatus,
which will resemble an atomic force microscope, but will be tailored to the
typical relaxation timescales observed in biological materials, which are
significantly larger than those probed by commercial atomic force microscopes.
The project will involve computational and analytical modeling of the fluid
dynamics surrounding the probe and sample to incorporate corrections due to
fluid forces, which can in some cases obscure the probe-sample interactions for
soft materials. Finally, the new apparatus and methods will be employed to
acquire the viscoelastic signature of melanoma cancer and healthy skin cell
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.