* 2019371
* Collaborative Research:  Moving with muscles vs. springs: evolutionary biomechanics of extremely fast, small systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mark Ilton, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,359.00

Movement in biology is most often associated with motor-like mechanisms, such as
muscle contractions in animals or hydraulics in plants. However, organisms have
another option for generating movement: they can use motor-like mechanisms to
load energy into elastic structures, such that pre-loaded, rubber band-like
elastic structures generate the movement, instead of motors. Latch-mediated
spring actuation generates movement largely or exclusively using stored elastic
energy and incorporates latches to mediate energy release, much like controlled
release of a coiled spring. This research examines how the size of an organism
may determine whether movement is driven by stored elastic energy or direct
motor action. Addressing this topic will improve understanding of fundamental
physical limits on biological systems and how those limits influence development
and evolution. Biological latch-mediated spring actuation generates among the
fastest movements ever recorded, which exceed the current capabilities of human
engineering to produce extremely fast movements in small, reusable devices. The
discoveries from this research can help develop novel engineering devices and
materials. This interdisciplinary team of research labs spans biology, physics,
and materials science, and will train undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers across four colleges and universities. The research activities will
engage the broader public through a Research Experience for Teachers program
each summer, alongside expansion of the Muser software program, which helps
diverse undergraduates access research experiences in an equitable and
transparent way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Latch-mediated spring actuation uses
materials, not motors, to generate extremely fast movement in small systems.
Energy is loaded into materials prior to movement and latches control loading
and release of energy. This research examines the transitions between motor-
driven and spring-driven movement within and across organisms. Across growth and
development within species, experiments and modeling will test how mantis shrimp
(Stomatopoda) maintain their mechanical capabilities and exhibit transitions
between motor- and spring-driven movement across eight orders of magnitude of
accelerated mass - a key predictor of the physics-based transition between
effective motor- and spring-driven movement in any system. Across mantis shrimp
species, variation in spring and latch components will be analyzed through
statistical comparisons of the tempo (rate of evolutionary change) and mode
(pattern of evolutionary change) to establish the key biomechanical factors
limiting and promoting evolutionary diversification. Across the tree of life,
the influence of accelerated mass and materials on origins and diversification
will be tested using phylogenetic comparative analyses. Variation, transitions,
and tuning of these mechanisms are informative for engineers designing small,
fast, re-usable mechanisms at these extreme spatial and temporal scales.
Undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher will receive
interdisciplinary training across the four labs. A Research Experience for
Teachers program will provide interdisciplinary research experience and course
development centered on these inherently engaging systems. The researchers will
use, promote, and develop an open access software platform called Muser which is
designed to enhance access and equity for undergraduate research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.