* 2019982
* Wisdom-of-Crowds Approaches for Improving Predictions from Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Drazen Prelec, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 380,000.00

This research project will investigate how survey accuracy can be improved using
the wisdom of crowds. Surveys are important tools for making inferences about
current attitudes, opinions, and behaviors as well as making forecasts about
future trends. However, they are facing threats to their validity that can
decrease the accuracy of their inferences. The project will explore the value of
two methods based on the wisdom of crowds for improving survey accuracy. One
method entails using respondents' knowledge of their social circles, that is,
asking respondents to predict the behavior of friends and family. The other
method is a scoring procedure that rewards honest and careful answers. By
conducting fine-grained tests of the mechanisms underlying these methods, the
project will provide insights regarding how to reduce common threats to the
validity of surveys. The project also will inform ways to capture the early
indications of opinion change relevant for elections and other societal trends.
The results could change the way election polls are conducted and improve
election predictions. Data from this project will be made publicly available.
The results will be disseminated broadly to scientists, practitioners in survey
research, polling companies, politicians, policy makers, public educators,
journalists, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will examine how political polling accuracy can be improved by incorporating
respondents' knowledge of their social-circles and by scoring respondents'
answers with the Bayesian Truth Serum algorithm. Social-circle expectation
questions ask respondents how their family and friends will vote. Bayesian Truth
Serum is a scoring method that can be used to incentivize and selectively weight
participants who provide honest and careful answers. The investigators will
assess how the combination of both methods can overcome four recognized threats
to polling validity: biased samples, careless responding, socially desirable
responding, and social dynamics. A longitudinal survey with a probabilistic
national sample will be conducted. The survey will consist of three waves before
the 2020 U.S. presidential election and one wave after the election. The
investigators will compare traditional survey questions with wisdom-of-crowd
methods. Benchmarks will include other concurrent polls and forecasting models
and eventually the actual election results and a post-election
survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.