* 2019363
* Rank-based Inference for Complex and Noisy High-dimensional Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Fang Han, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 290,000.00

This research project will develop a unified set of statistical, computational,
and software tools to address data mining and discovery science challenges in
the analysis of complex and noisy high-dimensional data. Data with these
characteristics are common in many fields, including the health sciences,
economics, finance, and neuroscience. However, statistical methods to analyze
these types of data have not kept up with the development of new technologies
and new datasets. This project will develop robust data analysis methods that
are scalable to large complex datasets. The ability to minimize the impact of
high dimensionality, data complexity, and noisiness on data analysis will
facilitate new discoveries in important areas such as health and economics. The
project will conduct both theoretical and empirical studies. Publicly available
software will be disseminated to complement the research activities. The
investigator will mentor graduate students in statistics and social sciences and
will seek to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop multivariate rank-based
methods that are robust to model misspecification, outliers, missing values, and
data dependency. Three problems associated with rank-based inference for complex
and noisy high-dimensional data will be addressed. First, multivariate rank-
based statistical methods for robust functional principal component analysis
will be developed. These new methods will improve on current functional
principal component analysis tools for noisy data and will be applied to the
analysis of physical activity data. Motivated in part by studies of complex and
noisy stock market and neuroimaging data, the project will devise multivariate
rank-based dependence measures as new quantifications for measuring between-
group dependences. The new quantifications will simultaneously incorporate
nonlinear dependence measurement, consistency of testing, robustness, and
distribution-freeness. Building on the second activity, the project will
estimate group-level networks through multivariate rank-based dependence
measures to characterize conditional instead of marginal independence
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.