* 2019992
* RUI: Pattern and process in four decades of change on Caribbean reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2025
* USD 705,074.00

The coral reef crisis refers to the high rates of death affecting tropical reef-
building corals throughout the world, and the strong likelihood that coral reefs
will become functionally extinct within the current century. Knowledge of these
trends comes from the monitoring of coral reefs to evaluate their health over
time, with the most informative projects providing high-resolution information
extending over decades. Such projects describe both how reefs are changing, and
answer questions addressing the causes of the changes and the form in which
reefs will persist in the future. This project focuses on coral reefs in United
States waters, specifically around St. John in the US Virgin Islands. These
reefs are protected within the Virgin Islands National Park, and have been
studied more consistently and in greater detail than most reefs anywhere in the
world. Building from 33 years of research, this project extends monitoring of
these habitats by another five years, and uses the emerging base of knowledge,
and the biological laboratory created by the reefs of St. John, to address the
causes and consequences of the bottleneck preventing baby corals from
repopulating the reefs. The work is accomplished with annual expeditions,
staffed by faculty, graduate students, undergraduates, and teachers, coupled
with analyses of samples at California State University, Northridge, and Florida
State University, Tallahassee. The students and teachers assist with the
research goals at the center of this project, but also engage in independent
study and integrate with the rich and diverse societal context and natural
history of the Caribbean. The scope of the science agenda extends to schools in
California, where students are introduced to the roles played by marine animals
in ecosystem health, concepts of long-term change in the biological world, and
the role of science engagement in promoting positive environmental outcomes. In
addition to generating a wide spectrum of project deliverables focusing on
scientific discovery, the project promotes STEM careers and train globally aware
scientists and educators capable of supporting the science agenda of the United
States in the 21st Century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages one of
the longest time-series analyses of Caribbean coral reefs to extend the time-
series from 33 to 38 years, and it tests hypotheses addressing the causes and
consequences of changing coral reef community structure. The project focuses on
reefs within the Virgin Islands National Park (VINP) and along the shore of St.
John, US Virgin Islands, and is integrated with stakeholders working in
conservation (VINP) and local academia (University of the Virgin Islands).
Beginning in 1987, the project has addressed detail-oriented analyses within a
small spatial area that complements the large-scale analyses conducted by the
VINP. The results of these efforts create an unrivaled context within which
ecologically relevant hypotheses can be tested to elucidate mechanisms driving
ecological change. Building from image- and survey- based analyses, 33 years of
data reveal the extent to which these reefs have transitioned to a low-abundance
coral state, and the importance of the bottleneck preventing coral recruits from
contributing to adult size classes. The intellectual merits of this project
leverage these discoveries to address eight hypotheses: (H1) long-term changes
are defining a cryptic regime change, with the low coral abundance reinforced
by, (H2) enhanced community resilience, (H3) low post-settlement success, (H4)
negative effects of peyssonnelid algal crusts (PAC) on juvenile corals, (H5)
inability of juvenile corals to match their phenotypes to future conditions,
(H6) impaired population growth caused by reduced genetic diversity, (H7) the
premium placed on PAC-free halos around Diadema sea urchins for coral
recruitment, and (H8) biotic homogenization occurring on a landscape-
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.