* 2019458
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Learning of Vehicle Energy Performance Models
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Jacopo Guanetti, AV-CONNECT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2021
* USD 255,352.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research an
internet-of-things (IoT) platform to automatically learn vehicle energy
performance models (VEPMs). VEPMs are used to predict driving range and battery
state of health in electric vehicles (EVs) on a per-vehicle, per-driver, per-
route basis, and 8-10 times more accurately than today. It is estimated that
over $150 billion will be invested in the electric vehicle ecosystem over the
next decade. A significant obstacle hindering rapid EV adoption is range anxiety
representing user concerns over the achievable distance and where/ when to
charge the EV. Range anxiety can be alleviated by providing EV drivers with
contextual intelligence on their realistic driving range and recommended
charging strategy, based on travel plans, driving behavior and vehicle model.
Increasing EV adoption by consumers reduces transportation system fossil fuel
consumption and emissions. As part of this effort, a cloud application
programming interface (API) will deliver predictions based on the learned VEPMs;
this will also enable energy-aware applications such as eco-routing, eco-
cruising, eco-powertrain control, and planning of charging stops, among others,
both at the individual vehicle and at the fleet level. Energy-aware applications
can increase the overall energy efficiency of electrified
fleets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to
advance an IoT architecture to automatically learn VEPMs from real-time vehicle
sensor telemetry and other data, such as maps and route topography. The plan is
divided into three integrated goals: (1) the building of an IoT framework
leveraging physics principles to capture the vehicle motion and powertrain
efficiencies, as well as data-driven approaches to capture human factors, and
uncertainty in maps and measurements, (2) efforts to address scalability and
generalization of the learning in geographical areas with limited data and
reduced expert supervision, and (3) the experimental validation of the platform
on real-world driving data collected in a set of representative conditions.
Statistical learning theory will be merged with predictive control theory using
a mix of physics-based and data-driven models in the learning process.
Scalability and accuracy will be attained by updating models in real-time using
data and sharing models among vehicles of the same
manufacturer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.