* 2019914
* Collaborative Research:  Causes and Consequences of Relativistic Electron Precipitation as Revealed by the CubeSat Mission ELFIN’s Pitch-Angle Resolved Loss Cone Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Vassilis Angelopoulos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 387,626.00

The jointly funded NSF/NASA ELFIN mission consists of two identical CubeSats on
a polar (~ 93 degree inclination), nearly circular, low-Earth orbit. ELFIN was
launched on September 15, 2018 and is currently operating within the geospace
environment. This funding will address the prime mission objective of analyzing
the data currently being collected by ELFIN to advance understanding of wave-
particle interactions and their effect on relativistic electrons in the outer
radiation belt. Two undergraduate students, a graduate student, and three early
career scientists will be supported. ELFIN data products are integrated into
courses at UCLA and in public outreach events in the Los Angeles
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize ELFIN, together with its
conjunctions with other, equatorial Heliophysics missions to address the
efficacy of EMIC wave precipitation, and the relative contribution of EMIC,
whistlers and kinetic Alfvén waves in the observed relativistic electron
scattering (100s of keV to a few MeV energy). The specific science objectives
are: (1) Are EMIC waves responsible for 0.5-2MeV electron
precipitation?&lt;br/&gt;(2) Are waves other than EMIC waves (principally chorus
waves and kinetic Alfvén waves (KAWs)), also responsible for significant
relativistic electron scattering? (3) What are the typical precipitation rates
associated with various wave types as function of geomagnetic
conditions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.