* 2019160
* Building Credit Histories
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Natalia Kovrijnykh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 325,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2008 financial crisis, the preceding credit
boom, and the subsequent credit contraction&lt;br/&gt;have highlighted the
importance of access to credit for individual households for the health of the
financial system and the economy. To guide policy proposals aimed at expanding
access to credit for credit-worthy households, there is a need to know the
forces behind the initiation and evolution of credit. This research project
analyzes novel data and proposes a new theory to understand the behavior of
emerging borrowers (borrowers who have only recently obtained their first line
of credit or credit card) and their creditors. The empirical analysis documents
new facts about how emerging borrowers expand their access to credit and how
this process differs from the process for established borrowers. The project
further develops a theoretical model of the interaction between borrowers and
lenders. The theory provides guidance on policies aimed at expanding access to
credit, such as allowing credit-reporting agencies to use non-traditional
sources of information to assess the risk profiles of emerging
borrowers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a novel dataset obtained from a
credit reporting agency, which allows for examination of the behavior of
individual lines of credit (credit cards) for borrowers over time. The project
documents the effects of opening a new credit line on a borrower’s relations
with existing and future lenders. Opening a new credit card by a borrower seems
to be interpreted by lenders as a positive news and is associated with an
expansion of existing credit lines. This force is much more pronounced for
emerging borrowers than for established ones. The theoretical part of the
project offers a dynamic model with multiple competing lenders who have
heterogeneous private information about a consumer’s creditworthiness. The model
incorporates selection and signaling mechanisms present when credit records
aggregate information across lenders. One implication of this model is that
while additional credit dilutes the value of existing loans by raising default
risk, borrowers that receive larger additional loans pose lower default risk to
their incumbent lenders than those who receive smaller additional loans. This
theoretical prediction is tested and supported by the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.