* 2019096
* MRI: Acquisition of Photonic Professional Nanoscribe Instrument
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Meng Lu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2022
* USD 429,975.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of three-dimensional (3D)
printing has allowed custom manufacturing of complex objects with millimeter
resolution. Recent advances have enabled 3D patterning of the critical
dimensions of materials and devices to the submicron scale. This project will
acquire a Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT2 system to be deployed at the
Microelectronic Research Center of Iowa State University. The Nanoscribe is a
computer-controlled pattern generator coupled with a 3D printer to produce
accurate materials, structures, and devices with a minimum feature size five
hundred times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. The Nanoscribe will
allow researchers to conduct transformative research in diverse science and
engineering areas, such as biomedicine, agriculture, energy, photonics, defense,
and advanced manufacturing. This instrument will also promote the integration of
research and teaching by using the Nanoscribe in multiple laboratory classes
taught by the investigators. The instrument will enrich programs that develop
the next-generation STEM workforce and help to broaden the participation of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Many
undergraduates will participate in the research through REU projects and as part
of their senior design projects. There will be a strong emphasis on recruiting
women and students from underrepresented minorities in STEM. The education of
students in STEM disciplines will be aided by hands-on demonstrations and by
providing high school teachers the opportunity to use the instrument and conduct
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nanoscribe
instrument will enable an array of new research projects in the area of micro-
nano science and technology, including multimodal wearable sensors to monitor
critical parameters in precision agriculture, portable exosome-based biomarker
screening devices integrated with micro-optics, photonic crystals and CMOS
imaging sensors, metamaterials and metadevices with functionalities attained
through the exploitation of sub-wavelength scale structures to manipulate
lights, biodegradable nerve regeneration structures for efficient peripheral
nerve repairs, engineered cell microenvironment, soft matter-based electronics,
bioinspired adhesives, microrobotic actuators, photovoltaic devices with printed
high-aspect-ratio microgrooves, high-efficiency triboelectric energy harvesting
materials, and high-performance X-ray collimator with nanogrooves. The
instrument will promote multidisciplinary collaborations between engineers and
scientists within the departments, across Iowa State University, and beyond the
institution. The capabilities of the instrument will become apparent to
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoc researchers in the areas of
advanced manufacturing, internet-of-things sensors, energy harvesting materials
and devices, biomedical devices and instruments, soft electronics, and condensed
matter physics at Iowa State University. The instrument will help Iowa State
University to become a regional hub for high-resolution 3D printing support to
researchers in the State of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.