* 2019220
* CC* Compute: A Customizable, Reproducible, and Secure Cloud Infrastructure as a Service for Scientific Research in Southern California
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Carl Kesselman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,800.00

________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
creates a hybrid cloud infrastructure as a scientific computing gateway that
promotes and supports inter-disciplinary, multi-institutional research in
science, engineering, biomedicine, and the social sciences. The hybrid cloud
platform also promotes regional and national research collaboration, as a
portion of the resources is integrated into the Open Science Grid (OSG). Many
institutes with multi-institutional research projects headquartered at
University of Southern California (USC), along with their regional and national
collaborators, benefit from use of the OSG. It also extends the impact of their
research outcomes and the projects themselves, as the system offers various ways
to share research outputs and knowledge with external collaborators. The planned
support for regional universities and integration with OSG increases
opportunities to serve a broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad
research community is supported by this system by providing access to public and
private cloud services as well as local high performance computing (HPC) and
data resources. The design of the hybrid cloud system facilitates the creation
of customizable, virtualized platforms and reproducible, container-based
application services that enable multi-dimensional computing and data solutions.
Researchers are able to pick and choose from a standard service catalogue to
build pre-defined virtual machines and containerized applications, or, if
necessary, create their own specialized environments. Along with built-in
security, reproducible service modules, and the capability of creating and
sharing customized environments, the hybrid cloud system bridges multi-
disciplinary research domains and enhances the usability of advanced
cyberinfrastructure for improved research
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.