* 2019231
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D Printer for Studying Biofluids and Biomechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gordon Murdoch, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 252,542.00

Fluid flow through biological tissues are challenging to accurately measure,
model, and simulate because of their complex geometries and varying length
scales. To address these research challenges, a high-resolution and mixed-
material three-dimensional (3D) printer will be acquired. The proposed 3D
printing technology uses jets of liquid photopolymer layers as thin as 16
microns to build high-resolution models of biological tissues. It will also
enable novel combinations of rigid and soft materials in specific concentrations
and structures in one printed model. The printer will advance ten innovative
research areas that are under investigation by four interdisciplinary teams that
include nine faculty from six departments in four colleges. The printer will
support research in lung, spinal cord, brain, aneurysms, and in understanding
the mechanical properties of tissues at multiple scales and fluid-tissue
interactions. The experimental data with synthetic tissues will be used to
validate numerical simulations of fluid-tissue interaction models. In addition
to training graduate and undergraduate students, the printer will be used in
3D-printing competitions for local K-12 students, and high school students when
they attend Women in Engineering Day on campus, which will broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities in engineering, science, physics,
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance
knowledge of biofluids and biomechanics by the ability to analyze complex
physiological multiscale tissue structures, and especially improve fundamental
understanding of these distinct topics of interest: (1) mechanisms of lung
ventilation including the study at each anatomical level of the lung, from the
microscale respiratory zone to the macroscale conducting zone; (2) cerebrospinal
fluid drug delivery, in vitro bioreactor investigation of brain cancer drugs, a
therapeutic approach for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and traumatic brain
injury; (3) experimental fluid-tissue interactions using transparent models with
precise and independent control of the surface roughness, fluid dynamics
parameters, mechanical properties, and geometrical parameters; and (4) how the
underlying micro- and macroscale collagen organization and structure regulate
the bulk mechanical properties of musculoskeletal tissues with the development
of 3D biomimetic tissue models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by CBET-MRI Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.