* 2019130
* MRI: Development of A Magneto-Optical Spectroscopy System for Investigation of Spintronic and Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Xiaoqin Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 642,485.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Many technological breakthroughs are enabled
by the discovery of new materials. Once new materials are synthesized, their new
properties and potential applications are revealed via careful and advanced
characterization measurements. This project funds the development of a unique
optical characterization instrument to study a wide range of quantum materials
and magnetic materials. The instrument enables multiple types of measurements of
light-matter interaction at the same area of samples placed in a magnetic field
and at low temperatures. Both linear light-matter interactions and nonlinear
interactions, when two light photons are combined to a single photon, are
studied. Researchers use the instrument to investigate atomically thin
materials, with the thickness of the layers or films only one atom or a few
atoms, and materials with a large number of tiny magnets in them. These
materials could potentially be used to build memory devices for storing a large
amount of data in the information age of the future. In addition to building the
instrument in an experimental facility, the team develops courses and training
materials for students and users. These students will become the future
workforce in the scientific and technological sectors and contribute to building
a globally competitive economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The team develops a magneto-optical spectroscopy system
to promote and advance studies of spintronic and quantum materials in the state
of Texas and beyond. The key instrument includes (i) a closed-cycle magneto-
optical cryostat; (ii) high-resolution spectrometers for inelastic light
scattering (Raman and Brillouin scattering) as well as magneto-optical Kerr
effect and second harmonic generation; (iii) a custom-made sample handling
system so that one can change samples without warming up the cryostat to improve
the efficiency of the operation. The instrument facilitates the discoveries and
fundamental understanding of magnetic and quantum materials. Examples of
materials to be investigated include van der Waals heterostructures consisting
of transition metal dichalcogenides, topological materials with long-range
magnetic order and superconductors. By performing several spectroscopy
measurements on the same sample, one may gain comprehensive information that is
difficult to obtain otherwise. The fundamental understanding of spintronic and
quantum materials will have a broad impact on information storage and processing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.