* 2019531
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Kilo-Pixel Detector Modules Based on Polarization Sensitive Multi-Chroic Aluminum Manganese MKIDs
* MPS,AST
* 01/10/2020,05/31/2022
* Bradley Johnson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,407.00

The cosmic microwave background is an image of the Universe in its infancy. It
spans the entire sky, but it is only visible to detectors that are sensitive to
microwaves. Understanding this background with ever-greater precision led to our
current understanding of cosmology. Further advances require more sensitive and
precise detectors. Johnson and collaborators are developing a novel, potentially
transformative technology called Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs).
Such devices have a superconducting film that is especially sensitive to light.
The devices are also sensitive to polarization, which enables them to make
further scientific discoveries. MKIDs can be scaled to large arrays, which are
needed for precise observations. Johnson and collaborators will create MKIDs
using a new material -- manganese doped aluminum. They will build an improved
prototype detector with more than ten times the number of pixels and demonstrate
its sensitivity and scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
kilo-pixel arrays of polarization-sensitive Microwave Kinetic Inductance
Detectors (MKIDs) that are sensitive to submillimeter radiation in the range
130-280 GHz. MKIDs operate by using superconducting resonators whose resonant
frequency changes when incident photons break Cooper pairs in the device.
Changes in resonance are monitored by a probe tone that drives the resonator.
Each detector can have a unique resonance, which enables multiplexing many
pixels onto a single output signal. Such multiplexing may enable very large
arrays of detectors. Johnson and collaborators will develop a new MKID design
using manganese doped aluminum, which has been used successfully in another
detector technology. They will scale up their existing 23 element design to a
331 element module. They will test this prototype and demonstrate that
multiplexing factors of ~1000 are achievable. Finally, they will expand the
fabrication pipeline to enable production of more devices. This project will
demonstrate the performance of these MKIDs to be comparable to competing
technology and demonstrate its potential to advance beyond current technology,
especially in terms of scalability for large arrays.