* 2019056
* MRI: Development of a Cryogenic Integrated Micro-Raman-Brillouin-Mandelstam Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2023
* USD 518,746.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This major research instrumentation (MRI)
development project aims to build an integrated micro-Raman-Brillouin-Mandelstam
spectrometer system with a capability for samples held at cryogenic
temperatures. Raman scattering and Brillouin-Mandelstam scattering are inelastic
light scattering processes, which are used to measure energies of various types
of elemental excitations, such as phonons and magnons, in solid materials.
Phonons are quanta of crystal lattice vibrations, which are associated with
sound velocities of solids and also reveal themselves in electrical, thermal and
optical phenomena in materials. Magnons are quanta of electron spin waves, which
determine characteristics of magnetic materials. The capability of conducting
measurements at low temperatures is particularly important for studying magnetic
materials. The spectral range and design of the spectrometer allow for its use
for samples of small dimensions and thicknesses. The project provides an impetus
to development of the Brillouin spectroscopy instrumentation, and its elevation
to the level currently enjoyed by Raman spectroscopy. Information obtained with
the spectroscopy system facilitates synthesis and characterization of new
materials, and helps in better understanding of their properties. The instrument
increases research competitiveness and enhances science and engineering
education at the University of California - Riverside, which is an accredited
Hispanic Serving Institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The characteristics of the micro-Raman-Brillouin-
Mandelstam spectrometer system make it a multi-user facility, and enable science
and engineering researchers from universities and industry to conduct studies in
a wide range of topics: from the cutting-edge fundamental solid-state physics of
magnons, phonons and non-trivial topological states to engineering measurements
of the elastic constants of composites. The advanced features of the system
include (i) a specially designed rotating microscopy stage and imaging system
for measuring the energy dispersion of phonons, magnons, and other elemental
excitations in the temperature range from 4 K to 700 K; (ii) a high spatial
resolution for the samples with the atomic thickness, lateral dimensions
approximately 250 nanometers for magnons and about 1 micrometer for phonons;
(iii) a modulus for recording phonon and magnon energies substantially below the
current 1-GHz limit of conventional spectrometers; and (iv) a stage for
simultaneous excitation and observation of coherent phonons and magnons with
high spatial and temporal resolution. The possibility of investigating
atomically-thin films with lateral dimensions in the micrometer range allows
researchers to measure acoustic phonon energy dispersion. The capabilities of
the system provide fundamental knowledge of phonons and magnons in two-
dimensional and one-dimensional materials; the strength of the magnon-phonon and
spin-lattice interactions in magnetic materials; elastic constants, phonon
velocities and Gruneisen parameters in low-dimensional materials; charge density
waves in quantum materials; as well as characteristics of other quasiparticles
in novel materials, heterostructures and biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.