* 2019362
* FMitF: Track I: Correct-by-Construction Synthesis of Microfluidic Chips
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 765,137.00

The burgeoning field of microfluidics and laboratory-on-a-chip technologies
enables miniaturization and automation of chemical and life-science experiments,
potentially yielding dramatic efficiency improvements for critical fields like
drug discovery and biotechnology. However, designing a microfluidic chip and
implementing the associated software currently requires a great deal of manual,
error-prone work, negating some of the productivity gains from the technology.
This project investigates algorithms that automatically synthesize complete and
correct microfluidic chip systems. The project’s novelties are that it aims to
be the first to simultaneously synthesize a programmable mechanical object (in
this case, a microfluidic chip) in conjunction with the software that controls
it, including customization of the chip design to meet the constraints imposed
by the equipment in a specific researcher’s laboratory. The project’s impacts
are that it broadens the usability of microfluidic technologies, catalyzing new
microfluidic applications, new interdisciplinary research, and new commercial
opportunities for microfluidics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the larger context
of formal methods and design automation for microfluidic chips, the project aims
to produce the first techniques to synthesize correct-by-construction
microfluidic components, multi-component microfluidic chips, and control
programs for microfluidics. The project investigates a novel counterexample-
guided inductive microfluidic synthesis (CEGIMS) algorithm, in which a
microfluidic-chip synthesizer and a control program synthesizer are combined to
synergistically generate both a microfluidic chip design and the corresponding
control software for available equipment. Users provide sketches of both the
microfluidic-chip geometry and control-software structure, along with evaluation
criteria specifying the user’s expectations for the physical properties of the
fluid flowing inside of the chip. CEGIMS integrates physical-modeling software
with Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) solvers, relying on counterexample-
guided search methods to complete the sketches, yielding a final chip layout
suitable for fabrication. At the same time, CEGIMS automatically synthesizes
control software that is guaranteed to drive the chip correctly. In order to
achieve these technical goals, the project aims to develop fundamental advances
in techniques to integrate solvers based on logical correctness properties with
simulation software that determines the correctness of a physical
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.