* 2019819
* I-Corps:  A Novel Approach to Sanitize Fresh Produce, Food-Contact Surfaces, and Wash Water Using Micro/nanobubbles
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Dan Freeman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be
improvement of the microbial safety of fresh produce in a cost-effective,
efficient, and non-toxic way. Sanitizing systems were valued at an estimated
$250 M in 2019. Washing with chlorine remains the predominant industrial choice
for minimizing pathogen contamination, but it is imperfect. Moreover, chlorine
can readily react with dissolved organic matter released from fresh produce,
causing the depletion of free chlorine and the generation of harmful chemical
by-products. The reduction/elimination of chemicals will help maintain the
nutritional value, prolong shelf life, and increase the market size of fresh
produce. The proposed innovation can be implemented into current produce
processing systems for sanitizing the produce, food-contact surfaces, and wash
water to partially/fully to replace chemical sanitizers. In addition to the
produce market, this innovation could be applied to adjacent food processing
industries and beyond, such as medical and cosmetic
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves micro/nanobubbles
(MNBs) for sanitizing fresh produce, produce-contact surfaces, and the wash
water for fresh produce industries. Chlorine systems can only achieve 1-2 log
cycle reduction of common pathogens. The proposed system offers greater removal
efficiencies of bacteria and colloids from various surfaces using MNBs and MNBs
in a combination of surfactants. MNBs are gaseous entities (at micro- and nano-
size range) characterized by: relatively stable lifetimes (up to months),
negatively charged surfaces, extremely high contact angles and interfacial
areas/energies, neutral buoyancy, reduced friction, and ability to generate
reactive oxygen species (ROS). These characteristics are highly desirable for
cleaning purposes. MNBs have been shown to be effective in many applications,
such as cleaning of medical equipment and wastewater treatment. We aim to
identify the key MNB properties (e.g., size distribution, concentration,
stability, zeta-potential), the most effective solution combinations, and
procedures on pathogen removal and inactivation
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.