* 2019064
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Temperature Semiconductor Processing Equipment to Support Research and Education in Power, Energy and Material Sciences
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 580,292.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon carbide (SiC), also known as
carborundum, is a colorless semiconductor composed of silicon and carbon. SiC
enables electronic devices to operate at high temperatures and high voltages,
making it attractive for power electronics. SiC power electronics have
potentially transformative impacts on development of the modern power grid,
increased adoption of renewable energy, and materials science. The project is to
acquire high temperature semiconductor annealing furnaces to complete a silicon
carbide (SiC) processing line at University of Arkansas. This instrumentation
fulfills a national need for low-volume SiC prototyping. The PIs will leverage
prior investments with engineering and science talent to create a facility that
will attract public and private partners to Arkansas. Associated workforce
training efforts will spur the creation of high-skilled, high-paying jobs
focusing on the development and manufacture of next generation SiC materials. It
can begin a growing high-tech segment to the Arkansas economy. As SiC becomes
more commonly used in power electronics, it is imperative that students gain
experience handling those materials, devices, circuits and power modules. The
SiC facility will enable world-class research and expand educational
opportunities for undergraduates and graduate students in materials research and
device engineering. Towards that end, a series of courses will be developed on
SiC processing for energy applications that employ the acquired instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
temperature annealing up to 1800°C is needed often and repeatedly for SiC device
fabrication to activate the implanted dopant species and reduce the material
damage caused by ion bombardment. It is also required for SiC gate oxide
annealing and ohmic contact formation in the metallization process. The
requested processing equipment will consist of vacuum tight reactor with three
heating and control zones, which can process various 6-inch wafers up to 2000°C.
Supporting clean room infrastructure for the proposed expansion to the UA
facility is ready, including space, power, safety and gas inlets. The proposed
equipment will diversify the types of semiconductor devices and circuits
supported by the UA thin film clean room, facilitating power and energy research
by a broader and more scientifically diverse set of users. Examples of new
research projects related to material, power and energy that will be enabled by
this MRI request include: (1) SiC devices and integrated circuits; (2) wide
bandgap-based optoelectronic device development for sensor applications; (3)
wafer-level integrated power module with thermal management; (4) high
temperature power-converter-on-chip; (5) high temperature packaging for SiC
integrated circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.