* 2019614
* RUI: Unraveling the physiological roles of multidrug efflux pumps in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* CRISTIAN RUIZ RUEDA, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

This project will determine how a multidrug efflux (MDR) pump of the bacterium
Escherichia coli, regulates gene expression and cell physiology. Efflux is an
essential function in all life forms. Gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli
possess MDR pumps that are highly-conserved and play a pivotal role in cell
physiology and bacterial adaptation to internal and environmental changes. These
MDR pumps have a unique ability to expel a wide range of molecules out of the
cell. These molecules include toxic compounds entering the cells from the
outside such as bile salts and antibiotics; as well as molecules internally
produced by these bacteria involved in functions such as bacterial growth,
signaling, and capturing iron or other limited nutrients. Among MDR pumps, the
AcrAB-TolC pump of E. coli is the most well-known because it is the main MDR
pump in this bacterium, which is an important model organism, gut commensal,
pathogen, and is widely used in biotechnology. This pump was first studied
because of its role in conferring antibiotic resistance by effluxing different
antibiotics. Recent findings indicate that this pump also plays a central role
in regulating gene expression and bacterial physiology; however, how this pump
controls these functions remains unknown. By identifying the molecules
internally produced by E. coli that are effluxed by the AcrAB-TolC pump, and how
this pump and its regulators control gene expression and physiology, this
project will make multiple significant contributions to science and the overall
well-being of society. More specifically, this project will advance our
understanding of how bacteria maintain their internal balance and adapt to new
environments, and offer novel insights into how to bioengineer bacteria to
improve the production of biofuels and other compounds of industrial interest.
The broader outcomes of this project stem from its integration into a re-
designed Microbial Physiology course at California State University, Northridge
(CSUN). CSUN is a primarily undergraduate and minority-serving institution.
Thus, this project will expand the number of students from diverse backgrounds
that have access to hands-on research, which is essential to train and inspire
the next generation of scientist and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MDR pumps
regulate gene expression, metabolism, stress responses, bacterial motility, and
other physiological processes. However, the molecular mechanisms that allow
these pumps to control all these processes remain unknown. Especially intriguing
is the question of how MDR pumps, which are located in the cell envelope, can
regulate gene expression. Our central hypothesis is that the main function of
the AcrAB-TolC pump is to efflux cellular metabolites, whereas the
transcriptional repressor AcrR senses the concentrations of different pump
substrates and then acts as a global regulator of gene expression. This
hypothesis is based on recent findings from the PIâ€™s laboratory and other
groups. To attain the overall objective, we will pursue two specific aims: 1)
Identify the genes directly regulated by AcrR and the metabolites that control
AcrR function; and 2) Identify the metabolites that bind to AcrAB-TolC and the
effect of AcrB-AcrZ interactions in modulating the function of this pump. We
will accomplish these aims by employing bioinformatics and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays to identify genes directly regulated by AcrR; as well as
fluorescence polarization binding assays to identify the cellular metabolites
effluxed by AcrAB-TolC, determine the effect of the small protein AcrZ on
substrate recognition by this pump, and identify which pump substrates bind to
and regulate AcrR function. Ultimately, this project will uncover the functional
link between pump function and gene regulation by identifying which cellular
metabolites are both pump substrates and AcrR ligands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.