* 2019288
* Controlling the Casimir Torque
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jeremy Munday, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 151,533.00

Our understanding of electrical charges and forces can break down when quantum
effects play a role. For example, when two conductive plates or surfaces are
brought together they either repel or attract each other depending on whether
they have the same or opposite electric charges. If they are uncharged, there is
no electrical force between them. However, this classical picture breaks down
when the surfaces are brought very close together with a gap of a few
nanometers. At that small distance the electric field between the surfaces
exhibits quantum effects and there is a small but measureable force between
them. This is called the Casimir effect, named after the scientist who explained
how the quantized electromagnetic field results in a force between uncharged
surfaces. Understanding various types of Casimir forces is important for our
fundamental knowledge of quantum physics and for applications to materials used
in micro- and nano-technologies. This project will study a phenomenon referred
to as the Casimir torque in which the two surfaces are caused to rotate. The
research team will demonstrate and quantify how materials with different optical
properties experience the Casimir torque. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite the
pervasive nature of quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field and their
influence on nanoscale science and engineering, control of fluctuation-induced
phenomena is difficult. Here it is proposed to test several hypotheses and
predictions related to the Casimir torque, which will lead to the generation of
new knowledge about controlling these interactions. The first test will be of
the hypothesis that the measured torque can be strengthened by increasing the
optical anisotropy of the two materials. The second test will be of the
hypothesis that the direction of rotation depends on whether the optical axis of
a birefringent material has an index of refraction that is higher or lower than
that of its extraordinary axis. The third will be to explore the idea of using
the Casimir force to translate lateral motion into rotational motion. These
experiments will not only advance the science related to quantum phenomena but
will also lead to new experimental techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.