* 2019843
* Increasing Undergraduate Student Interpreters' Fluency and Accuracy in Interpreting Biology Vocabulary in American Sign Language
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Judy Vesel, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 297,126.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by broadening participation of
hearing-impaired students in STEM learning, majors, and careers, specifically in
biological sciences. Many undergraduate students who are deaf or hard of hearing
encounter language-related obstacles to learning biological content. Overcoming
these obstacles could support their success in biological sciences courses and
majors. Increasing the biological vocabulary of American Sign Language (ASL)
interpreters is a key step toward achieving this goal. In this project, TERC and
Lamar University will develop and evaluate a unique set of materials for
training ASL interpreters. The cornerstone of these materials is a Signing
BioScience Dictionary that includes a set of signed terms commonly found in
undergraduate lecture material. To accompany the dictionary, the project will
develop summaries of core biology concepts to provide context for the terms and
video examples of accurate and fluent interpretations of biology lecture
material. Finally, strategies will be developed to help instructors incorporate
these materials into Lamar University’s four-year undergraduate ASL interpreter
training program. This project builds on the outcomes of prior work that
produced a prototype Signing BioScience Dictionary and findings about the types
of teaching and learning materials that are most useful to support training ASL
interpreters to communicate biology content fluently and accurately. This
project has the potential to open doors to STEM knowledge, particularly in
biology, for deaf and hard of hearing learners across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has six goals: 1) Prepare a beta
version of the Signing BioScience Dictionary; 2) Create summaries of core
biology content needed for fluent and accurate interpretation of undergraduate
biology lecture material; 3) Produce video examples of fluent interpretations of
biology lecture material; 4) Evaluate the use and effectiveness of the Signing
BioScience Dictionary, summaries, and videos in increasing student interpreters’
ASL vocabulary, knowledge of related content, and ability to accurately and
fluently interpret undergraduate biology lecture material; 5) Design a set of
instructional practices for use of the Signing BioScience Dictionary, summaries,
and videos in interpreter training programs; and 6) Disseminate project
deliverables. A mixed-measurement design that combines qualitative and
quantitative data will be employed to evaluate how Lamar University
undergraduate students in the interpreter training program use the Signing
BioScience Dictionary, biology content summaries, and videos. In addition, the
research will explore the effectiveness of the Signing BioScience Dictionary,
content summaries, and videos in increasing the undergraduate student
interpreters’ ASL biology vocabulary and biology content knowledge, as well as
their ability to interpret a typical undergraduate biology lecture accurately
and clearly. Results of these studies will inform the project team about
additions and/or changes that could make the materials more effective. The
project has the potential to make biology content more accessible to
undergraduates who are deaf or hard of hearing, and thus may be instrumental in
supporting their pursuit of biology (or other STEM) majors and careers. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.