* 2019309
* FMitF: Track II: Usability, Robustness, and Performance Improvements for CIVL
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Stephen Siegel, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Scientific and high-performance computing software deals with issues of
fundamental importance to science, engineering, and society more generally.
Examples include applications to predict earthquake damage, model the global
climate, perform atomic-level simulations of chemical and biological systems,
and to investigate the electronic structure of matter. These programs inform
both profound scientific conclusions and decisions of the utmost importance to
society. For these reasons, it is imperative to develop effective methods for
debugging and verifying scientific programs. This project enhances the
usability, performance, and robustness of the Concurrent Intermediate
Verification Language (CIVL), a verification tool for scientific programs based
on symbolic execution and model checking. The project's novelties are (1) an
expanded ability to verify programs that use a variety of parallel-programming
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), and (2) the capability to verify that
two versions of a program are equivalent. The project's impacts are seen in the
improved productivity of the software developers using CIVL to help debug their
code, and in the increased confidence in the correctness of the resulting
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project improves CIVL along three lines:
usability, robustness and language coverage, and performance. Usability
improvements include improved error reporting and the ability to control
precisely what CIVL checks. Language coverage is improved by correcting
limitations in CIVL's array model, and increasing coverage of the C standard
library. Performance is being improved by parallelizing CIVL's model-checking
engine and streamlining its expression-evaluation algorithm. These improvements
are guided by ongoing interaction with scientific-software development teams who
are using CIVL and providing feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.