* 2019849
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Micromechanical Properties of Hierarchical Coatings and Interfaces Fabricated by Self-Limiting Electrospray Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Assimina Pelegri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 511,152.00

Porous materials are ubiquitous in applications ranging from filtration and
construction to ones in extreme environments, such as the Arctic, deep sea, and
space. The methods of manufacturing these materials often require bulk
processing techniques, and it can be difficult to deterministically tune the
structure and composition independently. This collaborative research employs
self-limiting electrospray deposition (SLED) to create controlled libraries of
porous microfilms, enabling rapid screening of their characteristic material and
architecture parameters while facilitating customized property tunability.
Mechanical analysis covering testing conditions from quasi-static to ballistic
impact at room or elevated temperatures are undertaken, allowing probing of the
materials’ mechanical response to thermomechanical stimulus. For ballistic
analysis, laser-induced particle impact testing (LIPIT), an innovative method of
using laser-propelled microparticles to create controlled microballistic impact,
is used. These experiments inform a semi-empirical model that in turn guides the
direction of future experiments, ultimately leading to a platform to design and
optimize porous materials for myriad applications, including exploration of SLED
thin films as low-thickness alternatives to bulkier coatings. The project team
consists of experts in SLED fabrication, nanomechanical testing and modeling,
and microballistic analysis. This award allows for a new level of understanding
and control of the synthesis of critical porous materials aiding in US
competitiveness and prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SLED utilizes the
repulsion of the charged electrostatic spray to create level thin films of
controlled thickness. Spray parameters control different aspects of the final
porous morphology. The flow rate controls the characteristic scale of the porous
structure; the solids loading controls the fill fraction of the pores; the spray
temperature controls the degree of fusion of the pores; and the materials
selection controls the composition of the material. Evaluation of model plastic
with and without particle and rubber reinforcement, along with crosslinked
porous epoxies, will be performed. During the strain rate testing in LIPIT, a
ceramic microsphere is accelerated to at most 1,000 m/s by laser-induced rapid
gas expansion and is tracked using ultrafast stroboscopic microscopy. An intense
mechanical impulse is thereby applied to the specimen through the collision of
the microsphere and can then be analyzed for energy dissipation and damage
mechanisms. Moreover, using slower mechanical stimuli methods, nanoimpact (1-20
mm/s) and nanoindentation (10-1,000 nm/s), on the same specimens allows
comparison between the deformation-rate-dependent characteristics of the SLED
coatings over the different ranges. Each stage of these studies is supported by
multiscale computational simulations to create predictive models to guide both
the course of the experiments and the design of future
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.