* 2019164
* CC* Integration-Large: Robust and Predictable Network Infrastructure for Wide-Area Hybrid Sensor Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Engin Arslan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 998,568.00

Increased use of Internet-of-Things (IoT) sensor devices is revolutionizing
science and engineering applications, such as smart cities and environmental
hazard monitoring. These sensors are often deployed in remote and distributed
environments and rely on complex data networks that use both wired and wireless
communication to stream large volumes of data back for analysis and
distribution. Design and management of these complex hybrid networks is a
daunting task due to network capacity fluctuations and dynamic data flow
characteristics. This project develops a new software-driven network
infrastructure to help automate network management of these emerging hybrid
sensor networks for science and public service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops and deploys an operational Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
network management and monitoring infrastructure for hybrid wide-area research
networks spanning hundreds of kilometers in Nevada for distributed applications
in wildfire, climate, and traffic safety. Current practices of inflexible
network setup with limited monitoring capability struggles to satisfy ever-
increasing science needs, such as on-demand data pipeline creation and quality-
of-service satisfaction. Moreover, the project enhances network transparency
through deployment of high-precision (i.e., port-, flow-, and packet-level)
network monitoring and performance measurement (i.e., PerfSonar) nodes. The
project implements a deep-learning-based anomaly detection mechanism to protect
sensitive data from cyber attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating SDN with
high-precision monitoring into wide-area sensor networks has the potential to
accelerate adoption of IoT devices in many science areas by addressing core
hybrid WAN (wide-area network) challenges such as routing, troubleshooting, and
anomaly detection. Developing these integrations now is critical, because hybrid
WAN infrastructures (particularly in non-urban regions) will remain bandwidth-
limited relative to data generation devices into the foreseeable future. This
project allows University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) to continue leadership in wide-
area research IoT systems, expand institutional platforms for hybrid-cloud
operations, and scale up key products for communities as part of UNR's land-
grant mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any data produced in the context of this
project will be made available to the public and maintained throughout the
duration of the project and beyond. Developed source code will initially be
maintained in a private GitHub repository, which will be released at
“https://github.com/UNR-HPN/SDNWideArea” periodically when the codebase becomes
stable. The repository will be maintained as part of ongoing support operations
by UNR cyberinfrastructure personnel assigned to the infrastructure at the close
of the project. Performance monitoring in the project will be associated with
regional dashboards as best practices dictate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.