* 2019432
* New Developments in Methodology for Program Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Matias Cattaneo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 460,000.00

This research project will develop new statistical methods for program
evaluation with the goal of improving their reliability and scope in real-life
applications. Program evaluation methods are widely used in a variety of
disciplines in the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. These methods
are empirically employed to determine the causal effect of a policy,
intervention, or treatment on some outcome of interest. For example, program
evaluation methods allow policy makers to improve social programs or public
health officials to better target the mitigation of infectious diseases. This
project will develop new identification, estimation, and inference results for
three modern program evaluation methods: binscatter methods, synthetic control
methods, and regression discontinuity methods. The results of this research will
provide researchers with new methodological tools to improve empirical work.
Graduate students will be mentored and trained in the new methodologies and
provided with first-hand research experience. General-purpose software will be
developed to implement the new methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will provide new developments in mathematical statistics and
econometrics. For binscatter methods, which are closely related to machine
learning techniques, new uniform inference methods will be developed that build
on strong approximation tools from probability theory. These results will
provide valid confidence bands and hypothesis tests about shape restrictions for
causal inference models with possibly heterogenous treatment effects. For
synthetic control methods, novel prediction intervals will be developed using
non-asymptotic probability concentration ideas from the high-dimensional
statistical literature. Practical implementation of these prediction intervals
based on the bootstrap also will be studied. For regression discontinuity
designs, the project will develop new identification, estimation, inference, and
falsification methods for settings with duration-type outcomes and allowing for
covariate-adjustment and multiple cutoffs. Robust bias correction inference
methods will be developed along with tuning parameter selection
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.