* 2019596
* RII Track-2 FEC: From Ecosystems to Evolution: Harnessing Elemental Data to Detect Stoichiometric Control-Points and their Consequences for Organismal Evolution
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Amy Krist, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 5,093,565.00

All living things require elements like carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus in
specific proportions to grow. As a result, the relative availability of these
elements in an ecosystem can have major impacts on the growth and performance of
organisms, the biodiversity of biological communities, and the provisioning of
ecosystem services like water quality. Yet, human activities, including burning
fossil fuels, urban and residential development, and agricultural practices, are
rapidly changing the absolute and relative abundance of these elements. This
Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII
Track-2 FEC) award will permit researchers from four EPSCoR jurisdictions (AR,
NE, VT, and WY) to address how current and changing elemental availability
impacts ecosystems at regional and national scales. To do this, researchers will
combine growing environmental datasets from national efforts with ongoing and
historical studies at smaller scales to produce a publicly available database
containing information on both the elemental composition of organisms and the
elemental composition of those organisms’ environment. The effort will focus on
stream, lake, and other inland water ecosystems, providing the opportunity to
also address eutrophication issues found within each jurisdiction. The project
team will engage in workforce development through professional training
opportunities, develop database activities that expose graduate and
undergraduate students to ecological questions, engage with artists to better
communicate findings to general audiences, and promote diversity, equity, and
inclusivity through professional partnerships, e.g., the Society for Freshwater
Science’s Instars and Emerge program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological
stoichiometry (ES) applies first principles to examine how the differential
supply of elements constrains organisms and their interactions. Through this
collaboration, we will combine ES theory with ‘big data’ harvesting and analysis
tools to build the research capability and human resource capacity to
investigate stoichiometric control of ecological phenomena occurring across
scales that we currently cannot investigate. Specifically, we propose to: 1)
harness environmental data collected across wide spatial and temporal scales to
build a new database called the Stoichiometric Traits of Organisms In their
Chemical Habitats (STOICH), 2) develop new tools to address statistical and data
visual challenges to studying elemental ratios and their ecological
implications, and 3) build capacity in four EPSCoR jurisdictions for cutting-
edge ecological and environmental research. We will focus this capacity
initially on three research aims: 1) elucidate stoichiometric controls on
critical biogeochemical cycles, 2) understand how food web structure and
function respond to elemental mismatches, and 3) investigate how elemental
supply impacts functional trait diversity in biological communities. The
principal investigators include early career scientists from the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, University of Wyoming, University of Central Arkansas, and
Middlebury College. Each jurisdiction also includes a senior scientist as a
mentor to early career faculty. The project will support three postdoctoral
fellows, five graduate students, and many undergraduate research trainees.
Trainees will benefit from the diversity of campuses involved that include R1,
R2, and primarily undergraduate institutions. We will actively engage and
recruit underrepresented communities by holding ES-related topical workshops at
professional society meetings with successful mentoring
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.