* 2019012
* CC* Integration-Large: N-DISE: NDN for Data Intensive Science Experiments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Lixia Zhang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 875,000.00

The project, N-DISE (Named Data Networking for Data Intensive Science
Experiments), aims to accelerate the pace of breakthroughs and innovations in
data-intensive science fields such as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) high
energy physics program and the BioGenome and human genome projects. Based on
Named Data Networking (NDN), a data-centric architecture, N-DISE will deploy and
commission a highly efficient and field-tested petascale data distribution,
caching, access and analysis system serving major science
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The N-DISE project will design and develop high-
throughput caching and forwarding methods, containerization techniques,
hierarchical memory management subsystems, congestion control mechanisms,
integrated with Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) acceleration subsystems,
to produce a system capable of delivering LHC and genomic data over a wide area
network at throughputs approaching 100 Gbits per second, while significantly
decreasing download time. In addition, N-DISE will utilize NDN's built-in data
security support to ensure data integrity and provenance tracing. N-DISE will
leverage existing infrastructure and build an enhanced testbed with four
additional high performance NDN data cache servers at participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-DISE will provide a field-tested working
prototype of a multi-domain data distribution and access system offering fast
access and low cost, as well as data integrity and provenance, to many data-
intensive science and engineering fields. The project plans to hold annual
workshops and hackathons to train students, postdocs, and other researchers on
NDN architectural design, algorithms, as well as implementation methodologies
for specific data-intensive science environments. The project will undertake
initiatives for actively involving under-represented groups, and for educational
outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-DISE will maintain a GitHub
repository at https://github.com/neu-yehlab/n-dise. The repository will host up-
to-date publications, code, data, results, and simulators. The repository will
be maintained by the team for at least three years beyond the duration of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.