* 2019000
* CC*Compute: From classroom to the lab: NMSU responds to the changing HPC landscape in New Mexico
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Phillip De Leon, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,869.00

New Mexico State University (NMSU), a Minority-Serving Institution and Hispanic-
Serving Institution, recognizes the vital need for universal access to a high
performance computing (HPC) facility. Increasing the computational resources at
NMSU, including storage, supports NMSU’s high research need, instructors
interested in incorporating HPC into their classroom activities, and state-wide
collaborations with faculty who are excited to have a supportive HPC team to
assist their classrooms. New Mexico as a state has a high need for personnel
experienced with HPC use, but lacks resources dedicated to student learning. By
utilizing existing relationships between NMSU and other NM-based universities,
the new resources increase HPC-based classroom activities around the state
through a dedicated queue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students trained in HPC use are
in high demand both in industry and academia, providing our students with new
opportunities. Much of the research performed on the HPC is either unfunded or
funded through smaller grants that cannot purchase dedicated HPC resources and
many users start on their HPC journey without the basic knowledge of Unix or how
to use an HPC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time on regional and national super
clusters is valuable and not a good learning environment for those who are
beginning their venture into computing-intensive science. With extensive
collaborations across institutions and already having streamlined NMSU-
affiliated user on-boarding and account creation, NMSU is key in increasing HPC
knowledge across the entire state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity expands
the existing HPC resources at NMSU by roughly 30% through the acquisition of 10
compute nodes each with 36 CPU cores, at least 256 GB of RAM and 960 GB of local
storage for a total of 360 cores, two GPU nodes similar to the compute nodes but
with dual Tesla V100 GPUs, 600 TB of network connected storage, and Infiniband
interconnect hardware. The cluster supports both research and educational
activities in a range of fields from biology and environmental sciences to
physics, chemistry, and material science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.