* 2019704
* Curriculum Design in Robotic Exoskeleton-mediated Motor Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Peter Stone, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2023
* USD 432,000.00

This Mind, Machine, and Motor Nexus (M3X) project plans to use a wearable upper
extremity robotic exoskeleton to address the open question of how best to train
people to perform new motor tasks. Two objectives will be pursued. First, the
project team will use the robotic exoskeleton in a series of human subject
experiments to identify "source tasks" that can be combined to learn a
dynamically challenging motor skill. Second, the team will use the identified
source tasks to explore the efficacy of "curriculum-based" task training that
seeks to build skills efficiently and effectively through a progression of sub-
tasks of increasing challenge. The experimental task to be learned requires a
high degree of manual coordination in the manipulation of a hand-held tool with
challenging internal continuum dynamics. This research involves several
disciplines including mechanical engineering, computer science, neuroscience,
medical sciences, and education. The project will promote the progress of
science and advance the national health by developing fundamental knowledge in
support of a robot-mediated coaching system for motor skills training. Education
and outreach activities engage the participation of undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
pursue two objectives to advance the state-of-the-art in robot-mediated coaching
for motor skills training. For the first objective, the project team will use a
wearable upper extremity robotic exoskeleton and an immersive Virtual Reality
system to analyze movement kinematics, kinetics, and surface electromyographic
activity during tool manipulation as people perform a challenging dynamic task.
The result of this effort will be an identified set of "source tasks" that will
form the building blocks of a motor skill training "curriculum" to be developed
and tested in the project's second objective. For that objective, additional
human subject studies will evaluate the efficacy of a variety of curricula
(i.e., combinations of source tasks, source task orders, and training task
transition times) to be developed using a Reinforcement Learning agent that will
sequence the source tasks during training. The research explores the mechanisms
by which human motor function can be shaped and directed by interactions with
robotic exoskeletons. The major outcome of this work will be a robot-mediated
coaching system for motor skills training, which holds potential to improve
human motor performance in a variety of scenarios ranging from robot-assisted
surgery, sports, and physical rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.