* 2019485
* Collaborative Research: Increasing wildfires and the loss of legacy carbon from boreal and tundra ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Brendan Rogers, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,381.00

This research asks how increasing wildfires will change carbon storage in
northern ecosystems. Carbon is in all living things, the ocean, the earth, and
the atmosphere. Increasing carbon in the atmosphere has led to climate change,
which has had major effects across the globe. One effect has been increasing
wildfires in northern ecosystems. In these ecosystems, large amounts of carbon
are stored in soils. This carbon can be stored for a long time and is sometimes
very old. Wildfires that burn these soils can release this old carbon to the
atmosphere and cause more climate warming. This project will determine where and
when this old carbon is burning. This information will help us understand how
increasing wildfires will affect future climate. It will also help fire managers
set priorities for where to fight fires. We will share our results with rural
northern communities near our research sites and with citizens and youth of
Northern Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate how
increasing wildfires will impact the long-term carbon storage of Arctic
ecosystems. Arctic ecosystems store over 40% of terrestrial carbon and have
historically been considered carbon sinks. This means they store more carbon
than they lose to the atmosphere. Carbon in these ecosystems is primarily stored
in soils for long periods, sometimes centuries. Periodic wildfires release some
soil carbon to the atmosphere. Any soil carbon that escapes burning in a
previous fire is called 'legacy carbon.' Due to climate warming, wildfires have
increased in frequency and severity in northern ecosystems. More severe and
frequent wildfires can combust legacy carbon and shift Arctic ecosystems from a
carbon sink to a carbon source to the atmosphere. The main objective of this
research is to determine the processes that control legacy carbon combustion.
Understanding where and when legacy carbon combustion is likely to occur is
essential for predicting how frequently Arctic ecosystems will shift from a
carbon sink to a carbon source. These results will benefit global stakeholders,
including policymakers, by improving our understanding of the mechanisms through
which environmental change affects the global carbon cycle and climate. For
regional and local stakeholders, such as fire managers, this research will
improve our ability to identify areas vulnerable to legacy carbon combustion to
better prioritize management decisions. We will share our results with fire
managers by partnering with the Alaska Fire Science Consortium. We will also
engage with rural communities in Interior Alaska by hiring a local guide and
communicating our research goals, progress, and findings with community members.
Finally, we will engage with citizens, particularly youth, of Northern Arizona
about Arctic research by participating in our local festival of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.