* 2019983
* RAPID - Assessing the response of the Seychelles-Chagos Thermocline Ridge ecosystem to an Indian Ocean Dipole event
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Helga Gomes, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 221,836.00

Phytoplankton constitute the base of the marine food web. Their diversity,
productivity and abundance have a huge influence on fisheries. For example,
seasonal increases in phytoplankton biomass caused by the surge of deep ocean
nutrient rich waters into the upper sunlit layers in the Equatorial Indian Ocean
lead to an increase in tuna stocks. However, non-periodic increases of sea
surface temperatures in the Seychelles-Chagos Thermocline Ridge region in the
eastern Equatorial Indian Ocean, a phenomenon known as the Indian Ocean Dipole,
weakens deep ocean water surge, which seems to alter phytoplankton community
structure and to reduce phytoplanktonâ€™s productivity to the detriment of tuna
stocks. Yet, the impact from such unpredictable events is not fully understood.
This project investigates the impacts of an ongoing Indian Ocean Dipole, one of
the most severe on record, on phytoplankton. The broader impacts of the project
relate to its value to inform fisheries management plans in that area. Data
derived from this study is valuable to understand and predict wider changes in
the food web in a region that is coming under increasing pressures of global
warming. All the data is made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team is working with South Korean collaborators to understand how
changes in phytoplankton biomass and in deep chlorophyll maxima may be linked to
changes in phytoplankton productivity and growth rates due nutrient and/or iron
limitation as a result of the weakening of deep-water upwelling. The team is
also investigating the impact of the dipole event on cell size of dominating
phytoplankton populations. Finally, they are testing if the phytoplankton
community rely primarily on recycled as opposed to new nitrogenous nutrients for
photosynthesis and growth during dipole events. The hypotheses are tested
through extensive biological, hydro-chemical and biogeochemical measurements
that include: 1) microscopic, Flow Cytometry, FlowCAM and HPLC pigment based
analysis of phytoplankton biomass, community composition and size structure and
Fast Repetition Rate based measurements of phytoplankton photosynthetic
competency along a cruise track and different depths in the water column, and 2)
on-deck incubation based photosynthesis and nutrient uptake experiments. In situ
measurements and sample collection is carried out as part of the Korea-US inDian
Ocean Scientific (KUDOS) Research Program cruise (April-May 2020) on board the
Korea Institute of Ocean Sciences and Technology Ship R/V Isabu, one of the only
multi-disciplinary oceanographic cruises planned for the Seychelles-Chagos
Thermocline Ridge region during the dipole event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.