* 2019607
* Collaborative Research: Origins and population history of marine and terrestrial hunter-gatherer groups
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicole Misarti, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,944.00

While we have a deep understanding of human migration and history in some
regions of the planet, the peopling of the Americas is still relatively under-
studied. With support from SBE-BCS-Biological Anthropology and the Office of
Integrative Activities' NSF 2026 Fund Program and Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Drs. Alfonso-Durruty (Kansas State
University), Misarti (University of Alaska Fairbanks), and Bolnick (University
of Connecticut) will use skeletal, genetic, dietary and archaeological data to
examine two distinct ecological adaptations, terrestrial and marine
hunting/gathering, that are highly specialized and appear in the archaeological
record at different times. By using multiple sources of information, this study
will effectively expand our knowledge and understanding of the Indigenous
Peoples of a remote region of the Americas. The project will foster
international scientific research collaborations, engage with local communities,
and provide training, mentoring, and learning opportunities to undergraduate and
graduate students in subjects such as the production of 3D analogs and 3D
digital data, database design and management, scientific communication and
dissemination, molecular anthropology, and the chemical (stable isotope)
analyses of bone for dietary reconstructions. The project also will address two
of the top thirty-three NSF 2026 Idea Machine entries: “Designing Ecosystems for
the Future” and “Reversibility: Future of Life on Earth."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will utilize biodistance markers, stable
isotope data, next-generation genome sequencing, radio-carbon dating, and
statistical methods to estimate biodistance, compare and evaluate diets, and
reconstruct the population history of indigenous groups. The data will be
analyzed to determine whether or not pre-contact terrestrial and marine groups
had different origins, or whether the earlier terrestrial hunter gatherers
eventually gave rise to marine groups. The extended period of time covered by
the data to be collected will allow for reconstruction of the dynamics involved
in the population history of a remote region of the
Americas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.