* 2019506
* EAGER: Extending the Productive Lifetime of Scientific Computing Equipment
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Andrew Chien, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The growing environmental impacts of hardware acquisition and operation are
significant concerns for scientific computing infrastructure deployed at
universities and national laboratories. While significant interest in better
models for systems operation and lifecycle exist, there are ecosystem challenges
including lack of proven pathways and best practices. The Zero Carbon Compute
project will convene leaders in the scientific computing infrastructure
community, and connect them with leading ecosystem innovators in this space. The
goal of the project is to create "best practices" that will catalyze the birth
and growth of new lifecycle paths that both reduce the e-waste impact and carbon
footprint of research scientific computing. The project will also work to create
economic models of the extended lifecycles and broader ecosystem, focusing on
economic incentives and the potential impact on the carbon footprint of
scientific computing. The project will both increase computing capacity for the
national scientific community and create radical reductions in power carbon
footprint. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Zero Carbon Compute project will create new
opportunities for computing innovation by leveraging the growing excess
renewable power in US power grids and around the world. This rapidly growing
excess provides both low-cost power and low-cost operation, even for aging
computing equipment without increasing the carbon footprint of computing. The
project will also convene the scientific computing community through a series of
workshops and other methods to understand challenges and communicate the
potential benefits of the proposed solutions. Materials generated from these
community engagements will be used for wider outreach to the broader scientific
computing community, and the cloud computing community. In addition, the project
will create economic models of the extended lifecycles and broader ecosystem,
focusing on economic incentives, market equilibria, and the potential impact on
carbon footprint of scientific computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.