* 2019131
* MRI: Development of a Miniaturized Molecular Beam Epitaxy Setup for Direct Printing of Quantum Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Tian Zhong, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 447,086.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will support the development of
a nanoscale deposition tool – a miniaturized molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system
– for direct fabrication of nanoscale structures for quantum applications. As
the era of quantum engineering emerges, there is a pressing need to rapidly
design, prototype, and test nanoscale structures for quantum information
processing. This is critical not only to the investigation of fundamental
questions in quantum information sciences, but also to the development of
quantum sensors, quantum computing, and quantum networking. Current technologies
separate material synthesis and nanoscale engineering. To enable more rapid
development, researchers will pursue an innovative design based on nanoscale
scanning probe technologies and develop a deposition tool that combines advanced
synthesis and nanofabrication in one step. This instrument will have the
following impacts: i) facilitate rapid development of quantum technologies; ii)
develop a versatile tool to serve the broad quantum research and engineering
community at the University of Chicago; iii) promote education and outreach at
the graduate, undergraduate, and high school level. Outreach programs will
engage the surrounding community in the Chicago South area. The investigators
will allocate 40% of machine usage to the broader quantum research community at
the University of Chicago, which will serve as an intellectual hub for training
future quantum scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team includes experts on
nanoscale materials science, microelectronics, quantum sensing, quantum
computing, and quantum information. It has the goal of developing a miniaturized
MBE system. Traditional MBE is a state-of-the-art deposition tool to produce
wafer-scale thin films; nanofabrication such as photo- or electron-beam-
lithography is used as the second step to engineer the nanoscale structures and
devices. Supported by this MRI grant, the investigators shrink the lateral scale
of deposition to tens of nanometers. This is achieved by customizing a scanning
probe into a nano nozzle, which is integrated into a commercial scanning
tunneling microscopy system. This new tool is developed in a dedicated
laboratory space at the University of Chicago, with established microscopy and
spectroscopy tools available to characterize the structures fabricated by the
miniaturized MBE system. This instrument will enable research in a number of new
scientific areas including but not limited to: 1) two-dimensional
superconducting quantum devices based on nanoscale superconductor deposition; 2)
delta doping of rare earth elements in oxide materials to host individual to
few-body entangled quantum bits; 3) hybrid quantum sensors composed of rare-
earth oxide islands and nitrogen-vacancy centers. This will be a field-defining
development which aims at expediting the investigation of fundamental quantum
phenomena and quantum technology developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.