* 2019804
* Animacy and resumption at the border of cognition and grammar
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Matthew Wagers, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2025
* USD 411,058.00

Human language is uniquely structured in that it often requires us to link
together two expressions at a distance. This is a source of cognitive pressure
for language users, because one expression can appear far apart from where it
must be interpreted and usually there is no audible or visible cue to the site
of interpretation other than absence (a gap). For example, in the question “Who
do you think the bill will help?”, “who” should be interpreted as the object of
“help” even though it is pronounced many words, and several seconds, earlier. In
some languages, a resumptive pronoun can optionally be used (as in pseudo-
English, “Who do you think the bill will help them?”). The goal of this project
is to better understand the source of the optionality, and why some languages
have this expressive device, while others do not. Does the use of a pronoun
reflect a language user’s dynamic reaction to limited cognitive resources? Or
does it reflect conventionalized grammatical processes of particular languages?
The project will provide research opportunities and training in experimental
methods, fieldwork, and data analysis to undergraduate and graduate students. It
will also feed synergistically into a range of public-facing activities that aim
to share knowledge about indigenous languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tests a new hypothesis: namely, that animacy, the property of whether or
not an individual is alive, is a key factor in the use of resumptive pronouns.
It will compare two genetically unrelated languages that show similarities in
the use of these pronouns. The project will test the hypothesis that an optional
resumptive pronoun in object position is more acceptable the more animate its
referent is. A series of paired experiments combining eye-tracking and judgment
studies will be conducted to specifically contrast the particular grammatical
resources of a language that encodes a four-way animacy system throughout its
grammar and a language with no grammatical animacy distinctions. Through this
comparison, animacy as a conceptual category will be distinguished from animacy
as a morphosyntactic category. The project will involve acceptability and
comprehension studies across languages. For the language that encodes animacy
grammatically, two comprehension studies will be used to trace the incremental
comprehension of relative clauses involving co-arguments of differing animacies.
The result will bring novel evidence to bear on three related issues: the
problem of optionality in grammar, the relationship between resumptive pronouns
and gaps, and how language users comprehend resumptive pronouns in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.