* 2019532
* Expanding Access to Ecological Research Innovation and the Power of the Data Revolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Catherine O'Riordan, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2022
* USD 70,071.00

Many of the large, complex challenges in ecology and environmental science will
need new approaches, incorporating new data and collaborations with experts in
neighboring fields of science. To help address this, a cohort of twenty graduate
students and early career scientists from a variety of disciplines will meet to
foster collaborations in innovative ecological research methods and the role of
big data in emerging ideas through a series of activities at the 2020 Ecological
Society of America (ESA) Annual Meeting in Salt Lake City, August 2-7, 2020.
This project will help to advance ecological research by providing
opportunities, particularly for students and early career scientists from
underrepresented groups in science, to learn novel ways of harnessing the deluge
of data in ecology expected to yield transformative results for science and
society. By explicitly encouraging scientific research into environmental issues
that disproportionately impact the communities of participants, follow-on
research will have far reaching impacts on policy, resource management decisions
and programs in communities of color, low income communities and tribal
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cohort of graduate students and early
career scientists from underrepresented groups will be drawn from a variety of
disciplines, and will meet to foster collaborations in innovative ecological
research methods and the role of big data in emerging ideas through a series of
activities at the 2020 ESA Annual Meeting. Research skills workshops, diversity
networks and focused conversations on: i) Expanding Access to Ecological
Research Innovation; and ii) The Power of the Data Revolution will be followed
by two cohort web meetings to facilitate exchange of ideas. This project will
enable ESA to better understand the use of participant cohort strategies to
support diverse graduate students and early career scientists within an
expanding field with many sub-disciplines that extend into others. This project
will provide twenty participants with the exposure, skills training, and
networking to increase the likelihood of becoming contributing members of the
extended ecological research community. Over time, many will act as role models
for their communities and will inspire new students to enter and persevere in
science, helping to create a sustainable critical mass of scientists that
reflects the breadth of society in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.