* 2019400
* Cell surface glycosylation regulation of stem cell fate decisions
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2025
* Lisa Flanagan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,025,548.00

As the body forms during development, the cells that generate each organ receive
a wide array of chemical, mechanical, and electrical signals that help them
decide what types of mature cells to become. Some chemical and mechanical
signals are conveyed by molecules, either freely-traveling or bound to a cell or
a surface, that attach themselves to sensor molecules embedded on the outside of
the developing cells. This cell outer surface is covered in sugars, but the role
these sugars play in helping cells acquire and interpret the signals they
receive during development remains poorly understood. The Principal
Investigator's laboratory previously devised a novel way to study the cell
surface, and used it to identify a new role for sugars in regulating brain
formation. The present project will elucidate how the different types of sugars
on the cell surface influence key decision points in brain development, shedding
new light on crucial processes that affect brain formation and function. Since
the cell surface components identified in these studies are also present on
other organs besides the brain, the results of this research may reveal
important general mechanisms through which cell surface sugars impact the
development of many organs throughout the body. This project includes
initiatives to encourage tomorrow’s scientists by providing a fun and engaging
multi-disciplinary science experience for K-12 students through a community
outreach program. These initiatives aim at encouraging and empowering young
people to become scientists who can combine approaches from a variety of
scientific disciplines to deepen our understanding of biological
development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Undifferentiated cells encounter a variety of
external signals that impact cell fate. External signals bind to plasma membrane
proteins, and glycosylation plays a vital role in regulating membrane proteins
by controlling their ligand affinity and cell surface residence time. Despite
the importance of glycosylation, its role in cell fate decisions has been under-
appreciated and under-studied. The goal of this project is to understand how
glycosylation impacts neurogenic and astrogenic fate decisions of neural stem
cells. Previous research devised a novel way to determine cell fate that also
reflects cell surface glycosylation, and found that glycosylation regulates
neural stem cell fate determination. Key enzymes [Mgat5 (associated with
astrogenesis) and Mgat3 (associated with neurogenesis)] and distinct fate-
specific patterns of cell surface proteins were also identified. The present
research tests the general hypothesis that the balance of Mgat5 and Mgat3
activities is a critical determinant of fate potential, and regulates cell
surface protein interactions with extracellular ligands. Three more specific
hypotheses are tested using in-vivo and in-vitro experiments: (1) Mgat5 activity
promotes astrogenesis, (2) Mgat3 prevents astrogenesis and promotes
neurogenesis, (3) neurogenic and astrogenic cells differ in cell surface protein
function due to the activities of Mgat5 and Mgat3. It is expected that these
studies will reveal a crucial regulatory mechanism cells utilize to respond to
the myriad extracellular signals that impact their fate
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.