* 2019121
* DDRIE: Economic Value of Crime Control: Evidence from a Large Investment in Police Infrastructure.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Christopher Blattman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2021
* USD 12,733.00

Economic models of criminal behavior have focused mainly on the effects of
investment in policing on crime while ignoring the broader societal benefits of
such investments. This research project uses the housing market to study the
local welfare effects of a large investment in police infrastructure. Applying a
research design based on the openings of police stations in the three large
cities, the project studies the effects of public safety investments on crime
and housing markets. Specifically, it measures the relationship among police
investments, reductions in violent and non-violent crimes and changes in the
prices of nearby residential properties. Initial results show that observable
police presence reduce overall crime. However, the effect is local; it is within
less than half of a mile, with no appreciable impact outside the area where the
police stations are built. The researchers then use police station construction
to calculate their effects on local housing prices and new construction. The
researchers find statistically significant evidence that police stationsâ€™
openings increase housing values. The results of this research project provides
insights on the effects of police on broader welfare of citizens as well as
provide inputs into how to make local government investments efficiently.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DDRIE research project leverages new
police station construction in neighborhoods in a number of cities over time to
estimate the causal effects of police infrastructure on welfare of local
communities. The project consists of two parts---the effects of police station
construction on crime rates, and the effects of policing on housing markets.
Using quasi-experimental variation in police station construction in
neighborhoods and cities, this research project studies the short- and long-
term cross-sectional and intertemporal changes in reported crime and finds that
police station construction leads to reduction in local crime rates. This part
of the project also explores the mechanisms through which police station
construction affects reduction in crime, testing both deterrence and
incapacitation channels. The second part of the project uses a hedonic pricing
model to estimate the effects of crime reduction on property values, thus
recovering the price elasticity of crime. This is a first attempt to estimate
willingness to pay to avoid crime. The project develops a welfare analysis of
crime control that accounts for individual heterogeneity and sorting. This
research provides insights on the effects of policing on broader welfare of
citizens as well as provide inputs into efficient local government investments
decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.