* 2019494
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Arctic Community Resilience to Boreal Environmental Change: Assessing Risks from Fire and Disease (ACRoBEAR)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Orttung, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2024
* USD 147,902.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to predict and understand health risks
from wildfire air pollution and vector-borne disease in the Arctic, and the
resilience and adaptability of communities across the region to these risks.
This project focuses on a critical challenge as the Arctic has warmed rapidly
over recent decades, at around twice the rate of global mean temperature
increases, resulting in rapid changes to this environment. The Arctic has been
affected by unprecedented fire activity, leading to unhealthy air quality in
high latitude towns and cities. Vector-borne disease occurrence in these regions
is also changing in response to rapid changes in temperature and moisture. The
fire activity is also affecting this disease risk by altering the habitat
conditions for vectors and their hosts. The project will focus on integrating
satellite and in-situ observations, modelling, health data, and community
knowledge and stakeholder dialogue to understand community resilience and
response to these changing risks. This information will help communities address
environmental, social, and governance challenges in the most rapidly warming
region of the planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.