* 2019589
* STC: Center for Chemical Currencies of a Microbial Planet
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Mary Ann Moran, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 09/30/2026
* USD 9,999,986.00

Functions carried out by microscopic inhabitants of the surface ocean affect
every aspect of life on our planet, regardless of distance from the coast. Ocean
phytoplankton are responsible for half of the photosynthesis on Earth, the first
step in a complex system that annually withdraws 50 billion metric tons of
carbon from the atmosphere to sustain their growth. Of this, 25 billion metric
tons participate in a rapid cycle in which biologically reactive material is
released into seawater and converted back into carbon dioxide by marine bacteria
within hours to days. The chemical-microbe network at the heart of this fast
cycle remains poorly constrained; consequently, its primary currencies and
controls remain elusive; its sensitivities to changing ocean conditions are
unknown; and its responses to future climate scenarios are not predictable. The
Center for Chemical Currencies of a Microbial Planet (C-CoMP) integrates
research, education and knowledge transfer activities to develop a mechanistic
understanding of surface ocean carbon flux within the context of a changing
ocean and through increased participation in ocean sciences. C-CoMP supports
science teams that merge biology, chemistry, modeling, and informatics to close
long-standing knowledge gaps in the identities and dynamics of organic molecules
that serve as the currencies of elemental transfer between the ocean and
atmosphere. C-CoMP fosters education, outreach, and knowledge transfer
activities that engage students of all ages, broaden participation in the next
generation of ocean scientists, and extend novel open-science approaches into
complementary academic and industrial communities. The Center framework is
critical to this mission, uniquely facilitating an open exchange of experimental
and computational science, methodological and conceptual challenges, and
collaborations that establish integrated science and education partnerships.
With expanded participation in ocean science research and ocean literacy across
the US society, the next generation of ocean scientists will better reflect the
diverse US population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate-carbon feedbacks on the
marine carbon reservoir are major uncertainties for future climate projections,
and the trajectory and rate of ocean changes depend directly on microbial
responses to temperature increases, ocean acidification, and other perturbations
driven by climate change. C-CoMP research closes an urgent knowledge gap in the
mechanisms driving carbon flow between ocean and atmosphere, with global
implications for predictive climate models. The Center supports
interdisciplinary science teams following open and reproducible science
practices to address: (1) the chemical currencies of surface ocean carbon flux;
(2) the structure and regulation of the chemical-microbe network that mediates
this flux; and (3) sensitivity of the network and its feedbacks on climate.
C-CoMP leverages emerging tools and technologies to tackle critical challenges
in these themes, in synergy with existing ocean programs and consistent with
NSF’s Big Ideas. C-CoMP education and outreach activities seek to overcome
barriers to ocean literacy and diversify participation in ocean research. The
Center is developing (1) initiatives to expand ocean literacy in K-12 and the
broader public, (2) ocean sciences undergraduate curricula and research
opportunities that provide multiple entry points into research experiences, (3)
post-baccalaureate programs to transition undergraduates into graduate education
and careers in ocean science, and (4) interdisciplinary graduate student and
postdoctoral programs that prepare the next generation of ocean scientists. The
C-CoMP team includes education faculty who evaluate the impacts of education and
outreach activities and export successful STEM initiatives to the education
community. C-CoMP is revolutionizing the technologies for studying chemical
transformations in microbial systems to build understanding of the outsized
impact of microbes on elemental cycles. Open science, cross-disciplinary
collaborations, community engagement, and inclusive practices foster strategic
advances in critical science problems and STEM initiatives. C-CoMP science,
education, and knowledge-transfer themes are efficiently addressed through a
sustained network of scientists addressing critical research challenges while
broadening the workforce that will tackle multi-disciplinary problems with
academic, industrial and policy partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.