* 2019528
* RII Track-2 FEC: Highly Predictive, Explanatory Models to Harness the Life Science Data Revolution
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Hall, University of Wyoming
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,496,103.00

Dramatic increases in the scale and availability of data are profoundly
reshaping the life sciences. Data acquisition and availability are outpacing our
capacity for analysis, including the development of models that represent our
knowledge of biological processes. This collaborative project among three
universities in Wyoming, Montana, and Nevada will address this pressing need in
the life sciences through research and education efforts led by our consortium.
Some types of models can fit observed data very well, but lack generality and
the ability to extrapolate to novel settings or future time points. Conversely,
other types of models can be more general, but provide a poorer fit to
individual data sets. In our research we will develop knowledge of these trade-
offs and methods that combine advantageous features of different types of
models. In each year our consortium will train a diverse cohort of twelve
postdoctoral researchers in cutting edge modeling techniques and prepare them
for the workforce. The project investigators and postdoctoral researchers at our
three institutions will create an integrated, highly collaborative and
interdisciplinary consortium of data scientists. We will develop educational
tools to aid the dissemination of the methodologies we develop, promoting the
efficient use of high dimensional data in the life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatic increases in the scale and availability
of data are profoundly reshaping all domains in the life sciences. Data
acquisition and availability from DNA sequencers, environmental sensors,
parallel global studies, and imagery (among many others), across time and space,
are outpacing our capacity for analysis, including the development of models
that represent our knowledge of biological processes. We will address this gap
in the life sciences through research and education efforts led by our
consortium at the University of Wyoming, the University of Montana, and the
University of Nevadaâ€“Reno. We will compete and further develop computational,
statistical, and machine learning methods for multi-dimensional data to develop
highly predictive and explanatory models for the life sciences. We will test and
refine methods and develop critical tools for harnessing the data revolution. We
will apply them to three cross-scale domains within the life sciences and
advance our mechanistic understanding of key ecological and evolutionary
phenomena. By bringing together a consortium of scientists currently using
existing techniques from multiple disciplines, including computer science and
applied mathematics, and competing these techniques with simulated and real
data, we will evaluate the efficacy of existing methods. Further, we will build
on these methods to develop novel hybrid modeling techniques and expanded use of
linear and non-linear sparse models to maximize both the predictive accuracy and
mechanistic insight of models applied to high dimensional data sets. We will
apply these techniques to critical challenges in the life sciences, including
mapping phenotypes to genomic data, modeling community dynamics in highly
diverse systems, and disentangling the interplay among different temporal scales
of drivers in aquatic ecosystems. In each year our consortium will train a
diverse cohort of twelve postdoctoral researchers in modeling techniques and
prepare them for the workforce. The project investigators and postdoctoral
researchers in Wyoming, Montana, and Nevada will create an integrated, highly
collaborative and interdisciplinary consortium of data scientists. We will
develop educational tools to aid the dissemination of the methodologies we
develop, promoting the efficient use of high dimensional data in the life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.