* 2019525
* Structural, metamorphic, and thermal evolution of the Brooks Range (Alaska) metamorphic belts: implications for formation-exhumation of high-pressure rocks and Arctic tectonic evol
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* James Vogl, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 219,951.00

With a length of over 600 km, the Schist belt in the Brooks Range of northern
Alaska is one of the largest high-pressure metamorphic terranes in the world and
shares many characteristics with other high-/ultra-high- metamorphic rocks
around the world. This study is focused on documenting the deformational,
metamorphic, and thermal histories of the Schist belt and adjacent lower
pressure metamorphic rocks to test hypotheses related to two groups of
questions. (1) How are high-pressure rocks exhumed to the Earth’s surface?
Buoyant continental lithospheric plates may be pulled into subduction zones by
sinking of the attached dense oceanic lithosphere at subduction zones, providing
a simple explanation for deep tectonic burial and associated high-pressure
metamorphism in continental rocks. However, the processes by which these high-
pressure rocks are brought back up to the earth’s surface remain poorly
understood. (2) The Brooks Range, the rest of the northern Alaska, and Chukotka
are widely believed to have rotated about 66° anti-clockwise away from the
Canadian Arctic Islands during formation of the Canada Basin (Arctic Ocean). It
remains unclear as to what geologic events (e.g., continental subduction and
high-pressure metamorphism, collision, extension, basin formation), if any, in
the Brooks Range are dynamically linked to rotational basin opening.
Furthermore, it is unclear as to how this geometrical style of basin opening is
accommodated along the strike of the of the ca. 3000 km long continental land
mass from northeastern Alaska to Chukotka. This project will provide financial
support and training of a Ph.D. student, a M.Sc. student, and multiple
undergraduates in STEM fields, potentially including women and underrepresented
groups. The students will gain experience in field mapping, as well as a variety
of analytical laboratory techniques in facilities with experts at two
universities. Graduate students will be involved in outreach through creation of
teaching materials focused on Arctic geology that will be distributed to Alaska
schools through collaboration with the Alaska Division of Geological &amp;
Geophysical Surveys. Through an increased understanding of Arctic geology, this
study will provide an improved framework for economic development of resources
as the Arctic region opens for exploration in the coming
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jurassic(?)-Cretaceous convergence between a
passive margin and the oceanic Angayucham terrane produced the Brooks Range
orogen (northern Alaska), which includes a fold-thrust belt and two metamorphic
belts: the blueschist/eclogite Schist belt and the high-pressure greenschist
Central belt. However, many key aspects of the structural, metamorphic, and
thermal histories are lacking for these metamorphic belts, resulting in diverse
models for exhumation of the high-pressure rocks, and the tectonic evolution of
both the Brooks Range and greater Arctic region. In this study we will use field
and analytical techniques to document the structural, metamorphic, and thermal
evolution of both belts to test models in three interrelated categories. (1) The
researchers will test models for the highly debated relationships regarding the
timing and geodynamic significance of normal-sense structures on the south flank
of the Brooks Range, and the tectonic setting of flanking basins. The work will
place kinematic and age constraints on tectono-thermal events, particularly in
during the Aptian-Albian, a key time of important change in north Alaska and the
adjacent Arctic realm. (2) The researchers will test models for the formation
and exhumation of high-pressure rocks, with a focus on the role of buoyancy-
driven exhumation models. (3) The Brooks Range and the rest of the Arctic Alaska
– Chukotka microplate is believed to have rotated about 66° anti-clockwise away
from the Canadian Arctic Islands, resulting in the formation of the Canada
Basin. It remains unclear as to what events (e.g., continental subduction and
high-P metamorphism, collision, extension, basin formation), if any, in the
Brooks Range are dynamically linked to basin opening. Furthermore, there is
debate regarding how this geologically unprecedented geometrical basin opening
is accommodated along the strike of the of the ca. 3000-km-long continental land
mass of the Arctic Alaska – Chukotka microplate. Improved timing constraints for
Brooks Range tectonic events will address these issues and test specific
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.