* 2019178
* Collaborative Research: Social Norms, Trust, and Intergenerational Flow of Innovations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Haley Traini, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2022
* USD 43,762.00

Increased productivity and economic growth partly depends on adoption of
improved technology which in turn depends on the transmission of information
about new technologies. Young people tend to learn about new technologies before
their parents who own productive resources and are wedded to old technologies
and may not trust the new information they learn from the young. On the other
hand, young people may mistrust elders and may not reveal appropriate
information they think elders will not accept, thus slowing technical progress
and economic growth. This research project will use theory and experiments to
study how social norms affect the intergenerational flow of technological
information and how best to solve this friction in information flow. In addition
to intergenerational transmission of information, the research also studies
whether there is a gender dimension to the intergenerational flow of
technological information. The results of this study could influence the design
of effective information interventions that induce intergenerational flows of
knowledge to speed up technical progress. The results will offer valuable
information on the constraints in the economic empowerment of young women. The
results of this research has the potential to increase the pace of innovation
and accelerate economic growth, and improve the living standards of Americans.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will leverage a collaboration with
NGO partners in 150 junior high schools to study the barriers in
intergenerational flow of knowledge. The project focuses on beliefs held by
parents regarding the level and relevance of students’ school-taught technical
knowledge, as well as students’ assessments of parents’ beliefs. It examines
whether parents and students hold systematically biased beliefs; relates these
biases to conventional roles prescribed for different configurations of parents
and students by gender; and measures the effects of beliefs on intergenerational
communication patterns, parents’ acquisition of new technical knowledge, and the
empowerment of youth. The research proceeds in four stages. First, a baseline
survey will collect household demographics of participants in a school-based
technical education program. Second, the PIs will elicit parents’ and students’
beliefs in interviews; and deliver technical information to a random subset of
parents and students. Third, the PIs will survey productive inputs allocated to
youth for their home production, the acquisition of new technical knowledge
among parents as well as communication patterns between students and parents.
Finally, the study will track the impact of the information interventions on
production patterns after two school years. The results of this research has the
potential to increase the pace of innovation and accelerate economic growth,
thus improving the living standards of Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.