* 2019021
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope for cellular imaging for faculty and students at Baruch College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Valerie Schawaroch, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 446,909.00

An award is made to Baruch College, City University of New York to provide
support for the acquisition of an advanced confocal microscopy system with
super-resolution capacity. The new system will support the current and
foreseeable critical research needs of the faculty in the Department of Natural
Sciences, which include multi-color imaging of fixed and live samples, time-
lapse imaging, quantitative fluorescence, photo-activation, visualization of
subcellular structures and organelles, spectral analysis of bioluminescent
organisms, 3-D rendering and imaging of complex tissues. The system's
versatility makes it capable of accommodating a wide variety of experimental
approaches now and in the future and will maximize the number of researchers at
Baruch who can use the new equipment for years to come. In addition to faculty
research, the confocal will also be used to train graduate and undergraduate
students in modern research practices and technologies as part of individually
mentored research and classroom instruction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new
confocal imaging system will be used by at least nine research groups within the
Department of Natural Sciences and their collaborators, whose broad and
multidisciplinary research objectives include the determination of hormone
signaling mechanisms, elucidation of the role of reactive oxygen species in the
nervous system, identification of bioluminescence in marine organisms,
investigation of melanin in fungal pathogenesis, determination of muscle
attachment site selection, elucidation of gene regulatory pathways governing
vertebrate differentiation, identification of environmental impacts on insect
behavior, and classification of morphological characteristics in speciation.
These data will be publicized in the form of peer-reviewed publications and
presentations at scientific meetings, as well as directly shared with interested
researchers and collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.