* 2019691
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Rapid Arctic environmental Changes: implications for well-being, resilience and Evolution of Arctic communities (RACE)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nikolay Shiklomanov, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,382.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
focus on Resilience in a Rapidly Changing Arctic. Integrated teams of scientists
and stakeholders will address key areas of arctic resilience understanding and
action. This collaboration of academic and non-academic knowledge systems
constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that will advance not only
understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but also spur action,
inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for resilience. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RACE project addresses the impacts of rapid climate
and environmental changes in the Arctic on infrastructure and pan-Arctic and
regional population dynamics. By using best available datasets from in-situ and
satellite observations and re-analyses together with climate model simulations,
the project will develop improved regional assessments of Arctic Social
Indicators, which in turn, will be used for projections of population dynamics
as well as demographic and life quality trends of Arctic communities. For the
first time results of large-scale climate diagnostics and projections will be
used and translated into social indicators and further into demographic
variables by using socioeconomic and demographic models, thus providing accurate
regional projections of the Arctic population dynamics which presently are
routinely relying exclusively on economy forecasts. Results of this project will
provide critical information about on-going and future climate and environmental
changes, assessments of the impact on these changes on community well-being, and
projections of climate-mediated pan-Arctic and regional population dynamics.
This information is critical for building strategies for sustainable social-
economic development in the Arctic and pan-Arctic regions in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.