* 2019032
* MRI: Acquisition of a Large High-Temperature Vacuum Press for Advanced Materials Research, Manufacturing and Training at NC State University
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Afsaneh Rabiei, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 01/31/2024
* USD 640,150.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will support the acquisition of
a diffusion bonding hot press furnace (furnace) with high-temperature
capabilities to enhance research and education at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) and area universities and industries. The furnace will
catalyze fundamental research on new manufacturing processes and materials--
leading to enhanced performance, safety and efficiency for products ranging from
aircraft to biomedical devices. The furnace will be integrated into courses on
advanced materials and manufacturing and used for outreach activities in
additive manufacturing, including a Manufacturing Summer Camp for high school
and middle school students. It will help to foster collaborative efforts with
industry and to give students exposure to research experiences in partnership
with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The furnace will enable fundamental studies
to understand the effect of processing parameters on the performance of selected
material systems, which range from metal foams to high temperature
multifunctional ceramic sensors and from high entropy alloys to reinforced Ti
matrix composites. Potentially transformative research on composite metal foam
technology can enable higher energy absorption, excellent radiation shielding,
blast resistance, and good thermal insulation. This instrument will allow the
fabrication of the metal foams more consistently and reliably at much larger and
testable scales. The research on the development of high temperature sensors
would be potentially transformative by allowing the microstructure and
properties of the sensors to be controlled through the control of their thermal
history. There is a great need for such multifunctional ceramics at ultrahigh
temperatures for structural health monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.