* 2019073
* CC* Integration-Large: SciStream: Architecture and Toolkit for Data Streaming between Federated Science Instruments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Rajkumar Kettimuthu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 850,000.00

Scientific instruments are capable of generating data at very high speeds.
However, with traditional file-based data movement and analysis methods, data
are often processed at a much lower speed, leading to either operating the
instruments at a lower speed or discarding a (significant) portion of the data
without processing it. To address this issue, SciStream project will develop
software tools to stream data at very high speeds from scientific instruments to
supercomputers at a distant location. SciStream hides the complexities in
network connections from the end user and provides a high level of security for
all the network connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data producers (e.g., data
acquisition applications on scientific instruments, simulations on
supercomputers) and consumers (e.g., data analysis applications on high
performance computing systems) may be in different security domains (and thus
require bridging of those domains) and may, further, lack external network
connectivity (and thus, require traffic forwarding proxies). SciStream
establishes necessary bridging and end-to-end authentication between source and
destination, while providing efficient memory-to-memory data streaming. Through
the exploration of architectural and design choices and addressing issues of
control protocols and security, SciStream will advance the understanding of the
challenges in supporting high speed memory-to-memory data streaming between
remote instruments in federated science
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SciStream will benefit all scientific
applications that require memory-to-memory data streaming between distributed
instruments. Recent trends suggest that this is an important and growing
requirement for many scientific applications. SciStream will help significantly
reduce the time to solution for these applications, resulting in improved
scientific productivity and thus far-reaching benefits for society. Key design
choices such as application-agnostic streaming and support for best-effort
streaming will make SciStream appealing to a broader science community.
SciStream will engage with domain scientists, campus computing centers, and a
scientific user facility to reach a wider audience. Through on-campus programs
at the University of Chicago, SciStream will train under-represented students in
networking. Additional details on SciStream can be found here:
https://scistream.github.io/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.