* 2019233
* Alaska Undergraduate Research Experience: Partnering for Alaska Students by Growing Recruitment and Retention through Undergraduate Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Cindy Trussell, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2022
* USD 74,450.00

Undergraduate research experiences focused on regional issues are an effective
way to increase retention of underrepresented students in STEM fields
nationally. Alaska offers a rich diversity of field- and lab-based research
experiences, with much of this work being led by institutions outside of the
academic setting. However, it has proven to be challenging to connect university
students interested in pursuing careers in STEM fields in Alaska with those
opportunities. The main goal of the Alaska Undergraduate Research Experience is
to connect Alaskan students to local research opportunities in biological
sciences to increase retention and better prepare students to enter research
endemic to Alaska. This project will bring the Alaskan research community
together to develop community partnerships with local research projects (e.g.
local tribal councils, non-profits, state and federal agencies across Alaska)
and create pathways for future undergraduate research opportunities. To sustain
the network in its infancy, collaborators will participate in training workshops
that strengthen skills in building and sustaining community, mentoring, and
cross-cultural relationships. A website will be developed to connect
undergraduates to research opportunities and to provide an information hub to
tie communities in remote locations to research that is accessible to their
students. Alaskaâ€™s diversity, both in research, in its people, provide a unique
opportunity to connect people in national biological research industries to the
regional communities that they are exploring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will identify community partnerships with local research projects, provide
workshops on Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CURE) development
and place-based education for collaborators, develop a network informational hub
within the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) website, and evaluate the
network. The University of Alaska - Anchorage and Alaska Pacific University
serve non-traditional student populations and enroll a diverse student body,
including a large percentage of Alaska Native students. Students from these
institutions will be connected to the network collaborators to engage in
directed biological research for course credit. To ensure that the network is
sustainable, the SERC website will serve as a permanent platform to connect
local research projects with interested students. The outcomes of this initial
network-building project will guide future expansions of the regional network
and will inform retention efforts of underrepresented undergraduates in the
biological sciences nationally. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in "Vision
and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action"
(http://visionandchange/finalreport) with additional support provided by the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.