* 2019789
* Genetics and evolution of lethal alleles in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Mohamed Noor, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2024
* USD 960,344.00

Bad mutations arise in all species on Earth. Some mutations are so bad for the
bearer that, when an individual inherits a copy from both parents, they cannot
survive to adulthood. One would presume that such lethal mutations would rarely
be observed, since natural selection should eliminate them rapidly from natural
populations. However, for nearly a century studies in various species have found
that such lethal variation is surprisingly common. At least two hypotheses can
explain the persistence of such lethal variation: 1) lethal mutations arise at a
high enough rate that they are replenished before natural selection can
eliminate them all, and 2) a subset of lethal mutations may be actively
maintained through natural selection, for example if they are slightly
advantageous to bearers who carry only one copy. This project will use a mix of
classical genetics and genome sequencing to identify the genes bearing these
lethal mutations and to infer the evolutionary forces that cause the mutations
to persist at such high abundance in natural populations. This research is vital
to understanding the burden of such mutations on health as well as to
understanding the persistence of variation in natural populations. This project
will also contribute substantially to the education and training high school,
college and graduate students. The project uses current science fiction as a
backdrop for teaching fundamental principles in evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hundreds of such mutations will be isolated using
the model system Drosophila melanogaster from a natural population studied
extensively 50 years ago. All of the lethal mutations isolated will be mapped
using chromosomal deficiencies, and a subset will be mapped to single genes.
This mapping will determine if the lethal effects result from single-locus,
loss-of-function mutations, as often assumed. The continued research will focus
especially on lethal mutations that are most prevalent in the natural
population, since they are the best candidates for ones to have been actively
been maintained by natural selection. The researchers will use modern population
genetic approaches to infer the evolutionary forces that have acted on these
abundant lethal alleles. The prevailing dogma has been that virtually all lethal
mutations simply persist through a balance of mutation and selection, and this
research will rigorously assess this long-standing question. This work is
jointly funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular
&amp; Cellular Biology and the Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the Division of
Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.