* 2019520
* Upgrade of a transmission electron microscope energy dispersive spectroscopy (TEM-EDS) detector for teaching and interdisciplinary research
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Suzanna Brauer, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 56,458.00

This National Science Foundation grant supports the upgrade of an energy
dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) and scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) detector system for the transmission electron microscope (TEM)
in the Dewel Microscopy Facility at Appalachian State University in Boone, NC.
The multi-user Dewel Microscopy Facility supports the research and teaching of
five departments and is the only electron microscopy facility serving the
mountains of western North Carolina. There is no comparable instrumentation
(TEM-EDS/STEM) either within the university or in geographical proximity. The
TEM at Appalachian State University is used for teaching by multiple
departments, and is vital to a variety of research endeavors. It has enabled
regional, national, and international collaborations, and attracted and helped
retain faculty with active and energetic research programs. TEM-based research
will be used not only to recruit students who find independent, high tech
laboratory research appealing, but also those who may not feel comfortable with
or able to participate in field-based research. Appalachian State University is
one of the only providers of science-related outreach activities for a rural,
underserved region with an economy that is still classified as “at risk” by the
Appalachian Regional Commission. Outreach activities already involving the
existing TEM are numerous, and range from hands-on demonstrations to workshops
to science festivals. An operational, state-of-the-art detector will allow the
facility to increase participation by all students, expand the scope of the
outreach activities through the Microscopy Facility, and attract new users from
off campus and well as on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newer silicon drift
TEM detector (funded by this proposal) will have exponentially faster detection
times, better detection limits, will be able to detect light elements, and will
not require liquid nitrogen for operation, compared to an TEM-EDS detector
(using a Si-Li crystal). This upgrade will allow the university to greatly
enhance and expand its research and teaching activities, such as investigating
microbial manganese mineral formation in cave and karst environments, exploring
the role of mineral-induced selection by microbes, map heavy metal uptake on
metal oxide precipitates from acid mine drainage sites, study the microbial
ecology of peat bogs, help characterize novel methanogens, map conodont growth,
investigate grain boundaries in migmatites, and assist in studies of ore mineral
genesis in the central and southern Appalachians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.