* 2019348
* FMitF: Track II: Strengthening the integration of the CVC4 SMT solver in the Coq proof assistant
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Cesare Tinelli, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Proof assistants are interactive software tools that help computer scientists
and mathematicians prove mathematical theorems. In particular, they are
increasingly used to help develop and formalize the theoretical foundations of
certain areas of computer science, such as programming languages, or formally
state and prove the correctness of specific software and hardware. This project
aims to improve the level of automation in the popular Coq proof assistant. The
project's novelty consists in fully integrating in Coq a powerful automated
prover, CVC4, to prove automatically certain proof subgoals, expressed as
logical formulas, that may arise during a proof session in Coq. Increasing the
level of automation in proof assistants will positively impact Coq users
throughout academia and industry by making it easier and less tedious to develop
proofs in Coq. Demonstrating the advantages of this integration with real-world
problems through a planned collaboration with an industrial partner will have a
significant impact on verified construction of systems software. The reduction
of time and effort to develop fully verified software will facilitate the
creation of more robust, reliable and secure software
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team builds on a previous integration
of CVC4 in Coq achieved through the SMTCoq Coq plugin developed with external
collaborators. The integration is trustworthy because, once it proves a subgoal,
CVC4 generates a formal proof that SMTCoq then replays internally to prove the
subgoal within Coq. This project significantly extends the class of subgoals
that can be dispatched to CVC4 by adding support for user-defined functions and
quantifiers. It also extends CVC4 and SMTCoq with the ability to help the Coq
user when a subgoal does not hold, by suggesting additional assumptions that
would make the subgoal provable. Since the sort of automation enhancements
achieved with this project could be adapted to other proof assistants, this
project also contributes in general to bringing closer together the worlds of
interactive and automated theorem proving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.