* 2019561
* RII Track-2 FEC: IGM--A Framework for Harnessing Big Hydrological Datasets for Integrated Groundwater Management
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gregory Easson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,098,580.00

Groundwater depletion is a major water management problem that is of global
concern. Locally, the Southeastern US has experienced increased water stress due
to the mismanagement of its water resources, especially during drought periods.
Rapid agricultural expansion and unplanned urbanization have further aggravated
this problem. Given that water-related industries contribute to over 150 billion
of US dollars in annual revenues, the long-term sustainability of freshwater
resources is of paramount importance to this region. While mapping the
availability of water in topsoil, reservoirs, and rivers continues to receive
much attention, mapping of groundwater storage changes at a fine spatiotemporal
resolution over large areas is currently lacking. This is important because
groundwater contributes around 40 percent of freshwater usage in the
conterminous US, and its contribution in some Southeastern states, e.g.,
Mississippi, is over two-thirds. Groundwater also indirectly sustains surface
water resources, and hence its actual contribution to freshwater usage is even
larger than reported. The goal of this project is to harness the big data to
implement an integrated groundwater management (IGM) framework that will provide
new scientific insights and make useful groundwater predictions at an
unprecedented fine spatiotemporal resolution. The IGM framework integrates
hydrological, geological, and satellite datasets with machine learning tools and
high-resolution simulation models. The information generated will be made
available to a wide group of stakeholders through a web-based platform to help
develop engineering and policy solutions. The research tasks and workforce
development efforts will be jointly accomplished by a team of interdisciplinary
researchers at five universities: The University of Alabama, Louisiana State
University, University of Mississippi, Tuskegee University, and Southern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prediction of groundwater storage changes at
fine spatiotemporal scales is challenging due to lack of information about
recharge fluxes, which are influenced by variations in natural land surface
processes (e.g., precipitation and evapotranspiration) and anthropogenic
interventions such as irrigation and pumping. The inability to map subsurface
heterogeneities is another major limitation. In this study, we will harness big
hydrologic datasets using science-based process models and machine learning
tools to develop groundwater level and recharge maps at fine spatiotemporal
scales. Novel contributions from this effort will include the development of new
machine learning algorithms (such as convolutional and long-short term memory
networks constrained by conservation principles), a new hydrogeological database
derived from well log data, new machine learning tools for developing geological
cross-sections from well log data, physically-realistic process models that use
novel methods for estimating plant transpiration under climatic stress, and a
new web platform for sharing groundwater level and recharge datasets. The
integrated groundwater management framework will help answer several important
science questions: 1) How well can we predict the groundwater levels and
recharge at fine temporal resolution? 2) How different is the efficiency of data
driven models compared to process-based models for obtaining groundwater
recharge, and what are the advantages of a hybrid approach? and 3) What are the
physical controls on groundwater drought-recovery
processes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.