* 2019863
* SG: Broadening biodiversity-ecosystem functioning research to include mutualist networks
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rachael Winfree, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,920.00

The earth is rapidly losing its biodiversity. The consequences of this
biodiversity loss for ecosystem functions that humanity relies on, such as water
filtration, carbon storage, and pollination, are not well understood. In
experiments done with simplified ecological communities, ecosystem functions can
be maintained by a small number of species. However, biodiversity may be more
important in nature, where ecological communities are more complex. One aspect
of this complexity is that in nature, most species rely on beneficial
interactions with other species, or mutualisms. For example, flowering plants
need animals such as bees to pollinate them, and pollinators require flowering
plants as a source of food (nectar and pollen). Yet to date, these networks of
mutualist interactions have largely been left out of research on the importance
of biodiversity for ecosystem functioning. Thus, the current predictions for how
ecosystem functions will change with biodiversity loss might be overly
simplistic. In addition to addressing an issue of critical conservation concern,
the proposed work will contribute to training the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will bring mutualism into the study
of biodiversity and ecosystem function, using native bee species and the
pollination they provide to wild plants as a model system. The PI will use data
already collected by members of her research group in the Mid-Atlantic USA. In
total, the data include 116,000 individual pollinators of 500 species, and 339
plant species. Within each of 49 plant-pollinator networks, the PI will first
determine which bee species are the most important pollinators of each plant
species. She will then assess how the number of bee species that are needed for
the pollination of at least one plant species increases with the number of plant
species considered. Thus, the project will reveal how the importance of
biodiversity to ecosystem function increases when entire mutualist networks, as
opposed to only one or a few target species, are included. Null models that
assume random interactions among bee and plant species will be used to separate
the components of this increase that are due to stochastic effects from those
that are due to biology. Generalities will be sought by comparing results across
the 49 networks. An explicit goal of the project is to explore the role of rare
species in ecosystem function. Previous studies focused on the function
delivered to one or a few species often find that rare species are not
important. However, a bee species that is rare in the overall community might
still be an important pollinator of a particular plant, making rare species
important to the functioning of the network as a whole. The results of this work
will broaden our understanding of biodiversity and its importance to ecosystem
functioning in the complex natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.