* 2019727
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Adaptation to Highly Unpredictable Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Christine Hastorf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,194.00

Venicia Slotten a doctoral dissertation student will undertake research to study
long term diet and resource procurement strategies in a region of volcanic
activity. This region experiences powerful volcanic activity every few
centuries, which dramatically impacts the landscape and alters the ecosystems
that people used to obtain their basic resources for food, tools, and medicine.
Archaeological investigations are well suited for this study because they allow
for a long-term view of past lives and will allow the project to investigate
particular land management and settlement strategies that aided peoples to
continue living in such a dynamic landscape over a long time through at least
three major volcanic eruptions. This investigation will explore how people coped
with natural disasters by demonstrating the plant-human interactions that were
vital in long-term survival and could have helped the ancient inhabitants
maintain resilience within their environmental setting, thus illustrating
fruitful paths for future disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slotten and her
research team will excavate domestic contexts of a volcanically preserved
village site. Examining household contexts will allow the investigators to focus
on everyday practices in the past and to gain a better understanding of daily
life styles. The research will be conducted on a lake shoreline to uncover
household structures that are being actively washed away by the seasonally
fluctuating lake levels. Remaining archaeological materials will be recovered
before the site is completely destroyed. Since ecosystem management is one of
the main domains of adaptive strategies that societies have employed throughout
history in order to deal with their environment, this project will focus on the
recovery of preserved plant material in order to reconstruct past ecological
management and knowledge. At the core of the research design is a systematic
collection of botanical data, including macrobotanical remains (seeds and wood
charcoal) as well as microbotanical remains (pollen, phytoliths, and starch).
Botanical remains are a critical component towards understanding the basic lives
of traditional people, as their main material engagement within the landscape
was with plants. The team will generate environmental models to aid in the
interpretation of past migrations and resettlement as a result of volcanic
activity and explore the potential for multi-community engagements and
relationships in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.