* 2019976
* AccelNet: International network for brain-inspired computation
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Eric Shea-Brown, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2023
* USD 754,935.00

Brains have intricate complexity at many scales, from the detailed structure and
connections of neurons to the brain-wide swirl of electrical activity that
underlies thought and experience. Making sense of these complexities and using
new understanding to design improved computational algorithms requires new
combinations of research expertise. This AccelNet project builds international
links between academic, private research and industrial partners and prepares
the next generation of researchers at the interface between neuroscience and
artificial intelligence. The project connects leading centers for academic and
industry research in the Pacific Northwest, Paris, France, and Montreal, Canada,
to advance understanding of brain structure and dynamics and to use these
insights to develop more powerful and efficient computing frameworks that can
help mankind to solve the very challenging issues now confronting us.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This catalytic network of networks will spur advances in
brain-inspired computation and fundamental theories of neuroscience,
particularly with regard to biophysics and connectivity, the role of
neuromodulation in creating rich network dynamics, and analytical methods to
characterize and control these dynamics. The project combines expertise of
researchers gathering brain data from animals engaged in complex tasks,
theorists who make models of cognition, researchers who use machine learning to
develop new ways of analyzing data, and experts in artificial intelligence. The
network of networks will develop a student cohort with the ability to synthesize
findings from new and sophisticated data analysis into novel algorithms for
computation, and, vice versa, to translate findings from engineering of
computational algorithms into hypotheses for brain function. International
experience will enhance research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students. The ethical emphasis of the network will develop a cohort with
substantive experience and training in the application of neuroethics and
ethical engineering practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research
through International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is
designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.