* 2019007
* CC* Compute: Interactive Data Analysis Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Yingyan Lin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 397,600.00

Rice University researchers engaged in groundbreaking data-intensive science and
engineering increasingly depend on access to real-time data analysis facilities
required for their research. These research activities include image processing,
computer vision, and machine learning, spanning multiple fields, such as
geological sciences, statistics, computer science, and physics. Each of these
problems areas or use cases can be addressed by shared computational
infrastructure leveraging GPU accelerators for interactive computing. The system
provides a significant resource for enabling science but also for educating the
next generation of computational scientists in the latest GPU-computing
techniques through the outreach of the Center for Research Computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resource includes nine compute nodes, each with 40
cores, 384GB RAM, 4TB NVMe storage, and 8 NVIDIA Quadro RTX 6000 GPUs. The
systems are interconnected via high-performance networking and hosted on a
Science DMZ integrating them with the Open Science Grid as well as commercial
cloud allowing both increased utilization as part of national OSG efforts and
the ability to utilize cloud resources for load bursting. The system leverages
an open-source software stack designed to support containerization, enabling
each researcher to utilize their own unique set of software and toolkits while
sharing common hardware and a common cloud access platform. Moreover, the
infrastructure is part of a larger technology ecosystem that leverages federated
identity and access management as part of InCommon, advanced networking with
science DMZ, and Information Security Office that supports not only university
data and technology security but includes targeted outreach for research data
and protocol security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.