* 2019208
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Raman Imaging Microscope at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Steven Emory, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 295,160.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Western Washington University is acquiring a
Raman imaging microscope to support Professor Steven Emory and colleagues: Sean
Mulcahy, David Rider, Ying Bao and Manuel Monta√±o. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields of significant economic importance. In general,
a Raman microscope begins with a standard optical microscope but then uses a
laser to scan the surface of a sample to implement a chemical image over the
entire field of view. The laser wavelengths probe the surface and produce a
spectrum which identifies chemical components in the material. This analysis
gives useful information on the properties of the material. This is a powerful
analytical tool for identifying chemical composition qualitatively and semi-
quantitatively. The microscope is being used in a number of important research
areas and is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate students both at this institution and at nearby
universities such as Whatcom Community College and Pacific Lutheran
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the Raman microscope is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. The instrument acquisition
impacts studies of polymer-nanoparticle composites for energy and catalysis
applications and the use of earth-abundant photocatalysts for solar fuels. The
instrumentation is used for exploring the utilization of organic crystals for
electronic nanodevices and in applications of zinc oxide films in energy-related
processes. In addition, the Raman Microscope provides information for employing
nanomaterials for surface-enhanced detection and imaging as well as in making
plasmonic gold nanorod and nanowire sensors. The microscope is used to study
polymeric materials for potential biomedical applications and quantifying
nanomaterials in the environment. The instrument is also employed in studies of
deformation conditions of ancient subduction zones and in evaluating the
toxicology of environmental microplastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.