* 2019215
* MRI: Development of a High-Speed Light-Sheet Light-Field Microscope for Imaging in Materials Sciences, Physics, and Biology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Zvonimir Dogic, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Optical microscopy provides an essential
window into the micrometer scale structure and dynamics of diverse systems
ranging from simple colloidal suspension and biological cells to tissues and
entire developing organisms. Most optical microscopy studies are limited to two-
dimensional regions of interest. A typical method of characterizing three-
dimensional structure relies on confocal point scanning techniques, which are
very slow. Due to lack of appropriate techniques, high-spatial resolution
imaging of fast dynamics of macro-sized samples remains uncharted territory.
This project paves the way for overcoming this barrier. The resulting novel
imaging technique named light-field light-sheet microscopy is tested and
optimized with diverse samples ranging from quantifying dynamics and topological
structure of three-dimensional active liquid crystals to imaging the whole-brain
of a fruit fly during food-search. The design principles of the microscopy and
the associated software analysis code are shared with scientific community. The
imaging technique is also popularized through its inclusion in the Annual Santa
Barbara Summer School in Quantitative Biology, where the participants receive
the training in using the instrument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;By seamlessly merging the existing techniques of the
multi-view selective plane illumination microscopy and the light-field
microscopy, scientists are developing a new optical microscope capable of
imaging millimeter-sized samples with isotropic point spread function. When
compared to the fastest imaging times accessible to state-of-the-art selective
plane illumination microscopes, the technique being developed increases the
temporal resolution by almost two orders of magnitude. This opens up the
possibility of three-dimensional, high-spatial-resolution imaging of macroscopic
samples at frequencies as high as 5 Hz. The microscope is used to study a
variety of samples that range from materials science, cell biology and
neuroscience. In particular, scientist use the microscope to (1) elucidate the
interplay between the topological structure and dynamics of motile disclination
loops in three-dimensional active nematic liquid crystals, (2) quantify temporal
propagation of strain deformations in active gels where stresses are generated
by single molecular motors, (3) perform whole-brain imaging during food-search
in D. melanogaster larvae, and (4) characterize a whole nervous system as it
forms and activates in the embryogenesis of D.
melanogaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.