* 2019543
* 2020 Ocean Global Change Biology 2020 GRC/GRS
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Gretchen Hofmann, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 29,660.00

Understanding global change biology in the oceans is a major area of focus in
marine sciences. The scope and intensity of global change biology in oceans
demands an interdisciplinary approach to research, and the field brings together
scientists from a diverse range of disciplines, including physical, chemical and
biological oceanography, along with evolution and ecology. Historically, it has
been challenging to bring together this community at a single meeting, however,
since the inaugural meeting of the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Ocean
Global Change Biology in 2014, and subsequent meetings in 2016 and 2018, an
unparalleled opportunity for the community to meet in a retreat-like setting to
share cutting- edge work has been created. To date, the Ocean Global Change
Biology GRCs have been very successful with excellent attendance and
contributions, particularly from early career scientists, and have catalyzed
international research, education, and outreach initiatives. This project
supports partial funding for 20 U.S. graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
to attend the 2020 GRC and Gordon Research Seminar on Ocean Global Change
Biology, at the Waterville Valley Conference Center in Waterville Valley, NH on
July 19-24, 2020. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will facilitate the sharing
of new results and the integration of ideas and approaches across disciplines,
often using unpublished data and ideas. The 2020 conference will build on the
fast-moving topics that have emerged during the three previous meetings through
9 sessions over the 5-day conference. These include the need leverage our use
paleo models and analogue environments, expanding our view of multistressor
changes to include top-down processes and deoxygenation, building an
understanding of the roles of environmental fluctuations, connecting
physiological, ecological and evolutionary responses through non-genetic
inheritance, understanding the role of intraspecific variation, challenges in
understanding the impact of environmental changes over different life histories,
and challenges associated with tropicalization. Since this will be the fourth
meeting of the ocean global change biology community, we will also take stock of
how far we have come since ~2014, with a focus on how our research is being used
for conservation or policy action, and setting priorities for how to improve
outward-facing engagement going forward. The 2020 GRC program includes invited
speakers and discussion leaders that span a range of backgrounds and career
stages, from postdoctoral fellows who are putting fresh ideas forward, to
established researchers who provide a broad perspective. The program prioritizes
facilitating interaction across disciplines, nationalities, and career stages.
Funding the 2020 GRC on Ocean Global Change Biology supports U.S scientists in
attending a diverse meeting of present and future international leaders in ocean
global change biology, where ideas can be discussed, research directions
advanced, and priorities for multidisciplinary collaborations refined. These
meetings are well attended by researchers from other countries, thus allowing
U.S. scientists to fully participate in and develop international collaborations
and be at the forefront of new initiatives. The GRC and Gordon Research Seminar
also provides training and mentoring for students and postdoctoral researchers,
and an invaluable early-career networking opportunity. More generally, the GRC
will advance the communication skills and insights of the U.S. scientists during
the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.