* 2019277
* FMitF: Track II: eMOP: A Tool for Evolution-Aware Runtime Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Owolabi Legunsen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Most software developers perform regression testing, re-running tests after
every code change, to check that new bugs are not being introduced.
Unfortunately, regression testing often misses bugs. This project is developing
eMOP, a runtime-verification tool for discovering more bugs during regression
testing. Runtime verification checks test runs against specifications that are
encoded as logical formulas. Test runs that do not satisfy the specifications
result in violations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three infrastructure
thrusts. First, a core eMOP component is created that incrementally applies
runtime verification, for example, by rechecking only specifications that can be
violated in parts of code affected by the changes. Second, the core component is
integrated with popular open-source regression testing infrastructure: build
systems, continuous integration, and integrated development environments. Third,
the core component is enhanced with features for prioritization and improved
reporting that make it easier to triage, inspect, and debug violations. When
complete, eMOP will offer the bug-finding benefits of runtime verification
within regression testing infrastructure that developers already
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings the results of decades of runtime
verification research to a wider audience of software developers. eMOP enables
developers to find more bugs earlier -- ideally as soon as the bugs are
introduced. By using eMOP, students will also be introduced to lightweight
formal methods within a software-engineering curriculum. Graduate and
undergraduate students, including underrepresented minorities, will be involved,
and they will gain exposure to software engineering and lightweight formal
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eMOP code will be released publicly on GitHub
(https://github.com/SoftEngResearch/emop) under the Apache License 2.0. The code
will be maintained for a minimum of three years. A supplementary web page linked
from the GitHub repository will contain tutorials and experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.