* 2019749
* Collaborative Research: Beta-Ga2O3 high voltage power MOSFETs using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Uttam Singisetti, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 273,031.00

Proposal Title&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Gallium Oxide High-Voltage
Devices Using Advanced Materials Growth Technology for Efficient, Smart Power
Electronics (Proposal ID# 2019749/2019753)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Power electronics is an integral component in many
applications including the grids, electric transportation, data centers, to name
a few. It is also a critical component on several emerging applications such as
electric cars, electric aircraft and microgrid. However, significant energy is
typically wasted as heat in the existing power electronics systems. Ultra-wide
bandgap semiconductors such as gallium oxide (beta-Ga2O3) can provide energy
efficient power electronics especially at higher voltage ratings. Due to their
intrinsic materials properties, Ga2O3 power electronics can operate at higher
temperatures, handle higher powers at reduced size, weight, and at the same time
be more efficient than existing technologies. This collaborative project between
the University at Buffalo (UB) and the Ohio State University (OSU) will address
both fundamental science and technology development in order to demonstrate
Ga2O3 power transistors. The project will utilize advanced materials growth
technology along with radical device designs to achieve multi-kilovolt
operation. The integrated education plan aims to educate and motivate students,
especially female students and those from the underrepresented groups to pursue
careers in engineering and related fields. The research opportunities given to
undergraduate and graduate students will help build the skills of the future
workforce, hence maintaining the economic competitiveness of the US. In
addition, it will contribute to the continued growth of the power electronics
market world-wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The large
bandgap of beta-Ga2O3 and the maturity of the growth technology is exploited in
this collaborative project to design, develop, and demonstrate multi-kilovolt
(kV) class power transistors. High quality beta-Ga2O3 material grown by metal-
organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) is leveraged with the experimental
demonstration of the iron doped current blocking layer to design the multi-kV
transistors. The scientific objectives of this project at University at Buffalo
are (i) developing and optimizing iron and chromium ion implantation conditions
for the current blocking layer; (ii) designing the device and process flow for
multi-kV blocking; (iii) engineering the device to remove the parasitic
breakdown and achieve intrinsic breakdown capability; (iv) investigating the
switching losses of the fabricated devices; (v) using the temperature dependent
current and capacitance characteristics to create a scalable device model for
benchmarking. At Ohio State University, the objective is to understand the
fundamental MOCVD growth and doping mechanisms of beta-Ga2O3 targeting for drift
layer thicknesses of tens of micrometers with controllable n-type doping,
especially in the low doping range. Specifically, this project aims to (i) study
the impurity incorporation and its correlation with the growth condition and
film growth rate; (ii) identify, understand, and control potential compensation
centers, including extrinsic impurities and intrinsic point defects, through
comprehensive epitaxial-layer characterization and feedbacks from device
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.