* 2019150
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Power 100 kHz Laser for Recording Real-Time Movies of Ultrafast Molecular Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Weber, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,156,700.00

The ability to predict and control the outcome of chemical reactions is
essential for many areas of modern physics, chemistry and biology. This ability
requires detailed knowledge of how individual atoms in molecules move to break,
form, or rearrange chemical bonds between them during the reaction. This
research project aims at obtaining high-resolution movies of such atomic motion.
Since the atoms involved in chemical reactions move extremely fast, typically on
a time scale of few tens of femtoseconds (one femtosecond is one millionth of a
billionth of a second), ultrashort, femtosecond laser pulses are the only
experimental tools capable of recording such movies in real time. However,
because of the quantum nature of atoms and molecules, the outcome of any
molecular reaction is not deterministic: even if one measurement precisely
captures the positions of all atoms at a given time, the same measurement will
have different outcomes if repeated several times, even under exactly identical
conditions. The acquisition of a high-power laser system delivering a hundred
thousand pulses (each shorter than 10 femtoseconds) per second will enable
repeating such measurements millions of times, which is needed for the creation
of a quantum-mechanical molecular movie. Each frame of a movie then reflects the
probability of every possible configuration of atoms at different stages of the
reaction, instead of a fixed picture of a molecule. Such movies will advance our
understanding of fundamental chemical processes and provide input for
applications in areas of national priority, ranging from efficient energy
conversion and storage to synthesis of novel materials, drug design and
molecular electronics. This project is jointly funded by the Major Research
Instrumentation program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this project, a broad
range of photochemical processes, including photodissociation and isomerization,
charge transfer reactions and formation of van der Waals clusters, will be
studied. For each of these processes, the main scientific goal is to image the
time-dependent molecular geometry and simultaneously characterize the evolving
electronic structure of the molecule. This will be achieved by employing several
complementary time-resolved techniques, including photoelectron spectroscopy and
ion momentum imaging, inner-shell and laser-induced photoelectron diffraction,
as well as ion beam techniques and Fourier-transform spectroscopy for
characterization of the neutral fragments. For all these techniques, the key
technical aspect facilitating simultaneous characterization of electronic and
nuclear degrees of freedom will be the coincident detection of several reaction
products, enabled by the high repetition rate of the acquired laser. At the same
time, its high average power of several hundred watts will enable the efficient
conversion of the emitted near-infrared radiation to a broad range of different
wavelengths (from long-wavelength infrared to extreme ultraviolet and soft
x-rays) needed for initiating and probing the reactions to be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.