* 2019529
* SHF: Small: Architectural Techniques for Energy-Efficient Brain-Machine Implants
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Abhishek Bhattacharjee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 03/31/2024
* USD 535,189.00

This project focuses on the development of neural prostheses or brain implants
to advance the scientific community's understanding of how the brain works, and
to take a step towards devising treatment for neurological disorders. Brain
implants are devices that are surgically embedded under the skull (of animals or
humans in the context of scientific experiments and treatment of neurological
disorders respectively) and placed on brain tissue, where they stimulate and
record from hundreds of neurons. These devices are being used today to record
neuronal electro-physiological data to unlock mysteries of the brain; to treat
symptoms of Parkinson's disease, Tourette's syndrome, and epilepsy, with
techniques like deep brain stimulation; and to offer treatment to those
afflicted by paralysis or spinal cord damage via motor cortex implants. A key
design issue with brain implants is that they are highly energy constrained,
because they are embedded under the skull, and techniques like wireless power
can heat up the brain tissue surrounding the implant. This project offers
architectural techniques to lower the power consumption and energy usage of
processing elements integrated on brain implants, whether they are general-
purpose processors, customized integrated circuits, or programmable hardware. In
tandem with its scientific studies, this project integrates an educational
component to train high-school students, undergraduates, and PhD students on
neuro-engineering techniques crucial to the society's continued efforts to shed
light on how the brain works. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of technical
details, this project performs the first study on architectural techniques to
improve the energy efficiency of embedded processors on implants by leveraging
their existing low-power modes. Low-power modes can be used in the absence of
interesting neuronal activity, which corresponds to periods of time when the
implant is not performing useful work and the processor can be slowed down. A
critical theme of this project is to show that hardware traditionally used to
predict program behavior (e.g., branches or cache reuse) can also be co-opted to
also predict brain activity, and hence anticipate interesting/non-interesting
neuronal spiking. Such predictors can consequently be used to drive the implant
processor in and out of low power mode. This project studies how to design
hardware brain activity predictors that predict neuronal activity accurately,
scalably, and efficiently, and how to integrate such predictors with low power
modes on commodity embedded processors. The techniques are drawn from hardware
machine-learning approaches for program prediction and consider neuronal spiking
data extracted from brain sites on mice, sheep, and monkeys. Successful
deployment of these approaches is expected to save as much as 85% of processor
energy, effectively quadrupling battery lifetimes on implants being designed for
mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.