* 2019068
* MRI: Development of a Sensors and Machine Learning Instrument Suite for Solar Array Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Andreas Spanias, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 357,930.00

This project develops a testbed for solar energy grids that brings together
several labs, centers, and researchers to address &lt;br/&gt;• Elevating power
efficiency in solar farms, &lt;br/&gt;• Automatic fault detection, &lt;br/&gt;•
Maximizing solar power output, &lt;br/&gt;• Optimizing inverter performance,
&lt;br/&gt;• Providing secure communication for analytics, and m&lt;br/&gt;•
Making provisions for Smart Grid. &lt;br/&gt;Solar energy research strives to
solve challenging problems in increased photovoltaic (PV) efficiency, grid
management, power storage, intelligent inverters, and various problems of
economic nature, such as financing and manufacturing. The instrument is intended
to enable several innovations and elevate the state of the art of solar
technologies. It enables research on integrating sensors and machine learning to
elevate considerably the output power and robustness of solar arrays. The
seamless integration of several software and hardware components is designed to
enhance all aspects of solar array monitoring and control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;'A key component of the instrument, an Intelligent
Monitoring and Control Device (IMCD) consists of sensors, actuators, a
processor/controller chip, a secure radio, embedded machine learning software,
and signal processing and authentication algorithms. The overarching long term
goal is to Miniaturize IMCDs with the goal to embed it in photovoltaic (PV)
modules, to enable the building of a new generation of smart programmable PV
modules. This platform integrates a new intelligent monitoring and control
instrument suite and enabling researchers to obtain, process, and utilize real-
time PV and environmental data in order to: &lt;br/&gt;• Develop, integrate and
test detection and classification algorithms for PV faults;&lt;br/&gt;• Track
cloud movement and predict panel shading, and hence optimize further the output
of PV arrays; &lt;br/&gt;• Use secure networked connectivity and protocols to
protect data and avoid MRI instrument hacking;&lt;br/&gt;• Integrate all the
acquired data using fusion algorithms and enable appropriate control of the
panels; &lt;br/&gt;• Predict and eliminate inverter transients caused by faults
and dynamic shading conditions; &lt;br/&gt;• Provide continuous analytics and
create a mobile dashboard to monitor and control the array; &lt;br/&gt;• Use
data and design ground breaking optimization algorithms to improve the PV array
power output;&lt;br/&gt;• Elevate overall efficiency of solar farms in terms of
power output by more than 16%; &lt;br/&gt;• Create the foundations for designing
a new generation of solar panel technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.