* 2019473
* Collaborative Research: Photomechanical Behavior in Photovoltaic Semiconductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Lin Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2023
* USD 244,148.00

Photovoltaic semiconductors are capable of converting light into electricity.
They are the principal components of solar cells that provide renewable energy
from sunlight. These semiconductors tend to fail in a brittle manner, limiting
their general use to small-scale applications. New evidence shows though that
the mechanical behavior of photovoltaic semiconductors is sensitive to sunlight,
exhibiting the potential of relative malleability under illumination. The
mechanisms underlying such light-mechanical coupling effect remains elusive.
This award supports fundamental research to elucidate how light-induced
excitation controls the mechanical behavior of photovoltaic semiconductors. The
new knowledge is expected to offer strategies to design highly stable and
durable photovoltaic devices, such as solar cells, transistors, light-emitting
diodes, and photodetectors, providing the basis for extensive engineering
applications. This award will also offer education and training for graduate and
undergraduate students in interdisciplinary areas of mechanics, materials
science and engineering, and photophysics. The award will promote diversity by
involving women and underrepresented minorities in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photomechanical behavior of photovoltaic
semiconductors is determined by light-induced deformation mechanisms such as
dislocation and twinning. In this project, a multiscale modeling and
experimental framework will be used to accurately characterize the influence of
photoinduced electron-hole excitation on the dislocation and twining mechanics
in cadmium telluride, a prototype photovoltaic semiconductor. On the sub-atomic
scale, advanced quantum mechanics simulations will be performed to determine the
influence of electron-hole pair on the energy and force barriers of dislocation
and twin nucleation, as well as dislocation mobility. On the atomic scale, the
carrier concentration dependent mechanisms of the dislocation-dislocation and
dislocation-twin interactions will be characterized using reactive force field
based molecular dynamics simulations. On the mesoscale, the light-illumination
effect on the stress-strain behavior will be quantified by developing an
atomically-informed crystal plasticity model that incorporates dislocation slip
and deformation twinning. Theoretical predictions will be validated through
mechanical testing and materials characterizations using advanced experimental
techniques, including nanoindentation, scanning probe microscopy, transmission
electron microscopy, and electron backscatter diffraction. This work will result
in a new physical picture of the deformation mechanism of photovoltaic
semiconductors under light illumination, and provide a comprehensive
understanding of light-mechanical coupling effects in general photovoltaic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.