* 2019306
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: DeepSmith: Scheduling with Quality Guarantees for Efficient DNN Model Execution
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Zhiru Zhang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

The recent unprecedented growth of deep learning has led to rapid advances in a
multitude of cutting-edge technologies such as computer vision, language
translation, autonomous driving, and financial-fraud detection. However,
realistic deep-learning models based on deep neural networks (DNNs) typically
have substantial computational and memory requirements, which greatly limit
their training and deployment in resource-constrained settings. The proposed
research aims to employ formal methods to significantly improve the performance
of DNN execution while providing useful quality guarantees that will enable a
wider deployment of deep learning. This project will produce open-source
software and conference tutorials to facilitate technology transfer and fruitful
industry-academia interactions in a multidisciplinary community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes DeepSmith, a scheduling framework
for efficient DNN model execution based on satisfiability modulo theories (SMT).
The core of the proposed project includes a novel resource-constrained
scheduling formulation with combined theories using SMT to exactly encode a rich
set of performance and resource constraints, and a collection of advanced
domain-specific SMT-solving algorithms. Moreover, a domain-specific programming
language will be developed to enable the rapid development of exact scheduling
using SMT and high code reusability. The resulting DeepSmith framework will
allow productive exploration and deployment of SMT in DNN execution and
potentially other optimization tasks in high-performance computing and hardware
acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.