* 2019378
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Cyber-threat Detection and Diagnosis in Multistage Manufacturing Systems through Cyber and Physical Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jianjun Shi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 316,000.00

In modern multistage manufacturing systems, with increased software-defined
automation and control as well as monitoring of manufacturing assets across
networks, exposure to cyber-attacks also grows. The cyber-threats may compromise
the integrity of manufacturing assets (manufacturing systems and processes,
machine tools, fabricated parts), reduce manufacturing productivity, and
increase costs. Some cyber-threats including integrity attacks are only
partially observable in cyberspace alone, and therefore need to be detected and
diagnosed through inter-dependency analysis of both cyber and physical signals.
Thus, there is a significant opportunity in exploring physical signals, together
with cyber signals, to advance trustworthy manufacturing system research and
design.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project brings together leading researchers
from manufacturing systems, computer security, and electrical drives to develop
and demonstrate a new methodology and tool for cyber-threat detection and
diagnosis in multistage manufacturing systems. The cyber-security tool will
monitor a variety of cyber and physical signals and perform cyber-threat
detection and root cause diagnosis through advanced cyber-physical data fusion
and taint analysis. The goal is to enable the prevention and mitigation of
potential harms at the early stage, proactive and predictive maintenance, and
countermeasures. This project attempts to integrate and analyze the process and
quality signals, and the signals from the power networks and cyber networks of
multistage manufacturing systems to detect and diagnose cyber-threats. This new
systematic approach expects to capture new cyber-threats, especially data
integrity attacks, that traditional cyber-security approaches may not capture.
The proposed data analytics and methodology for integrating cyber and physical
signals will advance a fundamental understanding of cyber-threat detection and
diagnosis in multistage manufacturing systems and can broadly apply to other
cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.