* 2019023
* MRI TRACK I: Acquisition of a Super Resolution Module for Biological and Advanced Materials Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Derek Patton, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 311,395.00

Light-based microscopes are indispensable to the advancement of many scientific
fields. Lamentably, there is a lower limit to the size of objects that can be
observed due to physics of light itself. This barrier impedes investigation of
minuscule objects. Fortunately, recent advances have helped overcome this
hurdle, yielding “super-resolution” microscopes. The specific super-resolution
technology acquired by this award is well-suited for imaging dynamic objects
like those in cells as well as nanoparticles created in the laboratory. Projects
that will take advantage of the microscope include: material scientists studying
assembly of high performance plastic-like materials, cell biologists and
biochemists investigating cell components important in Alzheimer’s and genetic
tools, and microbiologists that examine bacterial community structures involved
in infection and plant-soil interactions. Availability of the super-resolution
microscope will provide opportunities for training in cutting-edge imaging for
faculty and students throughout Mississippi. Emphasis will be placed on
involving underserved communities and faculty at small colleges and universities
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests a Leica Stimulated Emission
Depletion 3X super resolution microscopy component. The system enables imaging
of nano-scale objects smaller than the diffraction limit of light without the
need for specialized fluorophores, intense laser exposure, and heavy
computational processing of data. Thus, acquisition of the component will
benefit numerous projects at the host institute as well as other academic
research in the region. It will integrate with an existing confocal microscope
housed and maintained in an imaging core facility on the University of Southern
Mississippi Hattiesburg campus. The core is a multi-user facility that provides
access, consultation, training, and technical support free of charge to
Mississippi academic scientists. The module will support the research and
education missions of the core facility along with projects supported by multi-
institute consortia aimed at engineering novel spectral properties in organic
compounds. Together this makes the system a highly accessible instrument,
offering a cutting-edge imaging mode to even the most resource limited
researchers, while synergistically empowering statewide programs to advance
their research programs and education missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.