* 2019441
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The expression of temporal-modal semantics in an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Anthony Woodbury, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2024
* USD 6,673.00

Whenever we speak, we communicate complex temporal-modal information about the
events and situations we are describing: Did this event occur in the past, or
will it occur in the future? Is it a hypothetical event, a guaranteed event, or
something that truly happened? The goal of this dissertation project is to
enhance our understanding of how speakers express temporal-modal semantics, and
how they manage this information within a discourse. The co-PI will create new
language infrastructure for an endangered and underdocumented language; using
this documentation, the co-PI will analyze the expression of temporal-modal
semantics in the language. Thorough descriptions of temporal-modal systems in
the world's languages help linguists analyze global variation and grammatical
change, and this in turn can illuminate underlying cognitive structures.
Furthermore, the language infrastructure created by this project can serve as
the basis for future research in other areas of linguistics. This project
incorporates research training for both US undergraduate students and indigenous
language speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following established methods for
language documentation and semantic fieldwork, the co-PI will record
naturalistic speech in the target language, including conversation, narratives,
and procedural discourse. The recordings will be transcribed, translated, and
analyzed in consultation with native speakers. This corpus of naturalistic
speech will be supplemented by elicited speech, structured experiments, and
previously-existing documentation from social media. Data from related languages
will allow for a comparative perspective on the temporal-modal system. The
dissertation will contribute to the typological study of temporal-modal
semantics: the language has primarily aspectual TAM categories, and so this
research furthers our understanding of how tense and modality are communicated
in an aspect-based system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.