* 2019320
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Mechanics and Dynamics of Low Frequency Vibration Assisted Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Stephenson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,162.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
partners two universities with industry in the fundamental research on the
effect of applying slow vibrations to enhance material removal in machining
processes. Vibrations have been treated as a disturbance and a source of
inefficiency to many manufacturing operations including machining processes.
However, this new approach attempts to use low frequency (slow) vibrations to
improve the contact conditions between the cutting tool and workpiece and
thereby improve machining efficiency. By applying controlled slow oscillations
to cutting tools, this new cutting process can enable material removal with
lower cutting effort and energy, attain longer tool-life, and improve overall
stability of the machining process towards higher material removal rates. It can
significantly enhance manufacturing productivity, and hence US competitiveness
and prosperity, and product quality especially for components made of difficult-
to-cut metal alloys employed in U.S. automotive, aerospace, defense and energy
sectors. Collaboration with a partner from US automotive industry will help
ensure the technology transfer and enhance student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the mechanisms by which
low frequency vibration applied in continuous cutting process can alter and
improve the cutting mechanics and dynamics. Modulating the tool at low frequency
along tool feed direction transforms continuous cutting into discrete cutting.
This new discrete cutting kinematics not only alters the deformation mechanics
of chip formation, but also changes the thermomechanical dynamics in the cutting
zone as well as the dynamic stability of the machining process. This research
will analyze chip formation mechanics through in-situ digital image correlation
and develop analytical models to understand the relationship between vibration
kinematics, including cutting force and energy, and overall material removal
effort. As the low frequency modulation periodically disengages the cutting tool
from the workpiece, it interrupts continuous heating of the cutting edge and
induces pre-determined cool-down periods to reduce tool temperature. Analytical
models and experimental characterization will capture this transient and cyclic
heat conduction regime and its thermo-mechanics. It will provide optimal cutting
strategies to increase the tool-life. Finally, effect of feed modulation on the
coupled dynamics of process and the machining equipment will be investigated.
New knowledge will be created on how to use the controlled low frequency
vibration to control and suppress high-frequency self-excited chatter
instabilities during machining. It will allow machining of precision parts at
significantly higher depth, feed and speed leading to greater material removal
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.