* 2019726
* SBIR Phase I:  Monitoring Desalination Membrane Fouling via Real-time Integrated Surface Imaging and Advanced Machine Learning
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Anditya Rahardianto, Noria Water Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 275,442.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to enable monitoring and decision support for membrane-based
water treatment and desalination processes in the municipal water reuse,
agriculture and industrial sectors. The proposed technology will integrate of
machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) decision support
technology with hardware for direct and real-time visualization of process
element conditions and performance process monitoring to reduce operational
risks and costs. Moreover, the proposed platform will enable more efficient and
lower-cost water production from non-traditional and underutilized source
waters, such as municipal and industrial wastewater, high salinity and/or
contaminated groundwater, and seawater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance translation of
a real-time detection, characterization and forecasting of membrane fouling and
scaling of reverse osmosis (RO) and nanofiltration (NF) membranes in water
treatment and desalination plants. ML and AI approaches will integrate direct
and real-time membrane surface foulant imaging with operating performance data
for real-time analysis and forecasting of plant fouling and its impact on plant
performance. The research will explore relationships between foulant/scalant
characteristics and plant process conditions for a Dynamic Bayesian Network
model to inform a decision support system for timely fouling/scaling mitigation
in RO/NF plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.