* 2019066
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-band Continuous-wave Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Joshua Figueroa, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 376,748.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of California-San Diego is
acquiring an X-band continuous-wave electron paramagnetic resonance (CW-EPR)
spectrometer to support Professor Joshua Figueroa and colleague, Galia
Debelouchina. In general, an EPR spectrometer yields detailed information on the
geometric and electronic structure of molecular and solid-state materials. It is
also used to obtain information about the lifetimes of free radicals (short-
lived, highly reactive species) involved in valuable chemical transformations of
biological interest. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
this Hispanic-Serving Institution as well as in the region. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in research and
research training using this modern technique. It also provides training
opportunities to many undergraduate and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral fellows at this institution as well as several neighboring
institutions such as San Diego State University and the University of San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The award of the EPR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. The instrument acquisition
impacts studies characterizing coordinatively-unsaturated transition metal
centers. The instrumentation is used for research on the development of new
methodologies to study the structure of biological macromolecules in cells and
the catalytic mechanism of nitrogenase. In addition, the EPR provides
information to further explore the role of paramagnetic species in natural and
synthetic melanin polymers and the generation of stable radical-containing
species and their reactivity towards small molecules. The EPR spectrometer is
also used to inform studies of the mechanism of electron-transfer reactions. It
is utilized in designing transition-metal doped metal oxide materials with
precisely tunable electronic and spin-qubit array
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.