* 2019568
* I-Corps: Fourth Wall Optics
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Ananth Dodabalapur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
translation of Organic Light Emitting Diodes (OLEDs) and other LEDs. The use of
Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality (VR/AR) goggles is growing in education,
industrial usage, and entertainment. More efficient and brighter displays would
greatly increase the functionality of these devices. High-efficiency displays
would enable mobile goggles without a need to be connected to an external power
source. Brighter OLED displays with higher resolution would be especially
important for AR to enable outdoor usage. LEDs for general purpose lighting are
already the most energy efficient and longest lasting sources. The proposed
technology would further increase the energy efficiency of these bulbs even
further. Brighter light sources could also be used in specialty applications,
such as projector lamps, automobiles, or holographic
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on technology to
improve a light emitting diode. Light extraction from Organic Light Emitting
Diodes (OLEDs) and other LEDs is limited because the light-emitting material and
other constituent layers of the device have higher indices of refraction than
air. This leads to total internal reflection and loss of generated light,
reducing the efficiency and potentially reducing the operating lifetime. Optics
developed from metamaterials (meta-optics) can control generated light in a
manner unachievable with conventional optics. By steering light away from the
modes leading to total internal reflection, new levels of light emission
efficiency can be achieved. The proposed technique offers relatively simple
integration with existing technology, along with compatibility with many
existing fabrication schemes for OLEDs and LEDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.