* 2019312
* Intrinsic versus Forced Decadal Variability in the Extratropical North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Bo Qiu, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 489,402.00

Decadal variability of the Kuroshio Current results from both the intrinsic
dynamics of oceanic jets and from atmosphere-ocean feedback processes. The
Kuroshio’s distinct path configurations south of Japan are associated with
differing states of intrinsic stability within the jet, with variations in
volume and heat transport by the Kuroshio, and with the N-S position of the
Kuroshio Extension (KE) downstream from Japan. This position affects the
character and intensity of air-sea interactions, which in turn feed-back upon
Kuroshio variability. This study will examine the mechanisms controlling shifts
between paths and stability states, and the interplay between intrinsic ocean
dynamics and air-sea feedbacks affecting variability. The scientific goals of
the proposal are to (1) clarify the processes by which the intrinsic Kuroshio
path variability south of Japan alters the KE dynamic state and how it competes
with the KE variability controlled by the basin-scale wind forcing, (2)
elucidate the dynamics underlying a recent Kuroshio large meander (LM) event,
and (3) quantify the relative contributions of sea surface temperature (SST),
SST fronts and mesoscale eddies due to the recent KE dynamic state change in
modifying the atmospheric circulation. The project will use process-oriented
oceanic and atmospheric numerical modeling to address the system variability.
The Kuroshio and KE are important components of climate variability, influencing
North Pacific ecosystems and basin-scale weather patterns, both of important
societal relevance. Student involvement and international collaboration are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accumulation of high-quality satellite/in-situ
observations and improvement in state-of-the-art ocean/atmosphere general
circulation models over the past decades have significantly improved
understanding of the roles played by the KE in the decadal North Pacific climate
variability. The specific feedback loop involves the wind-forced interior ocean
thermocline adjustment, its subsequent alteration to the KE dynamic state, and
the KE’s influence on the stormtracks and the surface wind field. This wind-
forced feedback loop, which had been at work in the past three decades, was
disrupted in late 2017 when the Kuroshio south of Japan changed to a large
meander path, a manifestation of intrinsic western boundary current variability.
Three testable hypotheses have been identified: Hypothesis 1: The 2017 KE index
reversal caused the LM occurrence; Hypothesis 2: The 2017 LM was triggered by
enhanced Subtropical Counter Current eddy activity; and Hypothesis 3: Meander-
induced KE dynamic state reversal impacts the atmosphere. The first two
hypotheses will be examined with the Hallberg Isopycnal Model, modified to a
three-layer configuration, which (a) accommodates the interception of layer
interfaces by steep bottom topography, (b) allows sea-surface outcropping of
isopycnic layers, and (c) has isopycnal coordinates to avoid unphysical
diapycnal mixing. Hypothesis 3 will be addressed using the Japan Meteorological
Agency’s non-hydrostatic mesoscale model, through a collaboration with Prof.
Shusaku Sugimoto of Tohoku University, Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.