* 2019444
* STC: Center for Integration of Modern Optoelectronic Materials on Demand
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 09/30/2026
* USD 10,000,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Optoelectronic devices that generate, sense, and control
light underpin the modern information-technology era. Society is increasingly
reliant on such devices for efficient lighting, information display, and optical
data transmission. Furthermore, the study of optoelectronics is enabling new
technologies ranging from ubiquitous sensors and photorealistic virtual reality
displays to quantum-based information technologies that promise to produce
exponential increases in computing power and secure communication networks from
hacking. Such advances in optoelectronics, in turn, rely increasingly on
advances in the synthesis of highly precise materials and the concomitant
integration of different materials into functional optoelectronic devices and
systems. This Science and Technology Center, the Center for Integration of
Modern Optoelectronic Materials on Demand (IMOD) is developing new classes of
optoelectronic materials, devices, and systems with unprecedented functionality
based on solution-processed inorganic materials. IMOD seeks to ensure the
successful translation of these scientific and technological advances to U.S.
industries by forging close relationships between the academic team and
industrial and national lab partners, while educating a diverse group of
scientists and engineers in an integrated fashion that focuses on building team-
science, inclusive mentoring, and communication, skills at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This STC’s goal is to advance
the science of atomically precise synthesis to achieve colloidal emitters with
the exactness of synthetic chemistry, and the scalability of additive
manufacturing. By controlling the surfaces of these nanomaterials, and their
position in small clusters, the Center for Integration of Modern Optoelectronic
Materials on Demand (IMOD) seeks to address emergent properties of assemblies of
nanocrystalline building blocks that exhibit collective behavior such as
coherent charge, spin, and energy transport. At the same time, IMOD seeks to
study and advance applications ranging from quantum-dot light-emitting diodes
(QLEDs) and detectors, to new quantum-light sources, spin-based quantum bits
(qubits), and quantum sensors, operating across the electromagnetic spectrum.
Thus, IMOD seeks to overcome barriers in stability, linewidths, and decoherence,
while tackling dispersity, processing, and device architectures. To achieve
these goals, IMOD is organized around three synergistic research themes: (1)
Atomically precise synthesis, comprising synthesis of II-VI, III-V, IV-VI, and
metal-halide perovskite semiconductors, incorporation of dopants and spin
centers, and growth of perfect epitaxial shells; (2) Heterointegration and
classical devices, including the combination of multiple atomically precise
materials into a single structure or device to achieve new functionality, while
seeking to advance applications like LEDs and detectors; and, (3) Quantum
optoelectronics: addressing quantum light and spin properties of materials and
assemblies developed in (1) and (2); while developing a new class of quantum
light sources and exploring frontier concepts in non-linear quantum optics,
cavity quantum electrodynamics, and polaritonics; and developing a new class of
colloidal-based qubits. IMOD’s technology outcomes are chosen for their
potential to have broader impacts on industries with important economic and
national-security impacts. IMOD’s broader impact goals include development of a
STEM-capable workforce that engages all Americans by: (1) training a diverse
group of scientists and engineers in an integrated team-based fashion across
traditional disciplinary interfaces, thus ensuring a U.S. workforce equipped to
lead the Nation’s economic and technological development; (2) making science and
equity-focused outreach curricula accessible to the public while empowering its
diverse participants to pursue STEM disciplines in an inclusive environment; and
(3) accelerating knowledge transfer through IMOD’s partnerships and programming
with industry and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.