* 2019161
* CC* Team: Oregon Big Data Research and Education Team
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jason Podrabsky, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,400,000.00

Today, more than ever before, big data pervade every area of the life,
environmental, biomedical, earth, marine, computational, physical, urban, and
social sciences, as well as numerous other domains. Increasingly powerful
computing technologies have opened the pathway for researchers to address major
global challenges through use of large and heterogeneous data sets and through
complex models and simulations. This project provides domain scientists,
including research students, with the expertise and training needed to
collaborate effectively with specialists in these advanced computational and
statistical methodologies. The project also provides training and research
experiences for students and instructors from small regional colleges, including
Hispanic-serving and Native-American-serving institutions. To widely share best
practices, it supports a community of practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project employs research and training staff (facilitators) with expertise in
data integration, multi-modal data analytics and machine learning. These three
related sets of methods enable the analysis of large complex data sets of
different types or from different sources, which may or may not have been
collected as part of a planned studies. Specifically, a four-person facilitation
team is established across Oregon State University, the University of Oregon,
and Portland State University. The interdisciplinary, cross institutional team
will establish the tools and managements practices to serve the researchers in
the state. The research facilitated by this project will lead to better
understanding of earthquakes, diverse ecosystems, and plant and animal form and
function. It supports development of faster computing systems, more secure
energy systems, and improved environmental health. The data challenges posed by
these application areas also motivate new foundational research in advanced data
analytics and machine learning. The project also prepares a new generation of
students from diverse backgrounds to enter the knowledge
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.