* 2019516
* RUI: Regulation of natural variation in maize (Zea mays) defense responses by jasmonate signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Melkamu Woldemariam, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Each year, global agriculture suffers significant yield losses due to attack by
insect pests. The United States is estimated to lose 25-30% of its agricultural
production to insect attack, while estimates for tropical countries are as high
as 50%. Damage from insect feeding and implementation of methods to reduce this
damage cost American farmers about $40 billion annually. However, all plants
have varying levels of natural protection against insect herbivory, including
both mechanical barriers such has hairs and thorns and chemical defenses that
deter or kill insect pests. Additionally, plants can emit volatile signals to
recruit predators that consume the attacking insects. Although some defenses are
always present, others are turned on only when the plants detect insect feeding.
This defense induction is orchestrated by a hormone signaling pathway that is
highly conserved in the plant kingdom. The proposed research is focused on
identifying and investigating novel components of the defense signaling pathway
in maize, the most important food crop in the United States. The identification
of natural variation in the resistance of maize to insect feeding will provide
new opportunities for breeding plants that are more pest tolerant. In addition,
the project will provide authentic research experiences to undergraduate
students, including students from groups that are underrepresented in science. A
proposed outreach component of the project will expose the broader community to
research on plant-insect interactions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The jasmonic acid
signaling cascade, which regulates the transcriptomic responses of plants to
insect attack, influences the expression of thousands of genes. Despite the
global importance of maize (Zea mays) as a crop species and the critical role of
jasmonates in regulating plant defense responses, the maize jasmonic acid
signaling cascade remains relatively uninvestigated compared to the
corresponding pathways in well-studied model plant species such as Arabidopsis
and tomato. Considering the evolutionary distance between these model dicots and
maize, it is reasonable to expect distinct jasmonic acid regulatory mechanisms
in the defense responses of this economically important monocot species. An
integrated systems biology approach, involving transcriptomic, metabolomic, and
genetic methods, will be used to uncover and characterize novel aspects of
defense regulation in maize. A genetically diverse population of maize inbred
lines will be used to assess natural variation in the accumulation of herbivore-
induced jasmonate and jasmonate-like molecules, identify previously unknown
regulators of defense responses, and elucidate their roles in maize defense
against two lepidopteran pests, fall armyworms (Spodoptera frugiperda) and beet
armyworms (Spodoptera exigua). In addition to providing the scientific community
with insight into the regulation of defense responses in maize, the planned
studies will generate high-quality transcriptomic and metabolomic data sets that
will enable other researchers to conduct further investigations of natural
variation in maize defense responses. A graduate student and a postdoc will
receive research training and will gain mentoring experience by helping to
supervise the experiments of undergraduate students contributing on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.