* 2019156
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Throughput Fluorescence Slide-Scanner Microscope for the University of Oregon Histology Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Cristopher Niell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,782.00

An award is made to the University of Oregon Eugene to support the purchase of a
high-throughput fluorescent slide-scanner imaging system. High throughput
analysis of biological specimens is increasingly essential for advancing many
fields of the life sciences. A key bottleneck, particularly in the study of
histological specimens, is the need for manual steps that limit the speed of
data acquisition. The new slide scanning microscope will automate many of the
manual steps to remove critical bottlenecks and enable high throughput analysis
of biological specimens by researchers at the University of Oregon and beyond.
The new instrument will be housed in the University of Oregon shared Histology
and Genetic Modification Research Core Facility. As part of a core facility,
this instrument will enhance training of undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars with cutting edge microscopy approaches, advanced image
analysis, “big data”, and other key quantitative skills. The system will further
accelerate student research during summer REU programs and will also be used in
outreach programs and shared with neighboring
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new system will be used for a wide range
of biological studies, including gene expression, anatomical reconstructions,
and tissue analysis, as well as contributing to undergraduate and graduate
coursework and training. Two features of this automated instrument will
transform the ability of UO researchers to perform these types of studies.
First, it automatically images large area specimens, stitching together
individual high magnification fields of view into a single high-resolution
image. Second, it can automatically process a large number of specimens, with an
autoloader capable of processing up to 200 slides in succession. These
capabilities will allow researchers to acquire complete datasets that are simply
not tractable with manual imaging, thereby opening up new types of biological
questions. The instrument has both brightfield and fluorescent capabilities,
enabling a wide range of applications including in situ hybridization analysis
of gene expression, reconstruction of large-scale neural organization, and
quantification of anatomical and cellular structures. Results from these studies
will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals, through presentation at
scientific meetings, and as part of public outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.