* 2019799
* BEHAVIORAL EPIGENETICS AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michael Goodisman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,102,861.00

Many animal societies build structures that are fundamentally important to their
survival and success. For example, human societies build, live, and work within
houses and buildings that provide protection from the environment. However, the
effects of built structures on behavioral and cognitive processes of social
groups remain poorly understood. This research program attempts to understand
how the built environment affects behavior and brain function in highly social
animals. The research team will use fire ants as models to study the effects of
nest structure on cognition and social behavior. The research program will
determine how individuals work together to build structures using collective
behaviors. The investigators will also study how different environments affect
social cognition by examining changes in brain activity of ants in distinct
environments. Finally, the team will determine how colony function changes in
different settings by challenging ants to live in experimentally fabricated
nests that differ in physical organization. This program will also broaden the
impact of the proposed studies by promoting teaching, training, and learning
activities throughout the city of Atlanta. In addition, the research will have
important applied aspects by furthering our understanding of traffic and
movement in complex landscapes, and by providing important information about the
behavior of a widespread pest insect. Overall, this project combines behavioral,
genetic, technological, and physical approaches to understanding the effects of
the built environment on society function and social cognition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of highly social species, such as social
insects, relies critically on the construction of nests. However, little is
known about how nest structure affects collective behavior and the molecular
processes associated with cognition. The goal of this proposal is to gain a
greater understanding of the behavioral and epigenetic consequences of nest
construction and living in insect societies. The research team will first study
how collective building behaviors emerge from individual actions. This will
provide insight into how individual behaviors successfully lead to group
activities. Second, the investigators will determine how the social environment
affects epigenetic processes in the brain. Patterns of DNA methylation of ants
subjected to different biological and physical environments will reveal how
epigenetic information in the brain is associated with changes in gene
expression. These experiments will demonstrate how epigenetic information is
linked to gene activity under different social conditions. Finally, the research
team will determine how the built environment affects collective behaviors.
These studies will demonstrate how different physical structures affect social
interactions, perception, and gene activity in the brain. Overall, this program
investigates the link between cognition, social behavior, and the built
environment. The research will ultimately initiate a new, interdisciplinary
research direction aimed at understanding molecular processes affecting social
behavior and construction by social groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.