* 2019598
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO Leveraging synthetic biology to probe the rules of cell morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Orion Weiner, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,095,602.00

This project seeks to understand how cells control their shape and movement
using synthetic biology tools. Cell movement is essential for single cells to
hunt and mate and for the correct development and function of multicellular
organisms. Sheet-like protrusions called lamellipodia are the engines that power
and guide this motility. However, the rules of their formation are not
understood. Similar to ant colonies where no individual is “in charge”, and the
overall behaviors of a colony depends on simple rules of local interaction
between ants, many aspects of cell biology are dominated by local rules of
interaction between proteins. This project seeks to define these rules of
protein-protein interactions by constructing lamellipodia from synthetic,
designer proteins whose patterns of interaction can be built to order. This work
is a collaboration between an expert in cell shape/movement (Orion Weiner at the
University of California-San Francisco) and an expert in protein design (Dek
Woolfson at the University of Bristol). STEM workforce diversity will be
enhanced through multiple synergistic activities. (1) reforming the grad school
admissions process to make it more inclusive; (2) research opportunities for
high school students from underrepresented groups and hands-on science
demonstrations for teachers and elementary/middle/high-school students; (3)
engagement of a wider audience by presentations to the general public through
the Exploratorium, Science Festival Discovery Days, and Science Cafés; (4)
Engagement of policy makers and local and national industries to advocate for
the use of designed proteins and systems in biotechnology; (5) interdisciplinary
training for three postdoctoral fellows and five high school students. This work
will strengthen links between US and UK labs and between the NSF and the
BBSRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weiner’s lab recently discerned the nanoscale
organization of a key actin nucleator that suggests a self-organizing template
for lamellipodia formation. These templates are not sufficiently understood to
manipulate directly their biophysical parameters (such as linearity vs.
curvature, rigidity, dynamics, etc.) and to probe fully the relation between
actin nucleator oligomerization and cell shape and function. A powerful
alternative to the typical genetic and biochemical approaches would be to build
actin regulators from scratch, so that the molecular logic of cell shape and
movement can be probed systematically. To do this, protein engineering and de
novo protein design (Woolfson lab) will be used to generate synthetic proteins
that assemble with defined geometries at membranes to nucleate actin, guided by
our knowledge of the native system. These synthetic systems will be tested for
their ability to support lamellipodial formation in vivo using cells defective
in lamellipodia formation and ultimately in complete reconstitutions. These
studies will advance protein design towards in-cell application, and, in turn,
they will help define the molecular logic of cell shape and
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is supported by
the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.