* 2019369
* Determining the future of polar bears in a warming world Understanding the occurrence and cost benefit of terrestrial foraging and the implications of increased land use
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Charles Robbins, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 09/30/2023
* USD 741,985.00

Polar bears live on sea ice that floats over the Arctic Ocean and that forms and
melts each year within bays and among islands in eastern Canada. This sea ice
habitat is critical for providing polar bears a way to access seals, their
primary prey. Polar bears hunt seals where they come up to breathe at holes in
the ice and when they haul out onto the ice to have their pups. The blubber of
seals is the primary energy source for polar bears throughout the Arctic. A
changing Arctic climate has already reduced the amount of sea ice that bears can
use to access seals, and continued warming of several degrees over the next 100
years is expected to further decrease sea ice during the summer and early fall
in many parts of the Arctic. With less ice, polar bears across much of the
Arctic are spending more time on land where they cannot access seals. Although
polar bears have been observed feeding on nesting geese and seabirds, berries,
and vegetation, these foods are more disbursed and less-energy rich than the
typical prey of polar bears. Thus, land-based foods may not occur in sufficient
quality, quantity, or distribution to ensure the current widespread distribution
of polar bears. This study seeks to better understand bear behavior on land and
the degree to which land-based foods meet the energetic needs of polar bears.
The question of whether bears lose or maintain their body mass for extended
periods on land is critical to determining potential effects of sea ice loss on
birth and death rates â€“ information that most Arctic nations need to manage
their resident polar bears. Because polar bears occur at the top of the Arctic
food chain, they are also a key indicator species for changes in the Arctic as
well as an iconic symbol of the effects of a changing climate. Our results will
help identify actions to further protect this species and the communities whose
cultures and safety are closely linked to the behavior of this Arctic
predator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this study are to determine the
behavior and energetic balances of polar bears while summering on land. We are
proposing to 1) quantify the degree to which foods consumed while on land meet
the energetic needs of polar bears and 2) thereby provide the information
necessary to understand the implications of increasing warming, sea ice loss,
and land use on polar bear well-being and population dynamics across the Arctic.
We will do this by measuring energy expenditure, weight change, fat and protein
composition of the weight change, activity and movement rates, and feeding
behavior of males and females, young and old while they are on land. We will
estimate the amount of energy coming from food as the difference between the
energy expenditure measured with doubly labeled isotopic water and the energy
released when body fat and protein are mobilized. If these values are equal, no
useful energy is coming from food. If the energy expenditure measured with
doubly labeled water is higher than that available from mobilized protein and
fat, then that difference is the amount of energy coming from ingested food.
These measurements can only be done with the most advanced techniques available
for human and animal research. These techniques include 1) GPS collars with
built in video cameras that will allow us to accurately track bear movements and
directly observe what they are doing and eating and 2) an isotopic water
dilution technique that allows measurement of the number of calories they burn
and how much fat and protein they gain or lose between two captures which will
be about 21 days apart. These techniques will allow us to determine the
implications of polar bears increasingly using land as their sea ice habitat
continues to decline. Thus, this study will provide information for
understanding the future of polar bear populations, a significant part of Arctic
food web, in a warming Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.