* 2020099
* RAPID:Collaborative Research: Micro- and macro-ecological succession in anchialine habitats during creation via volcanism
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Justin Havird, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 59,855.00

Lava flows create new, initially sterile habitats. The identity of the initial
colonizers of these habitats, subsequent invaders, and the repeatability of this
process is important for understanding the establishment of ecosystem processes
like nutrient cycling. Identifying steps in habitat maturation also shapes
conservation strategies for endangered species and rare environments. These
processes are virtually unknown in the anchialine ecosystem, which consists of
coastal, landlocked bodies of water influenced by fresh and oceanic waters.
Anchialine habitats are rare worldwide but are concentrated in Hawaii. Hawaiian
anchialine habitats are home to a diverse array of animals, plants, and
microbes, many of which are found nowhere else. In 2018 lava flows from the
Kilauea volcano created several new anchialine habitats on the east coast of
Hawaii, presenting an exceptional chance to examine how ecology emerges in the
anchialine ecosystem. The researchers will leverage this opportunity to detail
how these unusual habitats change over time. Microbial and animal communities
will be characterized as they become established. This research will advance our
understanding of the anchialine ecosystem, especially its microbes, which may
prove useful for future medical or commercial applications. Underrepresented
groups in STEM (including native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders) will take an
active role in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hundreds of microbial
samples will be collected during a time series in anchialine habitats undergoing
development. Microbial community structure will be analyzed using DNA sequencing
technology. These “young” communities will be compared to ones previously
characterized from other, “mature” Hawaiian anchialine habitats. This research
will address the repeatability of anchialine community formation and whether new
habitats are converging on microbial communities similar to those in established
habitats. To complement these microbial analyses, presence and abundance of a
keystone shrimp species in the new anchialine habitats will also be assessed.
Population genomic tools will be used to test the origins of the colonizing
shrimp, as the lava flows may have caused local extinctions in this species.
Physiological experiments in shrimp will also be performed to examine thermal
adaptations stemming from elevated temperatures due to volcanic activity.
Because shrimp act as important grazers on the microbial communities,
correlations between shrimp abundance and microbial community composition will
also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.