* 2020926
* Standard Grant: Engineers and the Globalization of Expertise
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Edward Beatty, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,035.00

This is a hybrid project in the history of engineering that develops research
infrastructure, a large database, and then uses that infrastructure to engage in
research to write a new history of the first generation of global engineers, the
international networks they established, and their growing influence on the
diffusion and organization of technical, expert knowledge over a 60 year period.
The study will provide the most detailed study yet of the globalization of
professional engineering expertise. The researchers will also build a public-
facing website that makes their data openly available to other scholars while
providing an interactive educational tool for students, classes, and general
public use; the project will yield materials for future scholars and for general
education. The database will be available for open access through a website
curated by the University of Notre Dame. The website will draw from the database
and the case studies to provide interactive features for the general public and
for support of new course syllabi and classroom use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project begins with the development of the largest available database of
individual engineers drawn from sources in the U.S., Britain, and Germany. The
database will contain information on engineersâ€™ education, their membership in
professional associations, their (global) places of employment and positions,
and their interactions on the pages of professional journals. The researchers
will then produce scholarly publications on the history of professional
engineering in the modern world that examine a global network unbounded by
corporate and national identities. Their database will enable them to identify a
set of questions and hypotheses that informs their selection of case studies
that examine local experiences of the global network around the world. They will
also gather a group of eight collaborating scholars to review the findings of
their database work and to contribute a set of focused, qualitative, archivally-
based case studies that explore, in detail and in local settings around the
world, the questions raised by the database work. By mapping the global
diffusion of, and new networks established by, professionalized engineering
expertise, the researchers can bring to light the importance of engineers in the
modern world including their role in broader histories of technocratic planning,
economic development, and of modern capitalism
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.