* 2020203
* Collaborative Research: Information Technology and Emergency Response Improvisation: An Investigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rui Chen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 257,711.00

Each year, in the US, emergencies cast devastating impacts on the civil and
technical infrastructure, resulting in loss of human life, social and economic
disturbances, and environmental damage. Because incidents are all different,
first responders improvise when plans do not readily address a situation, where
plans refer to documents detailing rules, standard operating procedures, roles,
and organizational structures or any agreed-upon courses of action. Despite the
importance of improvisation to emergency response, there exists a lack of
accumulated knowledge on emergency improvisation, thus at the practice level it
becomes difficult to transfer improvisation knowledge and skills from veterans
to novices who are in need of such knowledge. An inability to properly improvise
creates risks of response operation delays, inefficient allocation of resources,
insufficient protection of operational safety, and mismanagement of crisis
information. This project will explore the role of information technology (IT)
in enabling and supporting emergency response improvisation. It will also
investigate how organizational attributes and task-environment factors moderate
the effects of IT support on improvisation. Expected research findings will
guide IT vendors to develop new tools that offer improved support on emergency
improvisation; help the emergency response community create organizational
strategies and practices that better leverage IT for improvisational
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will adopt and extend Activity
Theory, a framework that is often used to describe collective actions, to the
emergency improvisation context – we term this Crisis Response AT (CRAT). We
will center our study of improvisation on upper to mid range Emergency Operating
Centers (EOC) where IT could play a role in supporting improvisation. To collect
a rich account of emergency response improvisation, the PIs will conduct
interviews and focus-group studies of emergency response managers. The PIs will
analyze the collected qualitative data and uncover major issues of
improvisation, which are expected to result in a better understanding of how IT
can be best used to address individual issues of improvisation. Following the
Technology-Organization-Environment (TOE) framework, in addition, the proposal
will explore important organizational and task environment factors that may
moderate, either support or hinder, the effect of IT on emergency response
improvisation. An online survey will be used to collect data from EOCs
nationwide and test hypotheses derived from the qualitative work and theory.
Survey data will be analyzed using advanced statistical methods. Finally, the
PIs will develop and distribute a toolkit to help EOC managers develop and
evaluate IT initiatives that support improvisation. This toolkit will be
validated by emergency practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.