* 2020071
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Blockchain-based Mechanisms for Timed Data Release and Timed Transactions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Balaji Palanisamy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2024
* USD 442,515.00

Timed release of data is a classical problem. Timed data release ensures that
data remains secure and undiscovered until a prescribed release time and gets
automatically released at the release time. Examples of applications requiring
timed data release include secure auction systems (bidding information needs
protection until all bids arrive), copyrights-aware data publishing (data is
automatically released when the copyright expires) and secure voting mechanisms
(votes are not allowed to be accessed until the end of the polling process).
This project develops a highly decentralized solution for supporting timed
release of data using Blockchain-based smart contracts that provide guaranteed
protection against adversarial attacks on obtaining access to the data before
the release time. This research also augments the timed data release techniques
with mechanisms for decentralized timed transactions that enable scheduling of
transaction functions without revealing the function inputs prior to the
execution time. The project aims to produce the techniques, algorithms, design
and implementation to enable timed release of data and timed execution in
decentralized blockchain platforms. Research results from the project will be
integrated into the security track courses at the University of Pittsburgh. The
project will engage the security track students in the proposed research and
development activities. New teaching modules related to blockchain-based
decentralized application development will be incorporated as introductory
modules for high school students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project takes a
transformational step towards building next generation decentralized
infrastructures for supporting timed data release and timed execution of
transactions that do not involve a single point of trust. A key aspect to this
model is a suite of novel secure data management techniques that allows data to
be published at a future time point without a single point of trust (i.e., the
data becomes available at the release time and prior to the release time, it
remains undiscovered and unavailable). The timed-release mechanisms route the
protected data within the timed data release system in a deterministically
pseudo-random manner, enabling it to automatically appear at the release time.
The proposed techniques use a monetary incentive mechanism enforced by the
blockchain to reward honest peers and penalize violators of the protocol. The
mechanisms are designed to protect against both rational and malicious peers in
the system. A key objective of the system design is to minimize the gas cost of
executing the timed data release and timed execution protocols while maintaining
high scalability and availability. The project demonstrates the use of timed
data release and timed execution features by developing a suite of decentralized
applications using the proposed techniques. The project implements the
mechanisms using the contract-oriented programming language, Solidity and
evaluates the techniques on the Rinkeby Ethereum test
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.