* 2020026
* IIBR Informatics: Comprehensive Metabolism Phenotype Characterization and Interpretation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Hunter Moseley, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,163,869.00

Metabolism is the combination of chemical processes associated with organisms.
Comprehensive molecular characterization of metabolism, i.e. detecting,
identifying, and measuring the amounts of metabolites which include feed
molecules, intermediates, and product molecules of metabolism, can provide the
most information-rich phenotypic description of the active state of an organism
or an ecosystem. In particular, new high-end analytical instrumentation applied
to experiments that enrich metabolites with stable isotopes (non-radioactive
types of atoms like carbon-13) can generate detailed submolecular features
representing isotopic flux through cellular and systemic metabolism for
thousands of metabolites extracted from cells, tissue, biofluids, and
environmental samples. The challenge now is in analyzing this complex data to
derive new biological knowledge and in making this data and knowledge available
in a highly reusable format in public scientific repositories. However, data
analysis methods for these state-of-the-art technologies are lacking. This
project will address this technical gap by developing new data analysis tools
that enable effective analysis, integration, interpretation, and public
deposition of large metabolomics analytical datasets collected from new high-end
instruments. This project will provide research exposure and training for high
school students, undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-accurate-mass and high-resolution Fourier
transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) applied in stable isotope-resolved
metabolomics (SIRM) experiments can generate detailed isotopologue features
representing isotopic flux through cellular and systemic metabolism for
thousands of metabolites from cells, tissue, biofluids, and environmental
samples. The challenge now is in analyzing this complex, submolecular data to
derive new biological knowledge, since appropriate data analysis methods are
lacking. This project will address this technical gap by developing new data
analysis tools that enable effective analysis, integration, interpretation, and
public deposition of untargeted SIRM and non-SIRM analytical data collected from
high-end instrumentation. Objective 1 will develop a novel multi-scan peak
characterization method that properly handles multiple data quality issues
present in FTMS spectra, minimizing intra-scan variance while removing spectral
artifacts that are dangerous to downstream data analyses. Objective 1 will also
develop a singularly unique tool implementing Small Molecule Isotope Resolved
Formula Enumeration, which will provide a truly untargeted isotope-specific
molecular formula (IMF) assignment of FTMS peaks without using a database of
known/expected metabolites. Objective 2 will develop a novel metabolic network
placement method that utilizes SIRM isotopologue data for robust metabolite
placement. An interoperable set of omics integration tools centered on a
comprehensive atom-resolved interaction network will allow cell/tissue-specific
and subcellular-specific metabolite network placement, modeling, and
interpretation. Objective 3 will develop libraries and tools that create
conformant depositions to an evolving mwTab format and standard of metadata
quality, with isotope-resolved IUPAC International Chemical Identifiers (InChI)
that greatly enhance reuse. The comprehensive characterization and
interpretation of metabolism afforded by this proposal will have broad impact in
the following specific ways: 1) Provide new metabolism research infrastructure
that will be impactful for non-model organisms. 2) Broadly disseminate, via
open-source code repositories (e.g. GitHub, Python Package Index, Bioconductor),
highly-reusable, fully-documented, production-level software tools that enable
novel metabolomics data analyses and public deposition. 3) Provide research
training in data science, metabolomics, and systems biology to high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.