* 2020422
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of acculturative stress on diet change and metabolic status among young adults
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* William Leonard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2022
* USD 25,192.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines biocultural questions about how
relocation affects young adults' dietary behaviors and physiology over time.
Scientists have observed that elevated stress and diet change are each
associated with poorer metabolic function for resettled populations in some
urban settings. However, social conditions that induce these changes, and the
interactive impacts of stress and diet change, are often underexplored. Using
existing survey data, new data, and biological sampling, this research will
advance fundamental knowledge about biosocial mechanisms that shape human
biological variation. Outcomes of this project will assist with interpreting
root causes of health disparities in diverse societies and may inform public
health research and policy. This project will also support student training,
international research collaborations, and science outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biocultural research in anthropology includes
questions about the physiological consequences of the nutrition transition in
which highly processed, nutrient-poor fast food supplants local food systems.
Other research complements this body of work by illustrating the challenges of
adapting to a new society, including a new food system. This project proposes
that social pressure to integrate into a new society induces stress and
accelerates diet change to negatively impact young adult physiological well-
being. Investigators leverage previously-collected survey data from when
participants relocated as children, and follow up with them in adulthood using
surveys, interviews, and health assessments. With this mixed-methods approach,
the project is uniquely positioned to trace and compare how diet and physiology
interact and respond to new social conditions. Pairing these analyses with a
health assessment can further clarify how social pressures "get under the skin"
to stratify health outcomes over the life course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.