* 2020185
* The role of short duration climate events in reducing natural tree regeneration in forests and woodlands of the southwestern United States
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John Bradford, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,606.00

Forests in the southwestern United States are declining and their future is
uncertain. Much previous research focused on how disturbances such as wildfire,
insect outbreaks, and severe drought killed mature trees. Yet, young trees are
also failing to grow from seed to adulthood in some locations, suggesting that
failure of the natural regeneration process may also be important. Changes in
temperature and moisture conditions are becoming less favorable for juvenile
tree survival. This may lead to even more severe forest ecosystem declines in
the future. This project will examine how short duration climate events such as
timing of summer rainfall support and limit juvenile tree survival. The role of
local environments, and the stress tolerance of juvenile trees has not received
substantial research attention. This project will train undergraduate and
graduate students, including individuals from under-represented groups. The
University of Nevada-Las Vegas is a Minority-Serving Institution. This project
will also enhance scientific infrastructure by establishing three vegetation and
climate monitoring towers. Research results will be useful to regional forest
managers, who will gain critical information for understanding the future of
forest ecosystems in the southwestern United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will use ground-based field instrumentation and remote sensing to study
the specific environmental conditions that initiate juvenile tree mortality
events. The three dominant coniferous tree species in the region will be
studied: ponderosa pine, pinon pine, and juniper. This instrumentation will be
deployed over multiple years and across diverse landscapes in the southwestern
U.S. This work hypothesizes that juvenile tree mortality will be caused by
environmental conditions that are different and less severe than those
determined experimentally. However, it is likely that prolonged environmental
stress will be required to kill juvenile trees due to the favorable
microclimates where they are located. Additionally, improved mechanistic insight
on juvenile tree mortality will be used to enhance existing forecasts of natural
forest regeneration in scenarios of 21st century climate change. When completed,
this research will improve our understanding of how the interaction of climate,
environment, and tree stress tolerance will shape the future of forests in the
southwestern U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.