* 2020275
* Network for Neutrinos, Nuclear Astrophysics, and Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* George Fuller, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2025
* USD 6,100,000.00

A revolution in astrophysics is underway, driven by new instruments that view
the universe’s most extraordinary events through multiple astrophysical
messengers. Merging neutron stars have been observed through their gravitational
waves and through the electromagnetic radiation emitted by the hot debris they
eject. Collapsing stars within the Milky Way produce prodigious fluxes of
neutrinos that are observed in massive underground detectors, while also
brightening the night sky in dramatic supernova. These explosions generate
extreme conditions – energies, sustained temperatures, matter densities – beyond
any realized on earth. The Network for Neutrinos, Nuclear Astrophysics and
Symmetries Physics Frontier Center (N3AS-PFC) is a collaboration of theorists
who utilize these observations to answer some of the most important open
questions in physics: how were the heavy elements created, what is the form of
the super-dense nuclear matter found at the center of a neutron star, and how
can we test the properties of neutrinos and dark matter using astrophysical
laboratories? The answers have the potential to influence the future directions
of nuclear, particle, and astrophysics. The new generation of postdoctoral
researchers that N3AS-PFC is training and the diverse group of students it
recruits and engages will be crucial to both current research and the field’s
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The N3AS-PFC will explore the physics in extreme
astrophysical environments by combining knowledge of the underlying nuclear and
neutrino microphysics, with the most advanced tools for numerical simulations in
astrophysics. The work will proceed on a number of scientific fronts. N3AS-PFC
will develop the theory of kilonovae – the optical counterpart of a neutron star
merger – to determine whether this environment can sustain the necessary chain
of nucleosynthesis. N3AS-PFC will develop theoretical tools for describing
nuclear matter at several times nuclear density, thereby relating fundamental
nuclear physics to properties of neutron stars, including their masses, radii,
deformability, and long-term cooling. N3AS-PFC will apply new tools to
understand the highly complex flavor physics of the dense sea of entangled
neutrinos created in the cores of supernovae. Because phenomena like neutron
stars, supernovae, and the Big Bang fire the imagination of students, N3AS-PFC
will establish an outreach program focused on community colleges to encourage
and then support transferring students to pursue research in astrophysics. N3AS-
PFC will also provide postdoctoral Fellows with broad training opportunities and
the support of multiple mentors, preparing them to become future leaders in
multi-messenger astrophysics. Through the research and educational programs this
N3AS-PFC award directly addresses the goals of NSF’s “Windows on the Universe:
The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics” Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.