* 2020999
* How Competing Sociotechnical Imaginaries Shape Trust and Governance of Gene Editing in Agriculture and Food
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Theresa Selfa, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,186.00

New gene editing techniques promise significant benefits within the agricultural
sector. However, realizing the full potential of these technologies will depend
on how it is governed, and whether the public accepts it. Gene editing for
agriculture and food poses public acceptance challenges due to its association
with genetically modified organisms, scientific complexity, and social and
ethical concerns. New governance forms for gene editing for agriculture and food
will be necessary since existing regulatory instruments cannot deal with its
complexity and novel risks, but it is unclear what those governance forms should
be and if they would enhance public trust in the technology. To address these
gaps, this project analyzes how key actors use competing collective visions of
the future and the role of science within it to shape public trust and
governance approaches for gene editing for agriculture and food. Findings will
be broadly disseminated to key publics through a policy panel, digital
storytelling projects, high school lesson plans, and in online publications.
These innovative digital and online educational resources will advance public
literacy and engagement with the scientific, social, and ethical issues
surrounding gene editing for agriculture and food. Knowledge generated by this
project will benefit a wide range of stakeholders, influencers, and publics who
are engaged in governance efforts for gene editing for agriculture and
food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a comparative investigation of how the ways
in which actors from key social groups imagine their technoscientific futures
matter for the use and governance of gene editing technologies for agriculture
and food. Multiple social science methods, including media content analysis, in-
depth stakeholder interviews, deliberative workshops, and interpretive
comparative methods, are used to investigate this emerging scientific
controversy and develop ways to create more inclusive governance processes for
decision making related to controversial and emergent technologies. Project
goals include: (1) Identifying key visions for technoscientific futures and
their proponents; 2) Assessing how key actors develop and use particular visions
of the future to stabilize or disrupt public trust in gene editing technologies
and their governance; 3) Comparing visions of the futures across cases; and 4)
Engaging key actors in deliberative workshops to provide an assessment of
findings and deliberate on inclusive governance approaches. Overall, the project
will contribute to the theory and practice of Responsible Research and
Innovation, and to scholarship in Science and Technology Studies on governance
of emerging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.