* 2020486
* Stretchable Papertronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Seokheun Choi, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,000.00

Paper-based electronics and sensors (i.e., Papertronics) are emerging
technologies providing a new platform for a wide range of applications for
healthcare, environment monitoring, display, and energy storage. Paper as a
substrate for next-generation electronics holds significant potential because of
its physical and chemical characteristics, including a high surface area to
volume ratio, porous structure, biocompatibility, biodegradability, low-cost
worldwide availability, foldability, and lightweight. However, the mechanical
properties limit intimate integration and conformal contact with living organ
systems because the paper is easy to tear and not stretchable. To advance
papertronics into bio-integrated soft bioelectronics, paper’s mechanical
properties will be modified to make it stretchable while keeping the fibrous
structure with bioinert chemical properties to take full advantage of paper’s
intrinsic characteristics. The stretchable paper, new material and platform,
will be the foundations of the next generation of the papertronics and
paperfluidics. Indeed, the stretchable paper can transform into a new domain of
interdisciplinary studies putting together basic material science research and
engineering sciences to establish groundbreaking innovations. The systematically
studied fabrication parameters will accelerate the development of advanced
manufacturing, especially in flexible hybrid electronics, and further will be
transformed into the production process for use by industry. Knowledge will be
disseminated through the development of an educational workshop for STEM
teachers, peer-reviewed publications, classroom teaching, student mentoring, and
full participation of minorities, women, and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to revolutionize paper-
based electronics by creating advances in the stretchable co-axial nonwoven
fibrous mat using electrospinning technologies. The stretchable papers consist
of thin, soft, and core-sheath fibrous platform that will allow becoming elastic
but maintaining chemical properties of the paper while using silicone elastomer
and cellulose for core material and outer sheath polymer, respectively. Our
project involves three objectives to investigate stretchable papertronics. The
specific aims are as follows: (1) the thin, nanomesh cellulose coated
elastomeric silicone-based polymer substrates will be investigated for
mechanically, and biochemically compatible bioelectronics; (2) the stretchable
paper will be characterized its physical, chemical, and mechanical properties.
The relationship between the fiber diameter and core (or sheath) thickness with
processing parameters will be systematically studied. Additionally, the
compatibility to the conventional printing technologies will be tested to
develop the stretchable paper into functional electronics.; (3) the elastomeric
paper-based microbial fuel cell (MFC) will be demonstrated as model
papertronics. The 3D cellulose-coated PDMS nanofibers will serve as a substrate
for MFC, which generates power for soft bioelectronics with conformal contact
with the organ system. Overall, the study of the paper-based electronics
validated with the stretchable paper will offer a comprehensive understanding of
future developments in the biomechanically compatible papertronics and
paperfluidics for inflammatory-free, long-term biomedical applications as well
as the environment- and cost-friendly solutions in manufacturing and disposal
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.