* 2020595
* Collaborative: AccelNet: Global Union of Bat Diversity Networks (GBatNet): Bats as a model for understanding global vertebrate diversification and sustainability
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Tigga Kingston, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,278,044.00

Bats play critical roles in ecosystems globally. However, key aspects of bat
biology, from the causes and consequences of population declines to their
ability to transmit viruses to people, remain poorly understood. This AccelNet
project establishes the Global Union of Bat Diversity Networks (GBatNet) to fill
key knowledge gaps and create an international structure to accelerate
discoveries across disciplines and borders. The network of networks fosters new
avenues for global research exchange through coordination of joint research,
education, and outreach. GBatNet links 14 regional and global networks with a
shared vision to address pressing questions in bat biology of direct relevance
to ecosystem and human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GBatNet will advance
understanding of mechanisms that govern the ecology and evolution of bats, and
address NSF’s Big Idea Understanding the Rules of Life. The network of network
forges novel connections among experts in paleontology, evolution, morphology,
ecology, virology, genomics, and conservation. GBatNet will address 3 broad
questions : (1) eco-evolutionary dynamics – what are the feedbacks between
ecological function, evolutionary adaptation, and rapidly changing
environments?, (2) metabolic homeostasis – how do individuals maintain metabolic
homeostasis, and what are the evolutionary contributions and ecological
consequences for populations and species?, and (3) tree of sex – what are the
evolutionary and ecological consequences of genomic rearrangement, especially in
sex chromosomes? Annual meetings, interdisciplinary synthesis sessions,
international engagement in bat diversity hotspots will foster coordination and
preparation of the next generation of professionals. In addition to producing
research syntheses and developing public outreach materials, the project will
synthesize existing datasets to create interdisciplinary tools and protocols to
gain insights to complex systems. GBatNet will build and test predictive models
of species vulnerability to ongoing habitat change, emerging infectious
diseases, and climate change. GBatNet will provide unparalleled collaborative
opportunities for bat research and conservation worldwide, and the U.S.
scientific community will gain expanded research opportunities in global bat
diversity hotspots and with networks across diverse
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this
award is being provided by the Directorates for Biological Sciences from the
Population and Community Ecology Program (BIO/DEB) and the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program (BIO/IOS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.