* 2020205
* Investigating Regulatory Functions of Archaic Hominin Genetic Variants in Modern Human Genomes
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Terence Capellini, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

When the ancestors of people living today dispersed from their ancestral
homeland between one hundred thousand and fifty thousand years ago, they
interbred with now-extinct distant human relatives, such as Neanderthals. The
resulting exchange of genetic material means that the modern human gene pool
includes a small amount of Neanderthal genetic variation. In this project,
researchers will examine how Neanderthal genetic variants that are present in
living humans affect the degree to which a nearby gene is active, in a variety
of different human cell types (e.g., skin cells, immune cells, liver cells,
skeletal cells). Through the identification of functional variants and by the
dissemination of such data to the public, the researchers will advance research
and public understanding of the effects of evolutionary history and genetic
variation on living human biology. The findings will help to characterize the
functional and medical impacts of Neanderthal DNA sequences on human cell
function. The investigators will also work with museums to develop exhibits that
will highlight the practical importance of this field of research. Furthermore,
this project will promote broader participation of women and underrepresented
scholars in STEM research through student training and mentoring activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given recent advances in high throughput functional
testing, the researchers will conduct experiments in which they investigate tens
of thousands of Neandertal genetic variants and their human counterparts for
their ability to regulate the expression of genes in a variety of human cell
types. The researchers will follow up key findings from this approach by
performing additional functional experiments on genetic base-pairs in specific
cell types, to examine the functional effects of Neandertal genetic variants on
gene expression and cell biology. Furthermore, by directly comparing previous
correlational findings to the results acquired in a laboratory experimental
context, this research will deepen the understanding of these commonly used
genetic datasets. This project is supported by NSF Biological Anthropology with
Human Networks &amp; Data Science co-funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.