* 2020973
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Fine-grain generation of multiscale patterns in programmable organoids using microrobots
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Sambeeta Das, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 08/31/2022
* USD 273,841.00

People with diseased or defective vital organs often need organ replacement to
survive, but the availability of replacement organs is severely restricted by
shortages of suitable tissue-matched donors and complexities such as postmortem
organ deterioration and immunological rejection. These problems could be
overcome by using high fidelity artificially-grown organs, but achieving that
goal faces daunting and long-standing scientific and engineering challenges that
this project aims to begin to meet. The project will focus on proof-of-concept
generation of microscale patterns in a liver organoid to mimic the anatomical
structure of lobules arranged in hexagonal patterns. The researchers will use
microrobots to dynamically regulate gene expression in 3D vascularized liver
organoids to generate the lobule like patterns. The results of this project will
define a new area of robot-assisted biological design. This research will result
in new biological rules, synthetic biology tools, and microrobotics that can be
applied in numerous disciplines. If successful, another broader impact will be
the demonstration of a method that could be used to create a new, in vitro,
native-like organoid for biological and medical research, opening the door for
research into the creation and repair of synthetic human organs. The project
includes research training for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional methods of reproducing biological
patterns in vitro suffer from multiple limitations. Previous research on pattern
formation has largely relied on delivering global stimuli and studying reaction-
diffusion mediated patterning of cell fates in the cell culture. Such methods
yield only static patterns and give neither precise spatial nor temporal control
over gene expression and resulting biological tissue formation. Current tissue
engineering capabilities such as 3D printing and optogenetics are also unable to
recapitulate the multiscale self-assembled patterns evident in native-like
organs. The proposed approach will enable precise control of microrobots to
achieve dynamic control over patterning in 3D biological systems, creating a
paradigm shift in the field. The proof-of-concept goal is to modulate localized
gene expression in engineered 3D tissue constructs to control the emergence of
multiscale patterns. Machine learning will be used to derive and characterize
desired multiscale patterns, synthetic biology to endow the stem cells with
genetic circuits that can differentiate the cells to form desired tissue
constructs, and microrobots to alter localized gene expression to form
multiscale patterns in tissue constructs. In particular, the researchers will
develop and control microrobots capable of sustaining and carrying engineered
sender cells, drive the microrobots and associated sender cells within a
vascularized 3D liver organoid to specific locations, and use the microrobot
controlled sender cells to communicate with endothelial cells, inducing these
endothelial cells to secrete Wnt and generate gradients controlling liver lobule
zonation. This patterned lobule zonation will regulate the metabolic activity of
the liver organoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.