* 2020029
* Study of Mass Independent Isotopic Compositions of Ru and Mo in Early Earth Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2023
* USD 317,425.00

The isotopic compositions of ruthenium and molybdenum in ancient rocks will be
measured. So-called mass-independent variations in the isotopic compositions of
these elements can reveal the cosmochemical “genetics” of planets; i.e., what
they were made from. In the case of Earth, some evidence suggests the genetic
signatures of these elements may have changed with time as the planet accreted,
indicating that the sources of Earth’s building blocks also changed with time.
The objective of this study is to ascertain the level of isotopic heterogeneity
present in rocks more than 2.5 billion years old. The isotopic differences in
these elements in early-Earth rocks, compared to modern rocks, will provide new
insights with regard to the late stage accretionary history of Earth, as well as
possible sources of water and organic molecules that were the necessary
ingredients for the origin of life. This project will support a postdoctoral
associate to conduct state-of-the-art research and will also involve
contributions from an undergraduate as part of a senior thesis
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-precision isotopic analysis of ruthenium and
molybdenum extracted from Archean rocks will be conducted. The specific
objective will be to identify and interpret genetic (nucleosynthetic)
characteristics of early Earth rocks, particularly with respect to
characterizing the building blocks and accretionary sequence of planet Earth.
Using proven techniques including nickel-sulphide fire assay pre-concentration,
chemical purification and thermal ionization mass spectrometry, Archean rocks
from southwestern Greenland, as well as Eoarchean rocks from Nuvvuagittuq
(Quebec), and Saglek (Labrador) will be analyzed. Most of these rocks are
characterized by positive 182W anomalies, indicative of derivation from
primordial mantle domains. Further, we will analyze rocks from three suites of
Archean komatiites, also characterized by 182W. The results of this project will
provide important information about the accretionary history of Earth.
Consequently, it will advance our understanding of the events leading to the
creation of a habitable planet, as well as provide clues to the evolution of the
mantle during the first 2 billion years of Earth history. Findings will guide
dynamical modelers of both the early Solar System evolution and the early
mantle. This project will support a postdoctoral associate to conduct state-of-
the-art research and will also involve contributions from an undergraduate as
part of a senior thesis project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.