* 2020978
* Building Capacity to Develop a Collaborative Research Agenda on Project-Based Learning as a Mechanism for Program and Institutional Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kristin Wobbe, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,576.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building the capacity of the
STEM community to design and conduct rigorous research studies to investigate
Problem-Based Learning (PBL). PBL is an educational approach and instructional
practice in which students learn by solving a complex, real world problem. The
propagation of PBL in higher education outpaces research on this experiential
learning approach. In response, this project aims to develop and foster the
research capacity of the STEM community to investigate PBL. The project will
address a significant gap in the research on PBL: most research on PBL has
focused at its impacts at the course level. This project will instead focus on
PBL as a mechanism to transform STEM programs and higher education institutions.
This focus draws on the project teamâ€™s expertise and experience in faculty
professional development, including in fostering the propagation of PBL in STEM.
The project is expected to contribute to examination of the efficacy of PBL as a
mechanism for transforming undergraduate STEM education at the program and
institutional levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognizant that there are a multitude
and variety of research topics to investigate and hypotheses to test, this
project aims to build the capacity of partner institutions to engage in research
through the use of different research methods, from quasi-experimental and
analytic studies to phenomenological and multi-site case studies. Activities
will include participation in professional learning communities augmented by
engagement in semester-long training, auto-ethnography, systematic research
syntheses/meta-ethnography, and the application of developmental evaluation for
assessing innovation and use (Patton, 2010). Self-reflection and auto-
ethnography, as a means to document and investigate the development of
expertise, is grounded in a phenomenological approach to research and knowledge
generation. STEM Central, administered by Project Kaleidoscope, will provide an
easily accessible site for sharing project deliverables including a PBL
literature review, a census/field scan of institutions implementing PBL, MOOCs
on organizational change theories, and logic models. It will also support
development of a national community of practice among institutions implementing
and researching PBL. The collaborating institutions include Worcester Poly
Technic, Texas A&amp;M University, Bellevue College, and the Association of
American Colleges and Universities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.