* 2020440
* Collaborative Research: Changing Seasonality and Nitrogen Reductions in the Northern Hardwood Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 63,212.00

In most temperate forests, the availability of nutrients limits rates of tree
growth. Nitrogen is a nutrient that has been shown to limit forest growth in
many ecosystems. In recent decades, much research has focused on how human
activities have increased inputs of atmospheric nitrogen in rain, snow, and dust
to forests. However, these atmospheric sources of nitrogen are now declining
over large areas of North America. There have been remarkable declines in the
availability of nitrogen for trees in some temperate forests that cannot be
explained by declines in atmospheric inputs alone. There are some concerns that
diminished nitrogen availability could reduce rates of forest productivity.
Potentially, nitrogen limitation could reduce the capacity of forest ecosystems
to respond to disturbances and environmental change. This project will study the
supply and demand of nitrogen in a forest in the northern U.S. This project will
also develop a set of education and outreach activities. These activities
include development of a new strategy for mentoring underrepresented minority
undergraduate students in conducting research. Outreach activities include
public engagement with climate science and ecosystem ecology. The research
results from this project will be integrated into local environmental outreach
and science communication programs. Training will be provided through this
project to several undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will test the
idea that reductions in nitrogen availability relative to demand by plants,
called nitrogen oligotrophication, are driven by seasonal changes during autumn
and spring. This idea requires a major reevaluation of temperate forest nitrogen
cycling. Specifically, nitrogen oligotrophication in hardwood forests in the
northern U.S. may be driven by increasing nitrogen demand by plants, caused by
rising temperatures, longer growing seasons, and other environmental changes. In
turn, these processes lead to greater nitrogen resorption by trees in autumn,
increased ratios of carbon to nitrogen in litter, and greater net immobilization
of nitrogen by soil microbes in the following spring. However, the timing of
snowmelt and soil freezing in spring may further affect net mineralization and
nitrogen availability for plants. These hypotheses will be tested using a
combination of observational, experimental, and modeling approaches at Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.