* 2020010
* GCR: Collaborative Research: Plasma-Biofilm Interactions at the Intersection of Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Engineering
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Mark Kushner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 230,000.00

Low temperature plasmas – ionized gases – operating at atmospheric pressure are
a copious source of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (RONS). Plasma-produced
RONS have the ability to combat antimicrobial resistant bacteria and serve as a
novel approach to cancer treatment. Reduction-oxidation (redox) processes play a
major role in the cellular life cycle and are the metabolic driving force for
aerobic biology. Plasma-induced redox chemistry in cells can potentially
regulate these processes. This project will investigate the capability of plasma
for control of biofilms – coordinated functional communities of bacteria.
Physically removing biofilms can be extremely difficult, and antibiotics and
topical decontamination products are largely ineffective due to multipronged
biofilm defenses. The control of biofilms has become a grand societal challenge
due to their exceptionally broad range of use and impact, from environmental
engineering to biomedical applications. As an example, biofilm induced corrosion
is a severe problem for world maritime industries. Biofilms and antimicrobial
resistance are also major issues in the food industry and in medicine.
Antimicrobial resistance is predicted to become the number one health problem in
2050 and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that every 15
minutes one person in the US dies because of an infection that antibiotics
cannot treat effectively. Although the consequences of biofilms are typically
thought of as being negative, biofilm bacteria are also extensively used in
bioreactors with beneficial applications ranging from water remediation to
energy harvesting. This project combines several research advances in plasma
science, microbiology and engineering – each significant in their own right –
into a convergent, transformative project to investigate fundamental plasma-
induced biofilm processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
develop the science required to understand the impact of plasmas on communities
of living cells. Plasma treatment of organisms can produce non-local effects and
systemic responses which are currently not understood. In complex organisms,
such as animal models, it is difficult to quantify both the initiating plasma
dose to individual cells and to diagnose consequences of the exposure –
components of animal models are simply too inter-related. The proposed research
will address the critical need to quantify plasma effects on organisms by
developing the science required to obtain a fundamental understanding of plasma
interactions within a biofilm – a simpler system of communicating organisms that
allows access to diagnostics and modeling. Furthermore, model biofilm bacteria
(e.g. Pseudomonas aeruginosa) are genetically tractable, lending themselves to
detailed studies of plasma-induced effects at a molecular level. This
improvement in understanding of systemic effects of plasma will be accomplished
by investigating the biological response of plasma-treated, biofilm-associated,
bacterial cells and their intercellular communication through the extra-cellular
environment. The project will develop this new and convergent research frontier,
combining plasma science, microbiology, and state-of-the-art printing
methodologies, using biofilms as a model system. While initially focusing on
global biofilm response to the plasma treatment, the project will advance plasma
and 3D printing frontiers to develop highly controlled spatially-resolved
experiments that could ultimately enable the treatment of a single bacterium
cell in a biofilm and track the associated local and non-local biological
impacts. The societal benefits of this research will be the ability to
manipulate the growth and character of biofilms – for example, to eliminate
biofilms where they are not desired, or to enhance their proliferation where
biofilms are a desired product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.