* 2020247
* AI Institute: Planning: The Proteus Institute: Intelligence Through Change
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Joshua Bongard, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

For nearly 50 years, AI researchers have improved their ability to simulate one
aspect of how the brain works: experience-driven change in the connections
between neurons to improve the organism’s -- or the computer program’s --
behavior. This mechanism now lies at the heart of modern AI technologies.
However, 'synaptic plasticity' is but one of millions of adaptive mechanisms
that evolved to help organisms grow and learn to grapple with their
environments, and many of those mechanisms are not limited to brains.
Intelligent problem-solving was already discovered by evolution around the time
bacteria evolved to clump together, and is used widely by cells and tissues
throughout the body. Imagine an Institute that helps biologists,
neuroscientists, ecologists and psychologists work with computer scientists to
turn hundreds of these adaptive mechanisms into code. Imagine further an AI that
figures out how to combine these code pieces together to create AI programs,
robots, and computer-designed organisms that inherit life’s breathtaking
abilities to perform complex tasks, recover from unexpected situations, and work
well with others. Organisms can do these things because they constantly adapt
their brains, bodies, and coalesce into ever larger functional groups, like
communities and societies. For this reason this project will use the next two
years to lay the groundwork for the Proteus Institute, named after the Greek god
of constant change. Along the way, the project will provide opportunities for
students, policy makers, companies and the general public to influence how such
technology is created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living systems continue to outstrip
the most adaptive state-of-the-art artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics.
One reason for this is that, without exception, organisms and species constantly
restructure themselves at all organizational levels, from the microsecond- to
millennial time scales; most machines do not. Almost all AI and robots
incorporate change at just one time scale – that of synaptic plasticity – and in
one modality: neural networks. This project will thus plan the Proteus
Institute, dedicated to studying embodied plasticity: how multi-level change
supports intelligence in protean systems (cells, organs, organisms, and
ecologies), and how best to channel those discoveries into protean machines
(robots and computer designed organisms) and algorithms (machine learning
methods). To achieve this, the project will construct a continuously-running
evolutionary algorithm that designs and trains robots and ML algorithms, using
the insights of basal cognition and the multi-scale control systems of
developmental biology. This algorithm will be increasingly enriched by software
patches that simulate new and potentially useful adaptive mechanisms. This will
enable the algorithm to discover combinations of domain agnostic adaptive
mechanisms in a growing set of embodied AI and ML substrates. The project will
also host two workshops where it will elicit candidate biological mechanisms not
yet incorporated into robots or ML methods from biologists, neuroscientists,
ecologists and psychologists. During the second workshop, the project will
convene computational researchers to begin incorporating those mechanisms, and
invite policy, industry, and other stakeholders to discuss how the emerging
biology-to-AI pipeline could facilitate technology transfer, education,
workforce development, and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.