* 2020636
* Building Cybersecurity Analytics Capacity in Big Data Era: Developing Hands-on Labs for Integrating Data Science into Cybersecurity Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Daniel Takabi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 383,371.00

Given the wide-spread use of big data, there is a growing need to develop a
cyber-workforce that understands cybersecurity in the context of big data. The
goal of this project from the University of North Texas is to integrate data
science into cybersecurity curriculum and train the next generation of security
experts. The project proposes to have direct and long-term impacts on the
growing national need for highly-trained cybersecurity professionals with data
analytics capabilities, by increasing the number and quality of cybersecurity
analysts. This project aims to develop instructional materials that cater to a
wide-range of student learning styles. The materials will be designed so that
educators at a wide-range of institutions (e.g., community college to research-
intensive institutions), and with varying levels of cybersecurity knowledge, can
easily incorporate them into their instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to develop a set of instructional modules and hands-on
labs that make use of state-of-the-art data analytics for addressing different
cybersecurity challenges. These instructional modules will follow active
learning principles designed to engage students, regardless of learning style,
and ensure that students retain the content learned. The modules will be based
on real-world security systems and will be designed to systematically cover
fundamental security principles. This approach will allow students to get
exposure to data analytics techniques and their application to cybersecurity
challenges via real-world examples. The project aims to produce engaging
materials that could be easily adopted by other educators. To simplify
integration and encourage adoption, the hands-on labs will be built based on
only open source software and tools that are free to use for educational
purposes. Further, they will be distributed via virtual machine images that
already contain all libraries and required software to run the labs. This
approach for development will allow a variety of instructors to confidently
integrate state-of-the-art data analytics labs into curriculum with minimal
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.