* 2020502
* Workshop: Collaborative Platforms for Engineering Biology: Biofoundries and Distributed Biorefineries
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Keith Yamamoto, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/29/2024
* USD 73,081.00

This award supports the workshop “Collaborative Platforms for Engineering
Biology: Biofoundries and Distributed Biorefineries”, that will convene experts
across the US and internationally to address mechanisms to advance the global
bioeconomies. Open, public biofoundries have recently emerged as key
accelerators in engineering biology discovery and application, as well as unique
spaces for training an emergent workforce and establishing a robust culture of
safety and responsibility in engineering biology. Mobile biorefineries are
emerging as a solution to the inefficiencies of biomass conversion, potentially
allowing for reduced costs, more jobs, and increased renewable energy
production. This workshop explores these tools for building a strong engineering
biology research and development base – one that will contribute the technology,
innovation, workforce, and infrastructure needed to secure a vibrant Bioeconomy.
The workshop will share best practices and processes among global thought
leaders in engineering biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop promotes
American engineering biology research and innovation that can drive economic
growth across multiple sectors, while at the same time engaging our
international partners on policies and paths forward that stimulate investment,
data-sharing, testing, and collaboration in the fields that make up the
bioeconomy. The workshop facilitates scientific and technological cooperation
and capacity building through exchange of knowledge and human resources. In
addition, the UCSF Science Policy Group, comprised of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, have the opportunity to learn first-hand about
collaborating nations work together to develop new, mutually advantageous
avenues of economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.