* 2020888
* GCR: The Transition to a Sustainable Energy Future
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,149,118.00

Transitioning the energy system from one dependent on conventional fossil energy
to a sustainable energy system primarily supplied by renewable energy is one of
societyâ€™s most pressing needs. Integrating increasing amounts of renewable
energy into the electricity system is a technical challenge, as many renewable
energy sources cannot be scheduled to coincide with the demand for electricity,
but instead produce electricity when the sun is shining or the wind is blowing.
Another challenge as the energy transition progresses is to ensure that all
communities are able to participate. This project pursues convergence research
at the intersection of these technical and societal challenges, designing and
evaluating policies, markets, and algorithms for a future electricity system. To
do this, the project will build a convergent team of engineers, computer
scientists, social scientists, and policy scholars along with key stakeholders
representing urban dwellers, their electric utility, and the independent system
operator. The project will produce new knowledge that accelerates the energy
transition, by enabling the integration of large amounts of renewables into the
electric grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision for this project is to learn the
ways in which energy technologies, grid algorithms, market solutions and policy
mechanisms can be designed so they account for both the complex and changing
scientific realities of the energy system and socio-economic goals. The project
seeks to (1) understand community priorities around transitioning the energy
system; (2) develop metrics for quantifying system costs and access that will be
used to assess technological, algorithmic, market and policy innovations; and
(3) evaluate integrated market mechanisms, grid algorithms, generation, storage,
and ownership structures in the context of distributed solar PV and large-scale
offshore wind energy. Accomplishing project goals requires deep integration of
scientists and engineers from different fields. With input from community
members and industry stakeholders, the project team will develop a common
language to communicate across the varied disciplines, leading to the
development of linked models that range from moment-to-moment control
algorithms, to hourly electricity market mechanisms, to long-term empirical
evaluation of economic and other societal impacts. The project will build
convergence among the team and community members through an electricity market
simulation. The results of the project will facilitate increased integration of
renewable sources into the electricity system. The research activities and
stakeholder engagement will also recruit and mentor students from under-
represented groups and developing relationships with underserved communities.
The electricity market simulator will be offered as a resource for community
organizations and local governments seeking civic engagement and discussion of
energy policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.