* 2020098
* Shape and Deformation of Colloidal Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Thomas Powers, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 383,463.00

This grant will support the development of the theoretical framework for the
design and control of colloidal membranes. Colloidal membranes are made of
filamentous viruses and held together by osmotic forces from polymers in
solution. Like cell membranes, colloidal membranes self-assemble; in other
words, these membranes form spontaneously from a solution of just the right
concentration of rod-like viruses and polymers. Although colloidal membranes
resist bending like a solid plate, they also flow like a liquid. Unlike an
orange peel, a colloidal membrane shaped like a spherical cap can conform to a
flat surface without tearing because the material can redistribute by flowing.
Likewise, holes can heal because the material flows. Self-assembly and the
ability to easily reconfigure make colloidal membranes attractive for developing
artificial micron-scale materials with life-like properties. The focus of this
grant is to mathematically model the shape-changing processes using tools from
applied mathematics, mechanical engineering, and physics. This grant will
support the scientific training of undergraduate and graduate students. The
investigators will mentor undergraduates from historically underrepresented
groups in engineering and physical science through the Leadership Alliance
Summer Research Early Identification Program. Soft matter topics related to this
work will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses in engineering
and physics. Graduate students will receive training in presentation and
communication skills, and develop YouTube videos explaining soft matter topics
to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research
is to apply continuum mechanics techniques to the study of colloidal membranes
composed of mixtures of long and short rods in the presence of polymers which
hold the rods together via the depletion force. Previous efforts have focused on
flat membranes or membrane ribbons composed of a single kind of rod. Membranes
consisting of a mixture of rods typically display a rich variety of complex
three-dimensional shapes, and the emerging evidence is that many of these shapes
are neither minimal surfaces nor constant mean curvature shapes. The shapes can
be tuned by controlling experimental conditions such as polymer depletant
concentration, and the theory the team will develop will quantitatively
determine how shape depends on experimental conditions. The particular aims are
to (1) determine how the Gaussian curvature modulus depends on the concentration
of short rods as well as the concentration of depleting polymers, (2) determine
the conditions that lead to tilting of the constituent rods of the membrane away
from the normal to the mid-surface in the bulk of the membrane, and (3) develop
a Monte Carlo technique that incorporates the rod degrees of freedom together
with the shape degrees of freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.