* 2020451
* Reprogramming of tRNAs in virulence of plant pathogenic Rhodococcus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Taifo Mahmud, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms by which
bacteria cause disease to plants. This project focuses on one group of bacteria,
called Rhodococcus. Most bacteria are not pathogenic to plants and are
associated with beneficial effects, such as promoting growth of plants and
protecting them from disease caused by other pathogens. However, Rhodococcus can
acquire extra DNA called plasmids that transition them to being pathogenic.
Hence, genes on these plasmids are critical for these bacteria to cause disease,
which is typically associated with disfigured growth. This disease results in
millions of dollars of damage to US agriculture. By understanding how plasmid-
borne genes function and manipulate the genome of the bacteria to cause disease,
this project will inform on strategies to help US growers mitigate disease
risks. As part of the project, there will be two outreach components designed to
address goals of increasing participation by underrepresented students. Summer
biology camps will be delivered to high school students to learn the scientific
process and give them a college experience. Long-term, mentored research
opportunities will be provided to undergraduate students to help prepare them
for careers in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virulence plasmids are
necessary and sufficient to transition Rhodococcus to being a pathogen of
plants. Two plasmid loci have been identified as necessary. The fasR locus
encodes a transcription factor. The fas locus encodes proteins implicated in the
metabolism of cytokinins. The regulon of fasR remains unknown. In contrast, a
long-standing hypothesis suggests that cytokinins, which are best known as plant
growth promoting hormones, are synthesized by microbes to directly manipulate
plant hosts. Research will test an alternative hypothesis that plasmid-encoded
genes and cytokinins coopt and reprogram chromosomal genes for virulence. Three
aims are designed to determine the necessity and sufficiency of genes in
pathogenesis, understand how virulence genes are regulated, and test the role of
cytokinins in regulating virulence of bacterial pathogens. To accomplish these
aims, the project will use molecular genetic approaches and whole
transcriptomics as well as proteomics studies to uncover how plasmid borne
virulence genes alter the expression patterns of chromosomal genes to cause
disease to plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.