* 2020644
* Collaborative Research: The Rise and Fall of the Neoproterozoic Era in Siberia: Connections between Tectonics, Ocean Chemistry, and Biologic Innovation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Geoffrey Gilleaudeau, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 361,062.00

The co-evolution of life and environment is one of the most compelling stories
in Earth's 4.5 billion year history. For eons, simple, single-celled organisms
dominated the Earth's oceans, until the first organisms with a cell nucleus
began to proliferate about a billion years ago. Then, in the geologic blink of
an eye approximately 550 million years ago, complex animals burst onto the
scene. The timing of these two extraordinary evolutionary events has been one of
the most enduring mysteries in the natural sciences. In this proposal, the
principal investigators test an intriguing hypothesis that both of these
evolutionary transitions were catalyzed by major mountain-building events that
delivered nutrients to the oceans, and changed the amount of biologically-
critical oxygen available for use by marine organisms. To test this hypothesis,
the science team will measure minute differences in the masses of the chemical
elements lithium (Li) and uranium (U) preserved in ancient limestone deposits
from Siberia. These rocks from Siberia preserve a spectacular record of life in
the oceans across these two evolutionary transitions, and new data generated
from this project aim to provide a fresh look at the fundamental processes that
drive evolutionary change on Earth. The researchers will also lead a broad
outreach program aimed at bringing field geology and university internships to
high school students in Maryland and Virginia. Specifically,
spectacular&lt;br/&gt;geologic formations exposed in West Virginia will be
presented to students both virtually and in person, with the broad goal of
training the next generation of geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 'big
bang of eukaryotic evolution' across the Mesoproterozoic-Neoproterozoic
transition, and the subsequent proliferation of animals across the Ediacaran-
Cambrian transition, mark two of the most critical biological transformations in
Earth history. Intriguingly, both of these evolutionary events are associated
with intense periods of global mountain-building, which may have delivered
nutrients and changed the redox balance of the ocean-atmosphere system. To test
the linkages between global tectonics, ocean oxygenation, and biological
innovation, this project will measure the isotopic composition of lithium (Li)
and uranium (U) in marine carbonate successions from Siberia that span each of
these critical transitions in Earth history. Li isotopes are a sensitive
barometer for the silicate weathering system, and U isotopes are a powerful new
tool for ocean redox quantification. Pairing these isotopes with
sedimentological and paleontological data from fossil-rich successions in
Siberia promises to provide new insights into the environmental conditions that
accompanied early eukaryotic and animal evolution on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.