* 2020415
* Increasing Student Retention in Chemical Engineering with Interactive Self-Study Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* John Falconer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 307,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student retention
in undergraduate chemical engineering degree programs. Retention can be
increased by helping students improve their performance in science, mathematics,
and engineering courses. Students encounter difficulties in courses when they
fall behind, are not properly prepared in pre-requisite courses, or have
forgotten concepts from previous courses. This project will create a set of
online, interactive self-study modules for three chemical engineering courses,
with thirty modules created for each course. Each module will take approximately
one hour for students to complete. These modules will be based on approaches
that have been effective in helping students learn, including self-testing,
introductory screencasts, interactive computer simulations, interactive tutorial
simulations that lead students through a step-by step procedure, and example
problems with student solutions. Modules will be freely available online through
the www.LearnChemE.com site, maintained by the University of Colorado, Boulder.
As a result, they have the potential to impact thousands of students. Although
the project focuses on chemical engineering students, many modules will be
useful for students in other engineering majors including mechanical, civil,
aeronautical, and environmental engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to increase student retention in undergraduate chemical
engineering programs by improving student performance. Modular resources can
help students understand key concepts and support active learning approaches
that enhance student learning. These modules will be used either as part of a
flipped classroom approach or as a resource that students use on their own. They
will also be used to increase retention in in second-chance courses, which are
intensive three-weeks courses offered, just after the end of the semester, to
students who did not pass the course that semester. The module structure
includes: (i) an overview describing the goals of the module and pre-requisites;
(ii) formative assessment using conceptual questions and problems; (iii) short
(3-6 minute) introductory screencasts with embedded questions; (iv) lists of
important equations; (v) interactive simulations in which students are asked to
predict system behavior; (vi) an interactive quiz-yourself simulation that asks
students for input on a complex problem solution; (vii) example problems with
screencast solutions; (viii) concept tests for summative assessment; and (ix) a
summary with problem answers and a list of what students should be able to do
after completing the module. The impact of the modules will be assessed by
evaluating studentsâ€™ performance on course exams after the modules are made
available and comparing the results with students who did not have access to the
modules. Modules will be disseminated through an existing online repository and
the results of the project will be shared with engineering faculty through
engineering education conferences and journals. This project is supported by the
NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.