* 2020788
* Addressing the Challenge of Authentic Inquiry at Scale: Probing and Supporting Teaching Assistants’ Implementation of a Model-Based-Inquiry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Molly Bolger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,213.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping students better
understand the nature of scientific research. Providing opportunities for
students to participate in scientific research increases their chances of
remaining on a STEM career path, especially for students from groups that are
not yet equitably represented in STEM. However, many students do not find
research opportunities on their own, suggesting that curricular reform is needed
to bring research experiences to all students. This project builds on Authentic
Inquiry through Modeling (AIM-Bio), a laboratory curriculum that provides
students with opportunities to ask scientific questions and to develop their own
experiments to test their questions. AIM-Bio has documented benefits for
students, including increases in their ownership of their work, their identity
as scientists, and their skills and knowledge about how science works. The
project team seeks to bring the AIM-Bio curriculum to more than 1,700 students
per year at the University of Arizona, a Hispanic Serving Institution. Meeting
this challenge will require preparing the undergraduate and graduate students
who serve as teaching assistants (TAs) for AIM-Bio laboratories, and who will
thus be the principal instructors for AIM-Bio. The project plans to develop a
training program that will prepare the TAs to mentor students in scientific
inquiry, the open-ended process of asking and answering science-based questions.
The project also intends study the alignment between TAs’ intentions about
teaching and their actual interactions with students in the laboratory. By
including a focus on the rationale behind TAs’ teaching decisions and actions,
this project will provide novel insights to guide efforts to train TAs as
teaching professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through their personal
interactions with students in laboratory sections, TAs hold an essential role in
large-scale implementation of authentic-inquiry curricula. Prior research
suggests that TAs may initially struggle with the open nature of an inquiry
curriculum, often preferring to use forms of direct instruction consistent with
more traditional views of teaching. To develop training strategies that will
support the TAs’ ability to enact authentic-inquiry instruction, it is critical
to understand TAs’ perspectives about teaching challenges. To this end, the
project aims to: 1) Develop a professional development curriculum to support TAs
in course-based authentic inquiry instruction, and 2) Build a model to explain
the relationship between TA intentions and actions when teaching a course-based
authentic inquiry curriculum. Research methods will include stimulated recall
interviews, which will ask TAs to reflect on episodes of their own teaching. The
collected information will be analyzed to identify the relationships between TAs
intentions for implementing curricular activities and the actions they take to
interact with students during those activities. In addition to the interviews,
recordings of TAs in the laboratory will be investigated using a unique
analytical framework that captures the process of mentoring students in the
scientific practice of modeling. Combined analysis of interviews and classroom
mentoring will allow the project team to gain a holistic view of TAs'
implementation of the AIM-Bio curriculum. Finally, to shed light on the
potential consequences of TAs intentions and actions, the project team will
compare student outcomes between TAs with different teaching approaches. This
project is funded by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.