* 2020095
* AccelNet: 3D Concrete Printing Network (3DConcrete) - Accelerating Progress in Concrete Additive Manufacturing
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Narayanan Neithalath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

Concrete is the most widely used construction material. 3D printed concrete has
the potential to significantly enhance the speed, safety, efficiency,
performance, and sustainability of concrete construction to meet the worldâ€™s
future construction challenges. This AccelNet project (3DConcrete) fosters
global interconnections and international consensus on 3D printed concrete best
practices, materials and design standardization and engages researchers in an
"innovation ecosystem" to facilitate technology transfer. 3DConcrete
strategically links key networks around the globe to synergistically meet key
research challenges. The network of networks (NON) provides a mechanism for
sharing knowledge, networking, and educating the next generation of
professionals. The NON will span 6 continents and 13 countries, with mentorship
activities that also connect colleagues in Asia, Europe, the Middle East,
Australia, and the Americas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3DConcrete will spur global
advances in the automation and digitization of 3D printed concrete and, through
industry participation, facilitate knowledge transfer and the implementation of
key advances. The NON integrates research and practice networks with
complementary expertise to address major scientific and technological challenges
in materials and structural design, digital construction and codification and
standardization. The broad collaborations will enable information synthesis and
exchange across networks and expand capabilities beyond the purview of any
individual network. 3DConcrete will provide valuable opportunities to students
and early-career researchers to further their knowledge and to become leaders in
this emerging field. Networking events, workshops, webinars, and exchange
programs will develop and nurture a new generation of diverse and globally
competitive researchers and workforce in 3D printed
concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this project is provided by the
Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.