* 2020449
* Doctoral dissertation research: Examining the effects of forest ecology on primate nutrition and social organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Herbert Covert, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 14,007.00

Primates depend heavily on plants resources for food in subtropical and tropical
forests. However, the way in which overall forest structure and function is
related to primate ecology and behavior is not fully understood. Tree species
differ in their traits, some of which affect plant growth and survival (e.g.,
leaf mass), while others (e.g., fruit sugars) negative or positively affect
primates. A "trait landscape" results from tree species' spatial distributions
and traits, including phenological activity (e.g., flowering). This doctoral
dissertation project examines how the constellation of plant traits in forests
that primates inhabit affect primate diet, nutrition, and mating patterns such
as monogamy. This project contributes to professional development and STEM
education of undergraduates and assistants from local communities. International
collaborators, including students and assistants, will obtain hands-on training
in canopy access techniques, drone remote sensing, and programming using Python.
The project will also support K-12 curriculum development and primate
conservation in the study region.

The goal of this project is to identify important ecological correlates of
primate diet and monogamous mating system, by carefully considering and
incorporating the bottom-up roles of plant traits and the spatiotemporal details
of forest ecology and composition. Specifically, the project will examine the
bottom-up effects of a tree communityâ€™s spatiotemporal distribution of
functional and trophic effect traits on the nutritional ecology and mating
pattern of Azara's owl monkey (Aotus azarae azarae). The researchers will (1)
consider the owl monkeys' diet and nutritional ecology in a forest ecology
context by considering the functional ecology/trait space of the tree community,
and juxtapose their findings with those of traditional nutritional ecology
analyses, and (2) assess how and why functional and trophic effect traits are
equally distributed over space and time in gallery forests, with pair-living and
a monogamous mating system as corollaries. The researchers will collect
standardized plant samples and analyze these for functional traits, nutrients,
and plant secondary compounds. They will furthermore assess the spatiotemporal
details of species distribution and phenology through drone remote sensing, and
statistically analyze spatial, nutritional, and community ecology parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.