* 2020785
* Spatial Skills and their Relationship to Creativity and Innovation in Undergraduate Engineering Design
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sheryl Sorby, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 487,391.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
innovation. It will do so by exploring how spatial thinking skills contribute to
the success of engineering designs. The design of technological solutions that
enable human society to adapt and thrive is a critical aspect of engineering
practice. To prepare engineering students for success as professional engineers,
undergraduate engineering education must help them become proficient at design,
which requires the ability to think creatively and flexibly about optimal
solutions to problems. This project team will conduct novel and potentially
transformative research to investigate the interactions between spatial skills
and design abilities among freshmen and seniors at the University of Cincinnati.
This research will examine how well-developed spatial skills may contribute to
the use of a holistic design approach that produces better solutions to design
problems. The team will also conduct exploratory research to examine the
experiences and interactions of students with weaker and stronger visualization
skill levels in a team-based engineering design assignment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize well-established procedures for
characterizing the design process employed by students. Spatial skills will be
measured using existing, reliable tests of spatial cognition, including mental
rotation tests. Solutions to open-ended engineering problems will be judged on
quality and creativity using established rubrics. The project team will also
examine the artifacts produced by students who complete assigned design tasks. A
mixed methods approach will be employed to answer three research questions: 1)
What is the difference (if any) between the design processes enacted by students
with high spatial visualizing skills versus low skills? Are these differences
the same for first-year students as they are for seniors? 2) What is the
relationship between the overall quality of the design artifacts produced and
spatial skills? How is the creativity of the design solution related to spatial
skills? and 3) What is the difference between the design experiences of low
visualizers compared to high visualizers? How do these experiences change when
spatial skill levels of teammates differ? The project has the potential to fill
a significant gap in understanding about how spatial thinking skills contribute
to engineering design success. This research will lay the foundation for future
work to develop educational interventions to improve design outcomes for
undergraduate engineering students. Since women are more likely to have less
developed spatial skills, the results from this project may be particularly
relevant for the design experiences of engineering students who are women. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.