* 2020221
* An Integrative Approach for Teaching and Learning About Biological Evolution Through the Human Maladies of Addiction, Autoimmune Disease, Sleep Disorders, and Cancer
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Peter White, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,847.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
biological sciences education. To do so, it will produce a set of interactive
instructional materials focused on the relevance of biological evolution in
human health. Many students are introduced to biological evolution in an
introductory biology course, where the topic usually receives little time in the
curriculum and is presented in isolation from other content. This instruction is
also typically limited to the broad concepts of natural selection and
adaptation, with little connection to the molecular and/or cellular events
involved in evolutionary processes. As a result, many students do not acquire a
solid foundation in basic evolutionary concepts or understand how evolution is
scientifically applicable to human biology. This project provides an avenue
through which biological evolution can be taught and learned through the lens of
medically relevant examples. This project will build, pilot, and disseminate
curricular materials that clarify the evolutionary underpinnings of exemplar
human diseases and health conditions for both beginning and advances biology
students. It is anticipated that the project will provide new knowledge about
teaching and learning about biological evolution and produce a set of
instructional materials and teacher guides that can be used in a broad spectrum
of courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop and implement four
portfolios of teaching materials that will teach evolution by focusing on four
pervasive human maladies: addiction, autoimmune disease, sleep disorders, and
cancer. Each of these maladies will be used as a platform for incorporating
human health-related examples into undergraduate education in way that
integrates natural selection across different biological levels, from the
molecular and cellular to organ systems and higher. In addition, each malady
will be explored from historical and sociocultural perspectives, including the
socioeconomic factors involved. This structure affords great flexibility in
potential uses of the portfolios. For example, an instructor could use the
genetics modules across all four maladies, or work through a single malady from
cell biology, to genetics, to ecology and sociological concepts. The project
also intends to characterize how students interact with the teaching materials
and how this interaction impacts their understanding of evolution. Specifically,
the project will address the following research questions: 1) How do the
portfolios of teaching materials impact student thinking about human evolution
from molecular genetics to macro scale processes? 2) How do the portfolios of
teaching materials impact student thinking on the nature of disease? and 3) How
do the portfolios of teaching materials impact student thinking on the
crosscutting and interdisciplinary nature of evolution? The project will
primarily use qualitative research methods to characterize how students interact
with the materials, how the materials impact student thinking, and student
perception of learning. This project is supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program,
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.