* 2020588
* Collaborative Research: Propagation, Evolution and Rotation in Linear Storms (PERiLS)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Parker, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 459,352.00

The PERiLS (Propagation, Evolution and Rotation in Linear Storms) project will
bring together NSF and NOAA scientists to study severe weather in the
Southeastern U.S. In the Southeastern U.S., severe weather is frequently
produced by squall lines, also known as quasi-linear convective systems
(“QLCSs”). QLCSs are responsible for approximately a quarter of all tornadoes in
the U.S. and the majority of QLCS tornadoes occur in the Southeastern U.S. QLCS-
spawned tornadoes pose a significant threat to lives and property, but
forecasting QLCS tornado events continues to pose significant challenges, even
more so than forecasting supercell tornadoes. The small-scale processes and
precise environments leading to these hazards are not well observed by the
current operational weather observing network and there is a lack of
understanding of QLCS tornadogenesis processes. Complicating this further,
coarse data and forecast analyses suggest large areas along QLCSs may be
favorable for tornadogenesis (tornado formation), but tornadoes tend to occur
only within a small fraction of that area. While many field campaigns have
focused on a better understanding of supercell tornadogenesis (especially in the
Great Plains), no campaigns have focused specifically on collecting data to
understand QLCS tornadogenesis. Starting in 2021, PERiLS will be the first such
project, and will deploy an extensive network of cuttingedge observing systems
to the Southeastern U.S. to gather data to help researchers better understand
how tornadoes form in QLCSs, what are the precursors for tornadoes, and what
storm processes and characteristics can be used to differentiate storms that
will produce severe winds from those that will produce
tornadoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are critical gaps in our knowledge
concerning how QLCS tornadoes form, which must be addressed before forecast
skill can be improved. QLCS tornadoes often form within mesovortices, but most
mesovortices do not produce tornadoes. Environments with “high-shear” and “low-
CAPE” are prevalent in the SE U.S.; storms that form in these environments
account for a substantial fraction of severe wind and tornado reports in the
region. How this environment specifically supports QLCS tornadogenesis is
unknown. Moreover, the characteristics of the temporal and spatial variability,
of both the storm and the environment, has yet to be well quantified. While
there have been idealized numerical modeling studies and climatologies based on
operational data of QLCS tornadoes, there is a dearth of the fine-scale
observations that are necessary to characterize storm and sub-storm scale
processes and the interaction of storm features with the rapidly-evolving near-
storm environment. The PERiLS field campaign will obtain observations needed to
address the following interrelated objectives: (1) Identify the mechanisms for
low-level mesovortex formation; 2) Identify the characteristics and mechanisms
that distinguish tornadic from non-tornadic QLCS mesovortices; 3) Identify the
environmental variability and storm-environment interactions that are associated
with QLCS mesovortex and tornado formation; and 4) Characterize the roles of
cold frontal processes vs. system-generated cold pools in the evolution of
strongly-forced QLCSs. This unprecedented data set will facilitate an
understanding of the interplay between environmental and within-storm processes
that contribute to QLCS tornadogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.