* 2020195
* Designing and Evaluating Organic Chemistry Curricular Resources for Green and Sustainable Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Melanie Cooper, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 296,688.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
organic chemistry education. Specifically, it will engage organic chemistry
students in learning about green and sustainable chemistry. The goal of green
and sustainable chemistry is to produce chemical products in ways that reduce or
eliminate hazardous chemicals at all stages, from product production to product
disposal. Chemical industries, as well as governmental and other organizations,
are increasingly emphasizing the need for green and sustainable chemistry
approaches. As a result, learning about green and sustainable chemistry is
critical for undergraduate chemistry education. Funded as an Engaged Student
Learning Level 1 project, this project will design and test case studies and
project-based laboratory activities that build students’ knowledge and skills in
green and sustainable chemistry. In the case studies, the students will be asked
to explain the underlying chemistry of a real-world issue, such as the
development of plastic materials that degrade more easily in the environment.
They will use the chemistry to guide explorations of related sustainability
issues and design potential solutions. In the laboratory activities, students
will work as teams to plan and carry out investigations, such as designing the
synthesis of a product using environmentally safe or sustainable source
materials. Each team member will investigate a different synthetic route, and
the team will then evaluate their pooled findings to identify the approach that
best meets green and sustainable chemistry criteria. The project is expected to
produce a set of case studies and project-based laboratories that incorporate
green and sustainable chemistry principles and that have verified positive
effects on student learning in organic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
design-based research approach, the project will design, refine, and evaluate
curricular materials, including laboratory projects and case studies, that
incorporate green and sustainable chemistry. Throughout the iterative cycles of
the design-based process, the alignment, effectiveness, and revision of the
materials will be evaluated through pilot testing and interviews with students.
Rubrics will be developed to characterize the levels of sophistication achieved
by students in response to assessment prompts developed concurrently with the
laboratory projects and case studies. These curricular materials, assessments,
rubrics, the associated findings, and a set of theory-based design principles
will be provided to the chemistry community. It is expected that these resources
will be used or adapted by educators and curriculum designers, or as guides to
produce new ones, thus potentially impacting a variety of institutional contexts
and student populations. In this way, this project aims to promote further
research on students’ understanding of green chemistry. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.