* 2020555
* Migrant worldviews and emergent ecological knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Carter Hunt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 283,344.00

Socio-cultural dynamics within and between groups influence human thoughts,
values, conflicts, and behaviors towards the environment and affect
anthropogenic change. Environmental anthropology has demonstrated the importance
of local knowledge of ecological processes to sustainable management practices,
while cognitive anthropology has provided important insights into the nature,
organization, and expression of culture. This proposal brings these two
theoretical perspectives together to address the cultural dynamics that
influence how humans relate to new environments, and in turn, how new
environments influence emergent culture. The project will further build research
infrastructure and train U.S. graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this mixed-method, multi-site study is to determine how the in-
migration of diverse worldviews into a new environmental setting relates to
conservation efforts and conflicts around scarce resources. Ethnographic methods
will capture individuals' views of local socio-cultural dynamics in the study
context, while cultural consensus analyses will permit quantitative comparison
among and between residents based on cultural group, livelihood, and residential
community. This mixed method approach ensures broader contributions to
anthropological theories explaining dynamic cultural influences on human
relationships to the environment in an increasingly mobile, interconnected, and
multi-cultural global society. It responds to specific calls for more
quantitative environmental anthropology needed to influence natural resource
policies, and it also addresses the influence of migration and cultural conflict
on anthropogenic environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.