* 2020312
* AI Institute: Planning: From Biological Intelligence to Human Intelligence to Artificial General Intelligence (B2A)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Konrad Kording, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is driving considerable parts of the US economy,
influencing almost every industrial and scientific sector. Yet, the
"intelligence" of these systems still cannot match the flexibility and breadth
of even simple biological systems. The objective of this project is to develop a
revolutionary new class of AI by focusing on four insights from the biological
intelligence (BI) of animals that, unlike current AI agents, (1) do not start as
blank slates (2) do not forget when they learn new things (3) have curiosity,
and (4) interpret the world in terms of cause and effect. This project brings
together outstanding scientists from a wide variety of disciplines and diverse
backgrounds to tackle this problem. Through planning meetings and collaborative
exercises, the team will generate preliminary data, and preparatory work for a
future center focused on reframing the fundamental question of "intelligence."
Outreach efforts will engage many diverse participants through large-scale
online teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the founding of AI, Alan Turing
proposed a test to determine when an AI behaves like a BI, and specifically
human intelligence (HI). This test set the stage for the following 70 years of
AI development. It has largely been replaced by narrow competitions aimed at
imitating humans at specific tasks, such as playing certain games, identifying
objects, or translating languages. But neither the Turing test nor today’s AI
competitions utilize modern conceptualizations of what it means to be
intelligent. It has become clear that intelligence evolved to incorporate
several complex capabilities, which are critically missing from today’s AI: (1)
preprogramming biases and baseline behaviors, (2) continually leveraging of many
previous experiences to improve decision making in newly encountered tasks, (3)
actively seeking out information that is useful for future decisions even if
these differ from past decisions, and, finally, (4) constructing causal models
relevant to decisions and communicating these models. This project brings
together a unique group that truly understands both AI and BI/HI to address this
gap. This group aims to define what is missing in AI relative to BI/HI, and to
determine which research paths can enhance future approaches. In year one, the
project will develop a test to measure a specific aspect of intelligence found
in animals, but not current AI. This test will be sufficiently simple that it
can be performed by several different biological taxa, humans, as well as AI. In
year two, the participants will conduct pilot experiments to quantify current
levels of performance on these tests and distill insights from BI/HI for AI. The
resulting benchmarks will provide explicit and quantitative milestones for the
eventual institute, whose goal will be to develop AI that matches HI on the new
tests of intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.