* 2020664
* Collaborative Research: Role of Endothelial Cell Activation in Hypoxia Tolerance of an Elite Diver, the Weddell Seal
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Jose Pablo Vazquez-Medina, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,233.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part I: Non-technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;The Weddell seal is an iconic Antarctic species and a superb diver,
swimming down to 2,000 feet and staying underwater for up to 45 minutes.
However, as for any mammal, the low oxygen concentrations in the blood during
diving and the recovery once back at the surface are challenges that need to be
overcome making their diving ability something unique that has fascinated
scientists for decades. This research project will evaluate the underlying
processes in Weddell seal’s physiology that protects this species from the
consequences of diving. The work will combine laboratory experiments where cells
that line the blood vessels will be exposed to conditions of low oxygen, similar
to those that will be measured in diving seals in Antarctica. The investigarors
will test a new idea that several short-term dives, performed before a long
dive, allows seals to condition themselves. Measurements on the chemical
compounds released to the blood during dives, combined with experiments on the
genes that regulate them will provide clues on the biochemical pathways that
help the seals tolerate these extreme conditions. The project allows for
documentation of individual seal dives and provisioning of such information to
the broader science community that seeks to study these seals, educating
graduate and undergraduate students and a post-doctoral researcher and producing
a science-outreach comic book for middle-school students to illustrate the
project's science activities, goals and outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:
Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The Weddell seal is a champion diver with high
natural tolerance for low blood oxygen concentration (hypoxemia) and inadequate
blood supply (ischemia). The processes unique to this species protects their
tissues from inflammation and oxidative stress observed in other mammalian
tissues exposed to such physiological conditions. This project aims to
understand the signatures of the processes that protect seals from inflammation
and oxidant stress, using molecular, cellular and metabolic tools. Repetitive
short dives before long ones are hypothesized to precondition seal tissues and
activate the protective processes. The new aspect of this work is the study of
endothelial cells, which sense changes in oxygen and blood flow, providing a
link between breath-holding and cellular function. The approach is one of
laboratory experiments combined with 2-years of field work in an ice camp off
McMurdo Station in Antarctica. The study is structured by three main objectives:
1) laboratory experiments with arterial endothelial cells exposed to changes in
oxygen and flow to identify molecular pathways responsible for tolerance of
hypoxia and ischemia using several physiological, biochemical and genomic tools
including CRSPR/Cas9 knochout and knockdown approaches. 2) Metabolomic analyses
of blood metabolites produced by seals during long dives. And 3) Metabolomic and
genomic determinations of seal physiology during short dives hypothesized to
pre-condition tolerance responses. In the field, blood samples will be taken
after seals dive in an isolated ice hole and its diving performance recorded. It
is expected that the blood will contain metabolites that can be related to
molecular pathways identified in lab experiments. Expert collaborators will
provide field support, with the ice camp, dive hole for the seals, and telemetry
associated with the seals’ dives. The project builds upon previous NSF-funded
projects where the seal genome and cellular resources were produced.
Undergraduate researchers will be recruited from institutional programs with a
track record of attracting underrepresented minorities and a minority-serving
institution. To further increase polar literacy training and educational
impacts, the field team will include a blog where field experiences are shared
and comic book preparation with an artist designed for K-12 students and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.