* 2020016
* I-Corps:  Polymer-free durable carbon nanotube (CNT) film membrane
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Dan Freeman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
investigate applications of polymer-free carbon nanotube (CNT) membrane filters.
Membranes currently in commercial use are predominantly made of polymer
materials but suffer frequently from membrane clogging and surface fouling. The
membrane fouling problem is further exacerbated in certain bioprocessing
applications. Polymer-free CNT sheet membranes are strong and chemically robust
even at extreme temperatures. They resist surface fouling and are uniquely
suited for bioprocessing applications such as removing bacteria and viruses from
solutions for sterilization; and harvesting cells, vaccines and monoclonal
antibodies. Because of these unique properties, polymer-free CNT sheet membranes
have the potential to greatly accelerate vaccine development and drastically
lower the cost of biopharmaceutical production, making them more available,
accessible, and affordable for patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is to explore the translation of polymer-free membranes. Polymer
membranes widely in use today suffer from membrane surface fouling, polymer
degradation and poor resistance to organic solvents, chemicals and elevated
temperature. Although CNT has long been recognized as well suited for this
application due to its chemical stability, its hydrophobic nature has hindered
efforts to make CNT membrane filters without the use of polymer binders.
Available CNT/polymer composite membrane filters do not meet the stringent
application requirements, i.e., high flux rate, chemical stability, mechanical
stability, and fouling resistance. This technology provides an efficient
purification method to render highly uniform CNTs with clean nanotube structure.
Such purification is critical for subsequent processes to densify and fortify
CNT sheet membranes to produce the desired pore size and mechanical strength in
the absence of any polymer binder. This project will investigate the technical
specifications of a polymer-free CNT membrane filter for
bioprocessing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.