* 2020709
* Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence for the Study of STEM Interventions
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Terrell Morton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts to significantly increase
the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority (URM)
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The Louis Stokes Centers of Excellence in
Broadening Participation in STEM (LSRCE) serve as exemplar sites in innovative
STEM education and broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louis
Stokes Regional Center of Excellence in STEM Broadening Participation Study of
STEM Interventions (LSRCE-SOSI), led by the University of Missouri-Columbia in
collaboration with the University of Michigan and the non-profit organization,
Understanding Interventions, will provide venues for training and development in
evidence-based research to practice in STEM broadening participation. The
project expands the reach of critical social-cognitive informed scholarship
focused on underrepresented minority students by integrating different
institution types (majority and minority-serving) into the existing communities
of scholars dedicated to transforming higher education. Project evaluation will
assess the project at the operational, programmatic, and research productivity
levels. New scholarship will be disseminated through Understanding Interventions
conferences, journals, other venues, and will be shared among higher education
institutions in the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.