* 2020112
* EAGER:A Novel Lab-on-a-Chip Concept for Characterization of Nanovesicles based on their Dielectric Properties
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Leyla Esfandiari, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,452.00

The objective of this project is to develop a rapid and accurate lab-on-a-chip
device for characterization of nano-size vesicles based on their unique and
intrinsic biophysical properties. The immediate focus of this project is to
characterize small cell-secreted vesicles (exosomes) which are classified as
circulating biomarkers associated with many types of disease including cancer,
diabetes, cardiovascular, infectious, and neurodegenerative diseases. This
research also has the potential to be expanded beyond exosomes to detect and
study other small membrane bound vesicles including viruses. Thus, this high
throughput detection tool can be utilized in a wide range of medical diagnosis
and biomedical research which could potentially reduce the cost of healthcare by
providing frequent, affordable, and early testing to patients. Furthermore this
multidisciplinary project crosses the traditional boundaries between
engineering, physics, and biomedical sciences which will provide students with a
unique educational experience during their academic training. The undergraduate
students will be trained and exposed to the field of micro- nanotechnology and
biomedical sciences by closely working with the graduate students and being
mentored by the principal investigator. The proposed project will also educate
public about the importance of the field of micro-nanotechnologies for medicine
through YouTube channel and “ThinkTV” program which will be broadcasting in
Southwest Ohio.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Exosomes are extracellular vesicles with
diameters of ~30-120 nm, released from many cell types into the extracellular
space. They are composed of a lipid bilayer membrane containing various
receptors and tetraspanin proteins. They also encapsulate nucleic acids,
proteins, and lipids in their lumen. Exosomes are promising biomarkers for
several reasons: 1) they are highly abundant in all bodily fluids and therefore
easily accessible; 2) their composition reflects their cellular origins and can
therefore serve as indicators of pathology; and 3) they are stable. Also, it has
been shown that exosomes secreted from different cellular origins, in particular
pathogenic exosomes, undergo compositional changes and could have additional
membrane receptors and/or elevated or suppressed levels of nucleic acids which
can be associated with their total electric charges and dipoles. However, use of
exosomes as biomarkers has been hampered by the lack of workable technologies to
reliably isolate and rigorously characterize their unique properties in a timely
manner. Although, some of the biophysical properties of exosomes such as size,
density and morphology have been characterized before, their dielectric property
which is associated with their unique compositional charges has not yet been
investigated. The proposed label-free lab-on-a-chip device will utilize
controllable electrokinetic forces across an array of borosilicate micropipettes
to rapidly entrap exosomes at the tip of the pipettes and characterize the
vesicles based on their unique dielectric properties by measuring their
impedance. The impedance measurement will be conducted across an array of
microelectrodes embedded in close proximity to the pipettes’ tips as an
alternative current (AC) is applied at a wide range of frequency spectrum (500
KHz to 50 MHz). The AC field at a wide frequency range will polarize the bound
and unbound charges associate with exosomes’ structure. The difference in
impedance measurements will be linked to exosomes’ unique dielectric properties
which includes their membrane capacitance and cytosolic conductance.
Additionally, the impedance of exosomes secreted from different cellular origins
and size distribution will be measured and their uniqueness in dielectric
properties will be investigated. This rapid and label-free electrokinetic device
can be further evolved as a diagnostic tool for initial non-invasive detection
of pathogenic exosomes while keeping their compositions intact for further
downstream analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.