* 2020597
* RAPID Proposal: Psychological distance and risk perception  related to the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Janet Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 197,402.00

This project assesses the American public’s perception of the 2019 novel
coronavirus outbreak that originated from Wuhan, China. The focus of this
research is to examine whether Americans’ perception of the root cause of the
outbreak, as well as whether they believe the outbreak is a distant issue for
most Americans, will determine their risk perception and emotional responses to
the outbreak. Further, this project examines the extent to which risk perception
and emotions influence whether Americans seek information about this issue,
share information with others, and support public health policies including
international cooperation. The proposed research advances risk communication
research, as well as enhances our understanding of strategic messaging design to
benefit public health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is an experimental survey to assess 1) how psychological distance
(especially spatial and social distance) and causal attribution influence the
U.S. public’s risk perception surrounding the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak;
2) how mental construal of the outbreak determines Americans’ emotional
responses to the outbreak; 3) how risk perception and emotional responses
influence risk communication behaviors and public support for U.S. involvement
in providing aid; and 4) whether cultural cognition moderates these
relationships. The research involves a survey, based on a nationally
representative sample of 1,000 participants, who are randomly assigned to four
experimental conditions. Psychological distance and causal attributions are the
main experimental factors with cultural cognition as the primary moderator,
while risk perception, emotional responses, communication behaviors, and support
for U.S. response effort are the outcome variables. The outbreak provides a
unique context to study public risk perception and risk communication behaviors.
Although only a small number cases have been confirmed in the U.S. at the
inception of the research, there is heightened media attention and the U.S.
government has issued a travel ban to all foreign nationals who have been to
mainland China. It is possible that social cognitive mechanisms, such as
psychological distance, causal attribution, and cultural cognition will
synergistically influence public risk perceptions and subsequent communication
behaviors and support for public health policies. Exploring these mechanisms and
their respective impacts can help us understand how to communicate better about
a major disease outbreak in an interconnected world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.