* 2020434
* Collaborative Research: Measuring leaping performance, evaluating its anatomical correlates, and reconsidering the importance of leaping in primate origins and early evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 158,544.00

Primate species display a diverse range of adaptations for moving through their
environments, and hypotheses about these locomotor patterns have long played a
central role in models of primate origins. In this project, the investigators
will use an integrative set of analytical techniques to (1) explore the
correlation of “leaping related” skeletal traits with leaping performance and
(2) assess the evolutionary implications of the resulting correlations in the
primate fossil record. This approach is designed to provide validated evidence
capable of supporting or refuting the hypothesis that selection for powerful
arboreal leaping characterized early primate locomotion. Utilizing research
facilities at the Duke Lemur Center and the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo (CMZ), this
study will contribute to the debate on the relevance of leaping behavior during
early primate evolution by providing quantitative biomechanical data on leaping
performance in 19 species of extant primates. The project will enhance K-12
education and outreach via the involvement of high school research interns at
Northeast Ohio Medical University and Duke University, as well as public
outreach efforts through the teaching of a short course on primate locomotor
biomechanics at a local STEM academy and public science events at the CMZ, Duke
University’s Darwin Day, and the North Carolina Museum of Natural Science. The
project will also provide research training and opportunities for
undergraduates, female graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differing hypotheses about ancestral primate locomotion
have long generated strong debate about the predominant selective pressures
acting during primate origins. Recent paleontological analyses have been
interpreted to suggest that selection for improved leaping was particularly
critical during early primate evolution. Hypotheses about the paleobiology of
ancestral primates are constrained by a limited understanding of the functional
significance of morphological variation in extinct lineages, as fossils
currently provide only imprecise clues about behavioral capacity. Robust
correlations between morphology and performance are needed to more precisely
infer locomotor transitions during primate origins from the anatomical
transformations revealed by fossils. Fortunately, leaping biomechanics are
relatively easy to characterize, making this a particularly tractable locomotor
behavior to study. This research is organized into two specific aims. (AIM 1)
Investigators will use high-speed video and force plates to study leaping
performance in a diverse sample of extant primates, squirrels, and treeshrews.
These data will be combined with morphometric datasets to test hypotheses
relating variation in leaping performance to variation in skeletal morphology.
(AIM 2) Armed with a deeper understanding of the functional morphology of
leaping performance, investigators will use phylogenetic comparative analyses
and evolutionary modeling to investigate the selective importance of leaping at
the origin of crown primates and during their subsequent evolution. This two-
pronged approach will ground interpretations of primate “leaping” morphology
with transformational functional specificity, permitting assessment of how
morphological changes in the primate fossil record quantitatively affected
leaping performance and informing long-standing debates on the ecological
context of primate origins. This project is jointly supported by the NSF SBE-
BCS-Biological Anthropology and BIO-IOS-Physiological Mechanisms and
Biomechanics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.