* 2020886
* Investigating how evolution of mate recognition traits drives speciation within an anuran ring species
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Lucinda Lawson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

What differentiates species? This question may sound straightforward, but for
many animals the answer can be complex. New species and subspecies of African
frogs are described every year, but in many cases there is not enough
information to understand how distinct and unique these newly-discovered
entities might be. This research aims to study the process of speciation in the
Hyperolius viridiflavus group of frogs consisting of a complex mix of
approximately 60 named species and subspecies with bright coloration spanning
sub-Saharan Africa. For more than 100 years, scientists have struggled to
understand how many distinct species are contained within the catch-all
identification of Hyperolius viridiflavus. Historically, species were largely
recognized by differences in coloring and geographic distribution; however, new
genomic data indicate that the physical cues we often use to distinguish species
may not always be correct and may even result in under- or over-counting the
true numbers of species. This project uses innovative genomic resources to
address a century-old puzzle and provide insights into the process of
speciation. The new clarification on the number and distribution of species
within this group will also aid conservation efforts, as policies aimed toward
protecting unique biodiversity are ineffective without an accurate estimate of
how many species exist and where they are located. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this study are to evaluate phylogenomics and the drivers of speciation
in the Hyperolius viridiflavus species complex. Genomic scale data across the
~60 known species and subspecies will allow accurate estimation of lineage
divergence, forming the basis for comparisons of trait variation across this
clade. Current lineages are recognized primary on coloration differences, call
variation, and geographic distributions, but relationships between these traits
and genetic divergence are unknown. Preliminary data show that this clade is
relatively young, and is primarily in lowland and potentially continuous areas,
yet has exceptional diversification compared to other co-distributed Hyperolius
species. The bright coloration of this largely nocturnal lineage may play a role
in true rapid speciation, or could overinflate scientific estimations of
divergence due to human biases. Results from this study will help inform how
diversification occurs without external barriers to gene flow while clarifying
which species-specific traits contribute to species recognition, influencing the
evolutionary fate of a rapidly diverging lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.