* 2020765
* A Randomized Control Study to Determine the Impact of Learning Communities that Link Three Undergraduate, First-Year Science and Mathematics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Thomas Kling, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 295,256.00

This project serves the national interest by working to improve the retention
and performance of students in science and engineering courses. Many
institutions place groups of students into the same course sections, thus
linking students together in learning communities. Such learning communities are
a component of many efforts to retain students in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Although the approach is often used,
thus far there have been very few rigorous scientific studies that probe the
effectiveness of these linked communities. This project intends to complete such
a study using randomized assignment of students to linked communities or to an
unlinked control group. To set up communities for the study, groups of students
enrolled in the same three introductory STEM courses, will be placed into small
seminar classes focused on contemporary issues such as biofuels or access to
clean water. The effects of being linked as a group into the same classes will
be determined by investigating the studentsâ€™ sense of belonging and their
motivation to continue their STEM coursework. The project hopes to identify
possible reasons why being in linked communities can improve student grades and
retention. The study will also examine which groups of students are most
impacted by participation in the linked community. Results of this analysis will
provide guidance about whether these communities are a viable approach to
increase diversity in STEM. In this way, this project has the potential to offer
a greater understanding about how and why these communities work, and thus offer
a possible path to replication at other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics placement scores and stratified random
sampling will be employed to place first-year, full-time STEM majors into one of
four groups: initial STEM coursework in a linked community; initial STEM
coursework unaffiliated with a community (i.e., controls); pre-STEM major
coursework in a linked community; and pre-STEM major coursework unaffiliated
with a community (i.e., controls). This sampling method will ensure that groups
represent the gender, income, racial, first-generation status, and
residential/commuter status diversity of the host institution. Cohorts will be
run for two years, accumulating at least 80 students in each experimental group
and at least 120 students in each control group. Hierarchical linear modeling
will be used to measure the effect of the learning communities on student grades
and retention. A repeated-measures ANCOVA will be used to compare the pre/post
responses to survey variables (i.e., sense of belonging, social capital, STEM
motivation, and communal perceptions of science). Covariates will include
relevant demographic variables and pre-existing markers of academic ability and
performance. A mediation analysis will be conducted to see if the psychological
variables measured by the survey (i.e., sense of belonging, social capital, STEM
motivation, and communal perceptions of science) mediate the relationships
between participation in the learning communities and grades and retention.
Finally, each of the analyses will also be conducted as group comparisons on key
demographic variables, including race, gender, commuter/residential status, and
first-generation status. In this way, the project will test not only whether the
learning communities affected student success overall, but also whether or not
they affected all groups of students equally. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.