* 2020295
* AI Institute: Planning: Physics of the Future
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Scott Dodelson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Physics applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) have led to some of the
most exciting recent breakthroughs, from astrophysics to regulatory genomics and
cellular imaging. Scientists at Carnegie-Mellon University (CMU) in Machine
Learning, Statistics, and other departments actively collaborate with colleagues
in the Department of Physics because of the opportunity for each field to spur
development in the other. This award will allow planning of a joint Physics/AI
Institute that will bring cutting edge methods from AI into a broad range of
physics areas, propagate successful methods from one field of Physics to
another, and facilitate back-transfer from the data-rich sub-fields of physics
to AI development. This planning phase focuses on areas where CMU scientists are
already leaders, with existing strong collaborations, and where rapid advances
are being made: astrophysics, subatomic physics, and biophysics. AI has obvious
benefits to society in general, so this project includes education, public
outreach and promotion of diversity, empowering a wide range of audiences to use
AI on a broad array of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applying AI will lead to
significant advances in the areas of dark energy and galaxy formation; new ways
of extracting information about the Higgs bosons and anomalies in gluon physics;
and enhanced understanding of biological networks and predictions for cancerous
tissues. Benefits in the other direction are clear as well: physics provides
complex use cases and profound problems that motivate AI researchers to advance
foundational AI. Planning activities include weekly interdisciplinary,
interactive seminars; a visitor program; topical conferences; planning
conferences; a graduate student summer program; postdoc mentoring; and an
extensive outreach program. Help in planning to scale up to the Institute level
will come from partners at universities, national laboratories, and
corporations, and by employing a consultant to survey and quantitatively assess
the success of different programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.