* 2020872
* EAGER: SaTC: Towards Accounting for the Human in Emotion Recognition Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Nazanin Andalibi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 239,054.00

Emotions are powerful, mediate human experiences with their surroundings, and
impact decision-making and attention online and off. Privacy and emotion are
related concepts; online and off, emotions are often deemed private. Sharing and
signaling one's emotions to other humans can be beneficial, but involves privacy
calculations and complex decision-making processes. Despite the deeply personal
nature of human emotion, artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms are being built
to recognize and infer emotions using data sources such as social media
behavior, streaming service use, voice, facial expressions, biometrics, and body
language in ways often unknown to users. Emotion recognition’s emerging market
is expected to grow to $3.8 billion by 2025. This project posits that emotion
recognition technologies can prioritize the privacy and preferences of the
humans they impact. This project takes steps toward addressing users' privacy
and other concerns by investigating people's attitudes towards emotion
recognition and how users and technologists conceive of this technology. This
project deepens intellectual conversations about emerging technologies' privacy
and safety; interactions between ethics and AI, data science, and research; and
social media design. Technologists, policy makers, and researchers in fields
such as computing, economics, and medicine can use this project’s resulting
framework to evaluate systems' potential implications. Furthermore, the
project’s topic provides an important context to challenge students to think
deeply about ethics, privacy, social responsibility, and technology in teaching
and research — crucial for generating a responsible and thoughtful next
generation of information and computing professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will focus on emotions and users' attitudes towards emotion recognition
technologies to contribute to our knowledge about socially and ethically
responsible use and treatment of data in algorithmic decision-making that
impacts personal lives. Using a human-centered lens, this work will contribute a
framework of guidelines within which emotion recognition technologies can be
evaluated for compatibility with people's values, needs, and concerns. The
research team will 1) conduct a series of critical analyses of artifacts,
including patents, to interrogate the ways technologists and academics
articulate emotion recognition technology's importance across application
domains, and its use-cases, visions, and implications (e.g., ethical, privacy,
personal, inter-personal, social); and 2) use interviews, vignettes, and focus
groups to examine social media users' attitudes towards emotion recognition and
its perceived impacts on their privacy and their lives, highlighting factors
contributing to a trustworthy or untrustworthy cyberspace that may utilize
emotion recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.