* 2020890
* GCR: Collaborative Research: The Convergent Impact of Marine Viruses, Minerals, and Microscale Physics on Phytoplankton Carbon Sequestration
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Daniel Whitt, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2025
* USD 277,717.00

A convergent team of experts in biology, chemistry, physics, engineering,
mathematics, and computational modeling examine how dynamic and coupled
phytoplankton-pathogen-particle-predator linkages coalesce to explain the
observed high spatial variability in the efficiency of the export of particulate
organic carbon (POC) to the deep ocean. They elucidate and quantify the linkages
between viruses and ballast minerals to increase understanding of carbon cycling
in the oceanic biological carbon pump and the impact of viruses within it. By
providing knowledge than can be used to improve the parameterization of carbon
export in Earth system models, the project will help reduce uncertainty in
regional marine biogeochemical projections, potentially improving marine
ecosystem and fisheries management on timescales from seasons to decades. The
project includes activities that provide teaching resources and hands-on
training to educators within a ‘Tools of Science’ program that provides a simple
and succinct way to communicate the process of scientific research to students
in a way that is useful to teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project couples
laboratory-based experiments on model host-virus-grazer systems with extensive
field based observational and manipulative studies on natural populations of
diatoms and coccolithophores, the two phytoplankton groups that account for most
of the estimated particulate organic matter flux to the deep ocean. Experiments
and measurements integrate diagnostic biological and chemical controls on
infection and particle coagulation theory with microscale physics and grazing to
quantify links to each hypothesized export mechanism under field-relevant
turbulent conditions. Cutting-edge engineering and analytical tools are used to
diagnose and track infection dynamics while characterizing and quantifying
particle aggregation and disaggregation, mineral dissolution, sinking dynamics,
grazing rates, and fecal pellet production at unprecedented resolution and under
well-defined, microscale physical regimes. Field campaigns elucidate the
relative efficiency of hypothesized mechanisms in stimulating POC export in
natural blooms, while providing bulk and size-resolved estimates of POC
flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.