* 2020728
* Collaborative Research: Coring Seymour Island (CSI) Antarctica: Evaluating Causes and Effects of the End Cretaceous Mass Extinction
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Brian Huber, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 22,707.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This 4-year project is evaluating evidence
of extinction patterns and depositional conditions from a high southern latitude
Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) outcrop section found on Seymore Island, in the
Western Antarctic Peninsula. The team is using sediment samples collected below
the weathering horizon to evaluate detailed sedimentary structures,
geochemistry, and microfossils in targeted stratigraphic intervals. The study
will help determine if the K-Pg mass extinction was a single or double phased
event and whether Seymour Island region in the geological past was a restricted,
suboxic marine environment or an open well-mixed shelf. The award includes an
integrated plan for student training at all levels, enhanced by a highlighted
partnership with a high school earth sciences teacher working in a school
serving underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is applying multiple techniques to address an
overarching research question for which recent studies are in disagreement: Is
the fossil evidence from a unique outcropping on Seymour Island, Antarctica
consistent with a single or double phased extinction? In a two-phased model, the
first extinction would affect primarily benthic organisms and would have
occurred ~150 kiloyears prior to a separate extinction at the K-Pg boundary.
However, this early extinction could plausibly be explained by an unrecognized
facies control that is obscured by surficial weathering. This team is using
microfossil evidence with detailed sedimentary petrology and geochemistry data
to evaluate if the fossil evidence from Seymour Island is consistent with a
single or double phased extinction process. The team is using detailed
sedimentary petrology and geochemistry methods to test for facies changes across
the K-PG interval that would explain the apparent early extinction. Samples of
core sedimentary foraminifera, siliceous microfossils, and calcareous
nannofossils are being evaluated to provide a high-resolution stratigraphic
resolution and to evaluate whether evidence for an early extinction is present.
Additionally, the team is using multiple geochemical methods to evaluate whether
there is evidence for intermittent anoxia or euxinia and/or physical restriction
of the Seymore region basin. Data from this analysis will indicate if this
region was a restricted, suboxic marine environment or an open well-mixed
shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.