* 2020842
* Thermal imaging with ultrafine spatial resolution in the scanning electron microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Chris Dames, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2023
* USD 416,558.00

From cell phones to laptops to the internet of things, the defining trend of
modern microelectronics is the relentless drive towards packing more processing
power in smaller areas. A corollary is that the heat dissipation per unit area
also increases exponentially, posing serious challenges in thermal management to
keep the devices from overheating. Some cutting-edge technologies exploit
nanoscale thermal phenomena such as heat-assisted magnetic recording and
resistive random access memory, which rely on precise heat generation and
dissipation at extraordinarily small length scales of ~10 nm and below. Clearly
the rational design of such advanced nanoscale devices requires measuring their
temperatures, yet direct experimental measurement of temperature at such small
length scales remains extraordinarily challenging. An ideal measurement
technique would have spatial resolution of 10 nm or less, operate without
physical contact to the sample, work on many materials, and use widely available
hardware. Developing such a measurement technique is the overarching vision of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on a preliminary proof-of-concept
study, the goal of this project is to develop a novel scanning electron
microscopy thermometry technique into a robust tool for temperature mapping. The
team focuses on the ubiquitous secondary electron signal, which is already the
standard for ultrahigh resolution (~1 - 10 nm) mapping of structure and
geometry. The proposal envisions three major thrusts: (i) Experimentally clarify
the underlying physics of how temperature affects the secondary electron signal.
(ii) Rigorously measure and understand the limiting resolutions of this
technique, in temperature, space, and time. (iii) Demonstrate the usefulness of
this new experimental tool for innovative studies of nanoscale thermal phenomena
as well as applications in device characterization. The intellectual merit of
this project is firstly in developing scanning electron microscopy thermometry
into a robust, practical tool for temperature mapping with ~10 nm spatial
resolution, using signals and hardware which are widely available. Another
contribution will be bringing concepts for rigorously quantifying spatial
resolution from optics into the thermal community, specifically the thermal
point spread function. Finally, the team will apply the tool to pursue the first
ever direct observations of ballistic phenomena such as temperature reversal and
localization via mapping their full temperature
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.