* 2020025
* I-Corps:  Malware Analysis to Generate Important Capabilities
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Dan Freeman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to defeat
cyber-adversaries. The proposed technology will use machine learning techniques
to automate and discover current unknown malware to provide reliable pre- and
post-breach intelligence. The goal for these products is to capable of
integration into any existing cybersecurity infrastructure. This technology may
be used to gather data from other products to make predictions about the threat
landscape. This project will explore the information needs regarding the
specific features embedded in the malware code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a large malware analysis platform
that performs static analysis of files to produce state-of-the-art malware
characterizations, including representing malware as graphs. These malware
detection and classification models have become extremely accurate, thanks to
vast amounts of data generated from malware datasets used in the development.
After analyzing thousands of different malware families in many ways, these deep
learning models have been trained to produce accurate and generalizable models
able to detect incoming threats in large organizations and reduce false
positives to help combat alert fatigue. This holistic view allows the user to
catch novel and heavily obfuscated threats that evade models trained on
traditional indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.