* 2020707
* Indigenous Calendar Knowledge, Research Protocols, and Visualization Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mark Palmer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 07/31/2023
* USD 315,108.00

This research examines the social, technical, and cultural processes of
integrating Indigenous scientific knowledge with digital media platforms. The
Otomi people of the central Mexican plateau have developed extensive
astronomical knowledge systems for calendrical timekeeping over thousands of
years based on observations of lunar, solar, and Venusian cycles. Efforts are
underway to collaborate with the Otomi people to digitize and preserve their
indigenous astronomical knowledge. This will enable Otomi knowledge-holders to
share their cosmological knowledge locally, regionally, and globally. However,
digital technologies like virtual reality environments and three-dimensional
imaging can also warp conceptions of space and time, creating distortions much
like a two-dimensional map distorts landmasses, challenging translational
processes. This project documents the intersection of knowledge systems as
community knowledge held through narratives, images, and intergenerational
exchange is translated into digital systems marked by computational
standardization and 3-d cameras. Researchers will analyze participatory design
processes as Indigenous ethno-scientists, digital media-makers, and traditional
knowledge-holders collaborate to create a prototype virtual reality
representation. The project will encourage Hispanic and Native American
studentsâ€™ interest in STEM careers and STS research, which is vital to the
American workforce, while also assessing the ways that virtual reality
technologies may contribute to Indigenous knowledge reclamations and cultural
sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing upon data collected through round
table discussions and participatory design sessions, and informed by Actor-
Network Theory, this research addresses four main questions: (1) Who are the
primary collaborators involved in translating Indigenous astronomical knowledge
and what materials will they use to create a novel form of Indigenous
technoscience? (2) Can immersive 3-D audio-visual technology accurately convey
the complex tenets of Indigenous epistemology? (3) What kinds of knowledge,
interface design, or data standardization will be needed to effectively
accomplish a best-case model for other Indigenous communities around the world?
(4) What kind of protocols and methodologies can enable a best-case practice for
ensuring that Indigenous communities and their knowledge are respected and not
exploited? Overall, this research investigates the processes needed to
standardize Indigenous calendar visualizations for public and community
presentation, with the guidance of Indigenous knowledge keepers and according to
the protocols of participating with Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.