* 2020465
* Diverse and Sustainable Resource Management in a Salvage Context
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lisa Lucero, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 322,988.00

This project will explore how a long term society sustainably farmed for
thousands of years without massive deforestation. Preliminary data show that the
area under consideration was occupied for over a millenium and that the
inhabitants interacted with the environment in such a way so as not to destroy
the resources upon which they reliedâ€”fertile soils, water, and a forest with
diverse flora and fauna. Results will provide strategies for more sustainable
resource management globally. This project is comprised of diverse researchers
including women and underrepresented minorities, as well as local foremen and
field assistants. Students will benefit through gaining research experience,
collecting dissertation data, participating in community engagement, and
authoring reports and articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring the
hypothesis that people practiced long-term diverse and sustainable practices
without deforesting the landscape the team can contribute to devising potential
agricultural strategies relevant today. Because the region is slated for
agricultural development, this archaeology program will collect as much
information as possible before it is plowed away. Analyses will be conducted to
assess the three test implications (long-term occupation, diverse subsistence
strategies, and use of forest resources) including artifact analyses, AMS C14
dating, settlement distribution, faunal remains, human remains, and micro- and
macro-botanicals. The research team will run three concurrent operations to
excavate 15 sites over multiple field seasons. Newly cleared areas will be
mapped using a drone and ground-checked. Personnel will conduct ceramic
analysis, osteological analysis and identification of faunal remains. The team
will evaluate maps and artifacts to assess agricultural practices, settlement
patterns, chronological distribution, interactions, and population size. The
project, by combining research and rescue archaeology, can serve as a model for
future endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.