* 2020194
* AI Institute: Planning: AI Institute for Rural Health, Wellness, and Resilience
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Katie Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,744.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) promises to improve our lives in many ways, but
most AI innovation is centered in coastal cities, far from the challenges of
rural America. This makes it difficult for AI technology hubs to study and
design for the distinct challenges and opportunities of rural America, where
over 20% of the U.S. population lives. For example, people in rural counties are
more likely to overdose on opioids, to be obese, or to smoke. The number of
infants who die before reaching 1 year of age is nearly 50% greater in rural
areas than in cities. Moreover, rural Americans face significant challenges with
access to the technology upon which AI depends, including internet, computers,
and smartphones. Unfortunately, there is a real danger that AI will not just
leave rural America behind but do significant harm: automation may replace 25%
of jobs in rural counties within the next decade, and many rural areas do not
have easy access to educational and vocational institutions to re-train for new
jobs. This project will plan an AI Institute hosted in the Midwest and committed
to creating Artificial Intelligence technologies that significantly improve
rural health, wellness, and resiliency. Solving major technical and societal
challenges and creating sustainable, ethical, socially accepted, and successful
applications of AI will require an interdisciplinary approach that tightly
integrates studies across many fields. This project will bring together experts
around five major technical pillars (Trustworthy AI, Interpretable AI, Human-
Centered AI, Ubiquitous AI, Ethical AI) and three major domains (Rural Health,
Rural Wellness, Rural Resiliency) in a series of workshops to build
collaborations across the Midwest that will lay the foundation for an Institute
proposal after two years. The workshops will also engage rural community members
to understand their needs and challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
begin to address the urgent need to study AI for improving health, wellness and
resiliency in rural communities, to address the unique technical challenges of
these applications, and to work to ensure that rural Americans share in the
benefits—and are not casualties—of the changes that AI is about to usher in. The
project will investigate new AI techniques that will improve the accuracy,
security, interpretability, and reliability of AI, which will benefit countless
applications beyond health. The project will also create education modules for
community partners who wish to engage in university research, form partnerships
that educate and inspire the greater community on challenges and opportunities
of AI to address pressing problems facing rural America, and developing new AI-
related academic partnerships across the Midwest. The workshops will engage
community members to not only help the project understand the needs of rural
citizens, but also to educate the public about AI applied to issues of health,
wellness, and resiliency, as well as to bring researchers into rural communities
to experience the challenges they face first-hand. Moreover, the project will
work towards building capacity in the form of an AI-educated workforce in the
Midwest, and investigating the ethical and societal impact of AI-driven
technologies to inform policymakers on how best to promote and regulate AI for
health, wellness, and resiliency in rural America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.