* 2020635
* AccelNet:GLASSNET: Networking Global to Local Analyses to Inform Sustainable Investments in Land and Water Resources
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Thomas Hertel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,999,991.00

Global efforts to address poverty reduction, food and energy security, clean
water, biodiversity, and climate change mitigation come with tradeoffs as well
as synergies. Decisions on policies, infrastructure, and investments made in one
place can have wide-spread consequences. Without the ability to link across
global and local scales, proposed solutions to the earth systemâ€™s grand
challenges could be infeasible, misleading, or have unintended consequences.
This AccelNet project, Global to Local Analysis of System Sustainability
(GLASSNET), will address barriers of incomplete, complex, or proprietary data
analysis by linking rapidly expanding sustainability science networks beyond the
customary, individual researcher-to-researcher basis. GLASSNET will deliver
transferable best practices for integration of models and data across spatial
scales, disciplines, and cultures to address community-recognized grand
challenges on a worldwide stage. GLASSNET links four U.S.-based global networks
and five counterpart networks in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland that share
common goals to build a multi-national bridge for intellectual partnership and
community-shared resources. Through testbed activities in China, Brazil, and the
Mediterranean region, GLASSNET will extend its global engagement and test its
effectiveness for local and regional decision making. More than two dozen
students, postdoctoral researchers, and early-career researchers, including
Native Americans, will be prepared to engage in and lead international
sustainability team science through novel training, mentoring, guided
networking, and exchanges across networks and nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GLASSNET network of networks will employ a GeoHub geospatial cyberplatform to
assemble and harmonize high-quality, spatially explicit, and multiscale land,
water, and ecosystem data that currently reside in fragmented form within
different disciplines, research communities, and countries. While local
circumstances require fine-scale analyses, market forces and government policies
drive global changes that compel macro-level analyses. Network integration will
begin with piloting common data frameworks. Modeling tools will be deployed for
deeper analysis to understand and quantify tradeoffs inherent in the equitable
and sustainable use of land and water resources. GLASSNET will tackle the
particularly challenging problem of downscaling outputs of economic models and
aggregating fine-scale economic and ecosystem results. By linking multiple
existing networks and engaging testbeds in key regions of the world, GLASSNET
will improve parameterization of existing models and incorporate new analytical
tools to innovatively represent institutional and biophysical constraints.
Evaluation of participant productivity across natural and social science
disciplines involved in this network of networks will generate novel insights
into the role of multi-teaming across the diverse participants in facilitating
research productivity and early career professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.