* 2020121
* EAGER: Doppler-free indirect rotational spectroscopy of complex interstellar radicals
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kyle Crabtree, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2023
* USD 164,171.00

Free radicals are an important component of the molecular inventory of the
interstellar gas, driving chemical reactions which build up molecular complexity
in space, but many interstellar radicals remain unidentified because of the lack
of accurate laboratory data. This exploratory project will develop a new
instrument to measure highly precise infrared spectra of radicals postulated to
be important in interstellar chemistry. This will allow derivation of pure
rotational frequencies of radicals with comparable accuracy to direct
submillimeter spectroscopy, enabling their detection by radio telescopes such as
the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). The project will train
a graduate student and an undergraduate student in methods of advanced
laboratory astrophysics, and it will conduct outreach centered around laser
technology to local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crabtree and his team
will add magnetic-field “Zeeman” modulation to mid-infrared Noise-Immune Cavity-
Enhanced Optical Heterodyne Spectroscopy (NICE-OHMS) performed in a positive
column direct-current plasma discharge cell. This will yield "Doppler-free",
sharp “Lamb dip” spectra, which, when combined with calibration by laser optical
frequency combs, will allow highly accurate and precise measurements of infrared
rovibrational transitions of radicals generated in the plasma. While NICE-OHMS
itself is well-established, the addition of Zeeman modulation for Doppler-free
spectroscopy of radicals is an innovation that carries significant technical
challenges. This project will develop this new capability at the proof-of-
concept level to demonstrate its suitability for submillimeter astronomical
observations, which require rotational rest frequencies of high-lying
transitions to be determined to better than 1 MHz. Following construction and
testing of equipment for Zeeman modulation, the v1 fundamental band of the
ethynyl radical, CCH, will be recorded and analyzed to validate the accuracy of
this method compared with direct submillimeter rotational spectroscopy.
Successful demonstration of this technique will provide a robust new method for
wideband indirect rotational spectroscopy of complex radicals in the laboratory,
thereby enabling their detection with ALMA and other submillimeter
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.