* 2020044
* Continued development and application of 40Ar/39Ar dating for archaeometric research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 254,405.00

The 40Ar/39Ar dating method has broad applicability in archeological and
paleoanthropological contexts, and is well established as a highly accurate and
precise dating tool that has contributed widely to the study of hominin and
primate evolution. With National Science Foundation support, the investigators
will initiate a three-year effort to maintain, operate and upgrade the 40Ar/39Ar
dating facilities at the Berkeley Geochronology Center (BGC) in Berkeley,
California. The research studies enabled by this grant are intrinsically
interdisciplinary and foster improved interaction between geological,
archaeological, and paleoanthropological scientists. In addition, the
archaeometric age data produced by BGC are frequently published in high-profile
journals that are covered by lay news media, hence receive broad public
dissemination in newspapers, magazines, radio, television, and increasingly, the
web. Finally, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, many of whom will
continue archaeometric research in the future, will receive direct training in
the use of the dating facilities, poised to represent the next generation of
40Ar/39Ar geochronologists. Many other graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows will receive archaeometric data in direct support of their field
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports planned equipment repairs and
upgrades that will ensure access by the Archaeometric community to a 40Ar/39Ar
dating laboratory exercising the best possible practices in this advanced and
powerful dating technique, in order to attain the highest possible levels of
precision, accuracy and throughput. The planned improvements to equipment and
technique will be in the areas of vacuum testing and development of gas
extraction systems, computer infrastructure and software development. This
funding will also help support a laboratory technician who engages in critical
tasks such as sample preparation, irradiation handling, and mass-spectrometer
operation. Finally, partial funding is provided for the PIs to liason from the
laboratory and in the field with the Archeaometric community in pursuit of
project research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.