* 2020174
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: Global Quantum Leap
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Steven Koester, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,671,545.00

Quantum computing and communication technologies have the potential to change
society in profound ways by enabling solutions to computational problems
inaccessible using conventional paradigms. However, the technical challenges are
daunting. Global Quantum Leap (GQL) establishes an international network of
networks on the shared vision that the quantum revolution will require
fundamental changes in nano-manufacturing infrastructure, and that developing
this infrastructure will require worldwide collaboration and coordination. GQL
will link nano-manufacturing and quantum networks to advance the scientific
knowledge required to realize manufacturable quantum technologies. This AccelNet
project will create strategic alliances between the National Nano Coordinated
Infrastructure (NNCI) and international networks working on quantum information
sciences. Initial partner networks include Nanoplatform Japan, Matter and Light
for Quantum Computing (ML4Q, a Cluster of Excellence supported by the German
Research Foundation), European OpenSuperQ, and the Chicago Quantum Exchange. By
linking these networks, GQL will lay the foundation to develop a globally-aware
workforce that can shape future innovations in quantum technology and will
fundamentally influence the overall trajectory for quantum manufacturing
development. It will also prepare a new generation of technical leaders to take
on highly complex projects requiring international coordination. Such outreach
will ensure that GQL has extensive societal impact, by exposing the widest range
of communities to the capabilities and potential of quantum technology.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The GQL network partnerships will bridge fundamental
knowledge gaps between the nanomanufacturing and quantum information
communities, including fundamental process, materials, and integration
challenges. GQL will engage with domestic and international partners toward
three main goals: (1) to create linkages between the nanofabrication and quantum
information science communities on a global scale, (2) to facilitate the
creation of a technology roadmap for emerging quantum computing systems, and (3)
to equip students, postdoctoral scholars, and early-career researchers with
skills to collaborate with international, interdisciplinary teams that will
tackle challenges related to quantum computing systems. A series of meetings,
workshops, structured and individual research exchanges, educational bootcamps,
and industry interactions will be designed to bridge the existing knowledge
gaps. Students, postdoctoral scholars, and faculty will also develop increased
communication and teamwork skills and learn effective strategies for
intercultural interactions on large-scale technical projects. The knowledge
advances of quantum manufacturing issues will have broad applications. The
learning developed in GQL will be transferred to the NNCI network in the form of
new equipment and processes that can be utilized by the academic and industrial
quantum community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.