* 2020731
* Develop innovative stable RNA-based anti-fungal reagents to control plant fungal diseases
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hailing Jin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Fungi can cause devastating diseases in plants and animals, posing an enormous
threat to global food security and human health. In humans, fungal diseases are
estimated to kill 1.5 million people every year. In plants, fungal pathogens
cause serious diseases on most pre- and post-harvesting crops and causes
billions of dollars loss worldwide every year. Despite these threats, current
strategies for fighting fungal disease are limited to chemical control. In
agriculture, fungicides can leave harmful residues in the environment. Further,
fungi have developed resistant strains that can survive nearly all major classes
of antifungal drugs and fungicides. In order to protect global food security,
human health, and the environment it is critical to develop new technologies for
combating fungal disease. Small RNAs are short regulatory molecules that can
inhibit the expression of their target genes. This is called RNA interference.
Recently, the research team discovered that multiple fungal pathogens can
efficiently take up RNAs as a nutrient source from the environment. When fungi
absorb RNAs that interfere with the expression of critical fungal proteins,
their growth and virulence is severely inhibited. This finding allows them to
design specific RNA molecules that can target fungal virulence-related genes to
protect crops from fungal infection. These RNA-based antifungals can be sprayed
onto plant material where they confer fungal disease protection to the plant,
through a process called Spray-Induced Gene Silencing (SIGS). Unlike traditional
fungicides, these RNA-based antifungals are safe to ingest and do not leave
toxic residues in the soil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish
and depoly RNA-based strategies for plant-pathogen immunity. To do this, the
project will first address a significant hurdle limiting robust function: RNA
rapidly degrades in the environment, especially in the soil, where many plant
fungal pathogens originate. The current project aims to tackle this problem, and
to further develop RNA-based antifungal strategies. One goal is to design SIGS
RNAs capable of protecting plants from four aggressive pathogens. Concurrently,
in order to enhance the stability of SIGS RNAs, the PI will develop several
classes of RNA delivery vehicles, made of both organic and inorganic materials.
While preliminary data shows that these RNA delivery vehicles can enhance the
stability of RNAs on plant material, they are not sufficient in protecting RNA
in the soil. In order to develop effective RNA-based antifungals to control
soil-borne fungal pathogens, the PI will engineer beneficial soil microbes,
specifically one bacterium and one fungus, to continuously produce and secrete
antifungal RNAs into the soil. Overall, this project will develop the next
generation of RNA-based antifungals to combat plant fungal pathogens, which will
directly contribute to securing global food security. Further, once developed in
plants, these RNA-based antifungal strategies can be translated into human and
animal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.