* 2020039
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Characterizing efficiency and limitations of RNA regulators to achieve robust dynamic behaviors
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Elisa Franco, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 720,000.00

Advances in cell-based bioproduction (within engineered or synthetic cells)
promises to solve global challenges such as production of fuel, food, cosmetics,
and drugs in a sustainable manner. Scaling-up cellular bioproduction is however
limited by the burdens this can cause to the host cell. This research will
develop tunable, low-burden RNA molecules for control of gene expression of
useful molecules. Experiments will be supported by computational models, to
understand the dynamics of cellular burden and to optimize bioproduction
performance. This project, which is a collaboration between researchers at the
University of California-Los Angeles (US) and Imperial College London (UK), will
provide training and mentorship to several graduate and undergraduate students.
Results and methods will be shared with the scientific community via
publications, archival documents, and data repositories; the Principal
Investigators will also share their work within the World Economic Forum Expert
Network and the Engineering Biology Research Consortium. This research will be
integrated both in graduate courses and in the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Synthetic Biology summer course. Dr. Franco will deliver outreach talks at
underserved schools in Californiaâ€™s Inland Empire as well as at international
conferences supported by the IEEE Controls Systems Society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology has made it possible to repurpose cells
to operate as microscale factories, energy sources, and even computers. However,
the introduction of pathways that are poorly tunable and non-native to the host
often causes undesired cross-interactions and unpredictable responses, and
reliable engineering of cells remains a challenge. In particular, the
introduction of exogenous pathways depletes cellular resources of the host,
triggering physiological changes, lower growth, and poor circuit performance, a
set of phenomena collectively known as cellular burden. This research will
address the challenges related to robust circuit engineering and burden
mitigation by developing synthetic RNA-based regulators, a programmable platform
that imposes a low burden on the host. The project will focus on systematic
screening and tuning of the response function of two classes of RNA regulators,
which will then be used to characterize the kinetics of the cellular burden
response, whose onset and recovery speed have not been elucidated. An improved
knowledge of burden kinetics will enable the generation of robust RNA-based
feedback loops to manage bioproduction of mevalonic-acid in E. coli. At every
stage, experiments will be supported and guided by mathematical modeling and
feedback control design principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
US/UK project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.