* 2020265
* The NANOGrav Physics Frontiers Center
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* James Cordes, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 03/31/2026
* USD 10,350,000.00

This Physics Frontiers Centers (PFC) award to the North American Nanohertz
Observatory for Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav) supports their focus on the
direct detection and characterization of low-frequency gravitational waves (GW),
in the nanohertz regime, some eleven orders of magnitude smaller than the GW
already detected by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO); these two NSF-supported experiments are highly complementary. NANOGrav
carries out this study by monitoring the pulse arrival times of millisecond
pulsars (MSPs), which are ultra-spin-stable neutron stars, and thus the most
precise celestial clocks in the Universe. GWs cause fluctuations in pulse
arrival times that are correlated among different pulsars. Discovering these
correlations requires the synergy of experts in gravitational physics, data
analysis, and astrophysics coming together in a collaborative environment. In
addition to monitoring a known list of MSPs, NANOGrav routinely discovers new
MSPs to add to their study. NANOGrav reaches large numbers of the general public
through exhibits and talks, and a growing social media presence. An associated
student research program reaches more than 150 undergraduate students every
year, and the Pulsar Search Collaboratory involves hundreds of middle and high
school students and their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sources most likely
to be detected in the nanohertz band in the near future are supermassive binary
black holes that form after massive galaxies merge. In fact, NANOGrav searches
so far have already placed astrophysically interesting constraints on the
evolution of galaxies and their supermassive black holes. Other sources include
cosmic strings, phase transitions in the early universe, and relic GW from
inflation; detecting any of these would be transformative. GW observations can
also be used to investigate the origin of cosmic acceleration and the conflict
between quantum mechanics and general relativity, two of the most profound
challenges currently facing fundamental physics. Apart from GW, NANOGrav
observations enable high-impact synergistic science, including constraining the
dense matter equation of state, making dynamical tests of general relativity,
further understanding the ionized interstellar medium, and discovering exotic
neutron star systems and radio transients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Physics
Frontiers Centers award is co-funded by the Physics Frontiers Centers Program in
the Division of Physics and the Mid-scale Innovations Program in the Division of
Astronomical Sciences. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.