* 2020249
* Center for Matter at Atomic Pressures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Raymond Jeanloz, University of Rochester
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2025
* USD 8,217,746.00

The Center for Matter at Atomic Pressures (CMAP) is a new NSF Physics Frontiers
Center that explores matter at pressures strong enough to change the nature of
atoms themselves. Such conditions have not been explored or exploited on Earth,
yet they dominate the interiors of planets and stars. To date, thousands of
planets have been discovered, providing numerous possible platforms for life
throughout the universe. To understand the origin, evolution, and nature of
these planets, one has to understand properties of high energy density matter at
and beyond atomic pressures. CMAP will use powerful lasers, pulsed-power, and
x-ray beam facilities to recreate and characterize matter under the extreme
conditions of the deep interiors of planets and stars. CMAP brings together a
diverse team, spanning disciplines from plasma physics, condensed matter, and
atomic physics to astrophysics and planetary science, to address gaps that limit
our understanding of most of the atomic and chemical constituents of the
Universe. CMAP aims to develop a new discipline of physics at extreme pressures,
combined with the most advanced laboratory and theoretical capabilities
available, to train tomorrow’s science leaders. CMAP’s research, education and
outreach programs aim to bring a new understanding of the universe to the public
and inspire and engage a new generation of scientists of all ages and
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF Physics Frontiers Center for Matter
at Atomic Pressures will exploit a new generation of laboratory capabilities --
kilo-joule to Mega-Joule lasers, tens of Mega-Amp pulsed power, and advanced
x-ray facilities -- and first-principles theory to explore the properties of
matter under the high energy density conditions that exist in the deep interiors
of planets and stars. CMAP will explore the nature and astrophysical
implications of matter extending to and beyond the atomic unit of pressure, the
pressure determined by the Hartree energy and Bohr radius, conditions that
disrupt the electronic-shell structure of atoms, engage core electrons in
bonding, and unlock a regime in which electron and ion quantum correlations can
grow to macroscopic scales at high temperatures. Atomic pressure is a
fundamental physical unit that remains unexplored. CMAP will bring together
experts in plasma, atomic, and condensed matter physics leading to new
discoveries and breakthroughs in physics. To do so, the CMAP team has a
particular focus on excellence through diversity, and on convergence of
research, education, and broad outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Physics Frontiers Centers award is co-funded by the Division of Physics in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Division of Earth
Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.