* 2020681
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Climate change, pollinator declines and the human diet
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Samuel Myers, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 130,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Micro-Poll seeks to develop a multidisciplinary
understanding the impact of environmental change on pollinator communities and
crop production and resilience in Nepal. Pollinator decline is predicted to have
negative impacts on human health as key micronutrients in insect pollinated
crops such as vitamin A and folate are lost from the diet. This “hidden hunger”
is predicted to cause significant global health burdens. Pollinator loss
disproportionately harms developing countries, as they are both less resilient
to yield drops and more reliant on the micronutrients found in small-scale
pollinator-dependent crops. Diversifying the diet by increasing access to
micronutrient-rich fruits, vegetables and legumes may provide a long term,
sustainable solution. The project will identify the crops providing key
micronutrients and the dominant pollinators of these micronutrient-rich crops;
investigate impact of change on key crop pollinators and the ensuing impact on
crop production and micronutrient intake; and test the resilience of the insect
pollination of micronutrient-rich crops. The project will work with local
researchers and community organizations to carry-out the research and
disseminate the findings to help decision-makers develop possible solutions to
this challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.