* 2020059
* Collaborative Research: Controls on along-strike variations in locked and creeping megathrust behavior at the Hikurangi convergent margin
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Demian Saffer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2022
* USD 118,391.00

The physical processes dictating the spectrum of fault slip modes (spanning
destructive earthquakes&lt;br/&gt;to slow slip events and aseismic creep) and
the links between these behaviors and long-term&lt;br/&gt;morphotectonic
evolution of subduction systems are not understood. There is a
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;need to address this important problem with an integrated,
system-level approach combining&lt;br/&gt;geodynamical modeling with high-
quality geophysical and geological constraints on subduction&lt;br/&gt;margin
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct an
interdisciplinary, multinational collaborative program involving the USA, New
Zealand, Japan and the UK to evaluate system-level controls on processes that
govern both slip behavior and long-term deformation at subduction zones. The
focus is on the Hikurangi margin in New Zealand, where GPS data show a
transition in slip behavior from predominantly stick-slip&lt;br/&gt;in the south
to aseismic creep in the northern North Island, and where a wide range of
subduction-related&lt;br/&gt;processes and characteristics vary along-strike.
The aim is to rigorously investigate the feedbacks&lt;br/&gt;between plate
interface slip behavior, solid and fluid mass fluxes, and manifestations of
plate boundary mechanics in the long-term geological record that likely reflect
common driving processes linking forearc uplift, sediment transfer and
underplating, plate boundary strength, and seismogenesis. The Principal
Investigators will address this important problem through an integrated approach
combining large-scale seismic imaging, paleoseismology, and geomorphology,
focused through the lens of state-of-the-art numerical modelling.