* 2020015
* EAGER: Toward Monolithic Optically-Pumped Single-Photon Sources Based on Deterministic InGaN Quantum Dots in GaN Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Shamsul Arafin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2022
* USD 181,999.00

Single-photon sources are one of most useful basic building blocks for many
future quantum technologies. In particular, quantum communication, quantum
computing and quantum sensing are the areas that can be revolutionized by the
development of high-performance single-photon sources. In order to enable these
practical quantum applications, such photon sources must be robust, coherent,
tunable and bright, and they should exhibit high- light-collection efficiency
and -directionality at the same time. To date, no technology options can provide
such a quantum light source that simultaneously combines all of these key
properties. This project aims to develop a single-photon source that can meet
these aggressive performance specifications. Such unprecedented performance will
enable future development of a photonic integrated circuit platform that will
simultaneously improve performance and efficiency as well as help meet low size,
weight and power-cost constraints for next-generation quantum photonic
technologies. In addition to high impact research advancement, our project will
also support interdisciplinary education activities in nanoscience and
nanotechnology. Because the proposed research project crosses different
disciplines of science and engineering, such as optics, materials science,
electrical engineering, physics, and chemistry, it will lead to a range of
potential, hands-on learning activities that can engage students of varying
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective of the proposed
project is to advance intellectual understanding of non-classical light sources
through the development of novel photonic platforms that require growth of one-
dimensional III-nitride nanowire (NW) structures. This advancement will enable
practical quantum technologies at wavelengths ideally suited for long-distance
quantum networks with existing fiber-optic telecommunication infrastructures. In
this EAGER proposal, we explore a new and unique technique for the growth of
nitrogen (N)-polar GaN NWs with InGaN quantum dots (QDs) deterministically
placed inside using a bottom-up approach via plasma-assisted molecular beam
epitaxy (PAMBE). Unlike a top-down technique, the bottom-up growth method allows
proper placement of QDs on the axis of tapered NW-waveguides and an improved
light extraction with reduced tapering angles on top of NWs. The long-term
objective of the proposed research is to achieve bright and ultra-spectrally
pure single-photon sources (SPSs) that meet aggressive performance
specifications, such as high count rate and near-zero auto-correlation factors
for high-fidelity entanglement. The work performed within this EAGER project
will serve as a foundation for designing highly-efficient and coherent tunable
SPSs. The project will advance knowledge on the MBE growth of the InGaN/GaN QDs
within NWs and the associated growth conditions including polarity and growth
rate control. The deterministic QD-NWs based SPSs and its emission properties
will be well-understood from the study. This project will also generate
technical advancements to push the light emission towards longer wavelengths for
the NW-based device technologies by increasing the indium incorporation within
QDs and controlling the polarity of NWs. The proposed research will lead to
deeper fundamental insights into mechanisms and processes involved in scalable
quantum photonic devices and integrated circuits. This inherently
interdisciplinary research combines material science, quantum physics, chemical
engineering and electrical engineering to generate new fundamental knowledge in
several scientific fields, indicating that the concept is highly novel and
transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.