* 2020024
* A Global Nuclear Environmental History
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Paul Josephson, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 287,589.00

This research project is a study of global nuclear environmental history focused
on North America, Europe, the former Soviet Union, and Far East. The PI will
develop a cross national comparison of the environment in relation to military
and civilian nuclear enterprises. In doing so, he will examine how
understandings of the human-nature atom interface have changed since the dawn of
the nuclear age. The project will produce a stand-alone global environmental
history of the development of the nuclear enterprise in cross-national
comparison that includes the conceptual, technological, socio-political and
environmental impacts that have accompanied that development. The research takes
place within the fields of history of science and technology, environmental
history, and history of technology; results are to be disseminated as original
research papers and a book manuscript pertinent to these areas. The PI also
plans to disseminate results beyond scientific publications through editorials
and through contact with various interested NGOs with interests in nuclear
history, and through a dedicated webpage with links to extant and new research
materials and teaching guides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
bring STS and environmental history methods to bear on the study of the nuclear
world to enable better understanding of the rise and functioning of state-
sponsored big science and technology for military and peaceful purposes. The PI
will use recently available primary sources in English, French, Russian,
Swedish, Korean and other languages. He will also make extensive use of
published and archival documents and studies on the nature of human-nuclear
interactions in the domain of nuclear science and technology for different
groups, languages and ethnicities, and across geographic and climatic areas; as
a result, this research will produce societally relevant outcomes in its
analyses of the role of women, children, underrepresented minorities including
indigenes in postwar nuclear worlds. This history is valuable because of the
vast expanse of the nuclear enterprise, its transborder and international
ramifications, and the nature and kinds of landscapes and peoples whose lives
have been affected by peaceful and military programs – and who have shaped its
development. It will have the potential to contribute to policy debates about
the costs, benefits and consequences of nuclear technologies over time, and to
facilitate analysis of nuclear power as an effective way to address climate
change in the twenty-first century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.