* 2020063
* Exploiting the Wind Energy Resource through Aeroelastic Vibration and Torsional Flutter
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Luca Caracoglia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 438,521.00

Wind energy is an important component of the United States program for renewable
energy. As part of this effort, large-scale systems (onshore and offshore wind
turbines) have been thoroughly investigated. On the opposite side of the
“spectrum”, micro-scale wind energy has been examined for the purposes of
deployment of small sensors that are self-sufficient and self-recharging. Both
technologies have reached an advanced maturity. In contrast, the meso-scale
range, i.e., the intermediate scale of a single-family household or a street
block, is largely unexplored and has good potential for growth and innovation.
This project addresses the need for clean energy at the meso-scale level, using
a simple and compact wind-based energy harvester. The power generator exploits
the torsional aeroelastic instability (i.e., torsional flutter) of a blade-
airfoil apparatus. The technology will be viable since its operational mechanism
is simpler than other, similar harvesting technologies in the recent past. The
research plan will include fabrication and testing of a reduced-scale prototype
unit. The project results will demonstrate how the apparatus can be implemented
in urban settings and provide a valuable energy source for electric and
mechanical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the technical
feasibility of the wind energy harvester that exploits torsional flutter.
Torsional flutter is a single mode aeroelastic instability phenomenon, which
triggers a diverging vibration of a flexible body. The project will make use of
preliminary results, in which a numerical model was employed to predict
mechanical vibrations and induced currents. The investigation will include
analytical, numerical and experimental stages. The objectives of this research
are: 1) advancement of the current theory and analytical modeling of flutter
energy “scavenging”; 2) assembly of a prototype unit used in the verification
and validation studies in the laboratory; and 3) deployment and monitoring of
the unit at full scale. The first objective will consider the modeling of post-
critical dynamics, nonlinear aeroelastic force and response, and the calibration
of the key parameters of the wind energy harvester. The second objective will be
accomplished through the design of a reduced-scale unit, followed by validation
and verification through wind tunnel tests, which will include operational
efficiency. Finally, an exploratory study will be carried out through the
deployment at full scale on a building roof. The educational plan includes a set
of outreach activities and demonstrations for various audiences (e.g., students,
engineers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.