* 2020002
* RCN: Building an Interdisciplinary Community of Big Microdata Researchers
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* John Warren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,055.00

This research award will support the creation of the Big Microdata Network.
Through multiple collections, researchers now have access to two billion census
records describing the entire American population from the mid-nineteenth
century to the present day. Although these data collections have rich research
potential, the massive scale and scope of the data poses new challenges for
researchers. The Network will address these challenges by building an open
interdisciplinary community of researchers. It will connect these researchers
through online communication and in-person meetings, including four annual
research conferences. It will lower barriers to research by creating working
groups to provide training and guidance. The Network also will conduct outreach
to new community members, including annual training workshops. Outreach efforts
will focus on scholars from underrepresented groups, early career scholars, and
those outside major research institutions. The Network will directly contribute
to the training of underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students through
participation in the institution's Summer Diversity Fellowship program.
Leveraging the broad experiences and expertise of the research community, the
Network will attract new scholars to these valuable data resources, enabling new
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Big Microdata Network will support an
emerging interdisciplinary community of scientists using vast collections of
census microdata describing the American population from the mid-nineteenth
century to the present day. It will leverage previous federal investment in
massive census data collections which describe the American population. The
IPUMS full-count census collection provides consistently coded data from 1850 to
1940 from census records that have been released publicly following the 72-year
requirement. The Federal Statistical Research Data Centers provide access to
decennial census data for 1960 to 2010 under appropriate data security measures.
Some researchers, however, lack the computing power necessary to take advantage
of these data, and even those with sufficient resources still require new
programming strategies to manipulate and analyze data of this scale. Record
linkage poses a host of problems, from analytic decisions to computational
capacity. Investigators working to exploit geographic detail also face
considerable startup costs for geocoding, developing GIS boundary files, and
conceptualizing new geographic measures of neighbors and neighborhoods.
Restrictions around data access pose constraints for sharing resources and
present difficulties for data replication and preservation. By increasing access
and lowering barriers to using these data, the Network will help researchers
overcome these challenges. It will advance scholarship across a range of fields,
including economics, sociology, demography, statistics, geography, epidemiology,
urban planning, and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.