* 2020803
* Infrastructure Capacity for Biology at the Nahant Marsh Educational Center
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Ellen Bluth, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2022
* USD 176,781.00

Eastern Iowa Community Colleges (EICC) EICC is a public two-year community
college district situated in Iowa along the Mississippi River that operates
educational programming for the Nahant Marsh Educational Center, one of the last
remaining urban wetlands on the Upper Mississippi River and a past EPA Superfund
Site. Area colleges and universities conduct research year-round at the site
that guide management practices and include water quality testing, turtle
population monitoring, and avian population studies. The Nahant Marsh
Educational Center is designed to expose students to research and engage them in
a path toward a STEM career. After engaging students in research questions, the
Nahant Marsh model involves the creation of opportunities for students to
explore those questions in greater depth. Research activities will adhere to
national educational standards (Common Core State Standards and Next Generation
Science Standards) and can be embedded as part of regular classes while higher
level research activities can be embedded as research opportunities in courses
offered at area colleges. Funding will allow valuable research into
understanding the marsh ecosystems, attracting more researchers, and training
K-12 students and college students on how to use research tools related to
environmental biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for
laboratory equipment that will allow for expanded research opportunities for
area colleges and universities in water quality testing, turtle population
monitoring, and avian population studies; attract more researchers; train K-12
students and college students on how to use research tools related to
environmental biology; and prepare individuals to enter a STEM field/workforce.
Support for research equipment and related supplies at the Nahant Marsh
Educational Center will allow for traditional laboratory activities to be
replaced by inquiry-based activities that expose students to contemporary
research methods. Students and teachers at all grade levels will be engaged
directly in data collection and analysis. Students will research opportunities
as part of a course, a degree program, or as part of a summer experience.
Additional equipment will allow students and researchers to be able to better
understand the marsh ecosystems and attract more researchers, and train K-12 and
college students on how to use research tools related to environmental biology.
This grant also allows Quad City community residents, students of all ages and
particularly URM students, educators and researchers the opportunity to
participate in STEM research. Participating in hands-on research will increase
the entrance and persistence of students into STEM fields and broaden the
participation of URM students in STEM fields. The participation of educators
from all grade levels will leave a legacy of faculty who have gained skills and
commitment to mentoring students and developing inquiry-based STEM pedagogy that
will impact the success of students. Research conducted at Nahant Marsh
utilizing equipment funded through this proposal will add to the broader U.S.
environmental biology science community. For more information visit
https://nahantmarsh.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.