* 2020560
* Using Problem-Based Learning to Increase the Ethical Reasoning Skills of Electrical and Computer Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Claire Major, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,997.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing electrical and
computer engineering (ECE) studentsâ€™ ethical reasoning skills and perspectives
about social responsibility in engineering. Concern for teaching ethics in
engineering has existed for some time, with engineering professionals
identifying the need to focus on public safety, health, and welfare as early as
the 1940s. The need for students to recognize ethical and professional
responsibilities and make informed judgements were recently included as a
student outcome requirements for ABET accreditation. This project focuses on
effective approaches for teaching ethical reasoning and social responsibility
for first year students in ECE. This study will evaluate if the active learning
approach called problem-based learning is more effective at teaching ethics in
engineering education than a traditional lecture-based approach. Problem-based
learning approaches help students determine their own learning needs and
strategies to achieve that learning. This approach contrasts with traditional
approaches that introduce problems only after students have first acquired the
relevant content knowledge and skills, often through a lecture. Ethical
engineering modules will be designed and deployed in a required first-year
course that introduces ECE students to the discipline with a goal of centering
ethics and social responsibility as core components of the discipline. These
modules will be made available online for engineering educators who are
interested in improving ethical reasoning and awareness in other engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to transform
undergraduate engineering education by centering ethics and social
responsibility as core components of ECE. A first year introductory ECE course
will be re-designed to emphasize ethics and social responsibility throughout the
course. The project team will develop and implement learning modules that will
be deployed using either a problem-based learning or lecture-based approach. The
modules will be used to address the core research question: Is problem-based
learning a more effective pedagogy than a traditional lecture based approach for
teaching ethical reasoning in support of social responsibility to first year ECE
students during their primary introduction to the discipline? The project team
will address this question by collecting and analyzing samples of student
coursework and performance on tests of ethical reasoning and social
responsibility administered before and after the course. Two additional research
questions will be addressed: (1) Are there differences in ethical reasoning and
perspectives of social responsibility between first year engineering students in
ECE and other engineering disciplines without this ethics focus? and (2) Are
faculty scores in ethical reasoning and perspectives of social responsibility
within an engineering discipline strongly associated with student scores from
that same discipline? These two questions will be answered by collecting scores
on tests of ethical reasoning and social responsibility from faculty and first
year students across engineering disciplines. The results of this project and
the ethics modules will be disseminated through an online repository that will
include the modules, implementation plans, and results demonstrating the
effectiveness of the modules. This project is supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR
Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.