* 2020464
* NSF-BSF: Synchronous electro-optical DNA detection using low-noise dielectric nanopores on sapphire
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Chao Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2024
* USD 376,000.00

Nanopore DNA sensing is an emerging technology, and has recently been developed
to detect both the DNA primary sequence and epi-genetic information (such as
methylation), which is crucial to both fundamental biology and precision
medicine.. However, high-speed and accurate DNA methylation detection in
nanopores still lags behind. This is attributed to an insufficient signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) resulting from the inherent large electrical capacitive noise
from the conductive silicon (Si) and also the complex DNA dynamic interaction
with nanopore surface. This project proposes a multidisciplinary research plan
to address the fundamental challenges in high-speed and low-noise biomolecular
sensing in a solid-state nanopore device. The new design combines electrical and
optical sensing on a single sensor platform to improve the sensing accuracy. It
utilizes crystalline sapphire as an insulating substrate and integrates large-
bandgap titanium oxide thin film as the sensing element to minimize both the
electronic and optical noise. The demonstration of DNA methylation detection
will prove the feasibility of our TiO2/sapphire nanopore sensors in detecting
complex molecular structures that will have broad impact on molecular marker
detection and molecule-molecule interactions. The educational objectives are to
promote electronic nanosensors related engineering education to undergraduate
and graduate students, and to better prepare them as future innovators to
transform nanobiotechnologies. The outreach objectives are to promote public
awareness of the importance of nanosensors in health care and to attract the
participation of K-12 students and underrepresented individuals in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to fill the knowledge gap in
nanopore sensing research by creating a significantly improved nanopore sensor
platform that integrates low-optical background titanium oxide membranes on low-
capacitance and hence low-electrical-noise sapphire. The research team will
fabricate small and thin TiO2 membranes on sapphire, establish high-throughput
manufacturing methods for both membrane formation and nanopore drilling, perform
single-molecule DNA translocation, study the DNA-nanopore interaction, and
analyze the data for methylation detection. The proposed sensor platform has a
number of key features to support the development of a wide variety of emerging
biomolecular diagnostic technologies. First, the creation of ultrasmall (&lt;10
Î¼m) dielectric membranes on insulating sapphire eliminates substrate
conductance, and drastically minimizes the chip capacitance to a few picoFarads
even for high-dielectric-constant and ultrathin (&lt;5 nm) TiO2 devices, thus
significantly reducing the background high-frequency electrical noise and
markedly improving high-bandwidth sensing. Further, both membrane formation and
nanopore drilling will be achieved by high-throughput manufacturing methods,
i.e. wafer-scale and batch-processing compatible sapphire etching and direct
laser drilling, thus enabling low-cost and repeatable production. The scalably
manufactured, low-noise, high-sensitivity nanopores will facilitate high-
resolution gene identification and quantitation of their methylation status in a
single measurement and at a greatly reduced cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.