* 2020289
* AI Institute: Planning: TRustworthy Autonomous Systems Engineering (TRASE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lui Sha, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

In many ways, autonomy is the holy grail of artificial intelligence (AI). While
tremendous advances towards this ultimate goal have been made across a number of
disciplines, and for a number of applications, general-purpose autonomy remains
elusive. Indeed, even when we focus on specific classes of applications, such as
autonomous driving, numerous gaps remain. One fundamental challenge shared by
many autonomous systems is to ensure that autonomous behavior is trustworthy:
that is, safe, reliable, secure, and fair. This planning grant is a stepping
stone towards an AI institute devoted to foundational and use-inspired advances
in TRustworthy Autonomous Systems Engineering. The institute would be focused on
four research themes: 1) trustworthy AI integration in autonomous systems, 2)
trustworthy platforms for real-time AI in autonomous systems, 3) trustworthy
multiagent systems, and 4) accountable autonomy. Each of these will yield
important advances in understanding the design of trustworthy systems in which
AI is embodied in an open-loop framework involving perception, planning, and
control. Furthermore, these advances will be coupled with use-inspired research
in areas such as autonomous driving and drones, creating a virtuous cycle with
applications directing fundamental research, and benefiting directly from
it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will aim to create a community of
stakeholders---the TRASE Innovation Ecosystem---focusing on trustworthy
autonomous systems, with implications for a broad range of applications, from
autonomous driving to autonomous flight. In addition, the institute will yield
transformative educational advances in the form of new materials for courses and
programs that train students in the design and analysis of autonomous systems.
The vision is to develop innovative educational components, such as
competitions, and integrated student-industry-research teams that coalesce
around common TRASE-relevant problems. Finally, educational collaborations will
be established with minority-serving institutions, such as St Louis Community
College (Florissant Campus) to broaden participation in computing in general,
and in trustworthy autonomous systems engineering in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.