* 2020243
* AI Institute: Planning: Institute for AI-Enabled Materials Discovery, Design, and Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Description: Scientific progress is being increasingly enabled by
the ability to examine natural phenomena through the use of computation. The
emergence of “big data”, and advances in machine learning have dramatically
accelerated some of the key steps in science, e.g., data acquisition and model
fitting. However, other key elements of the scientific process, e.g., generating
hypotheses, designing, prioritizing and executing experiments, integrating data,
models, and simulations, drawing inferences and constructing explanations,
reconciling scientific arguments, and communicating across disciplines, remain
largely untouched by the advances in artificial intelligence (AI). Accelerating
scientific progress, potentially by several orders of magnitude, by effectively
addressing these bottlenecks presents a grand challenge for AI. Materials
discovery, design and synthesis provides an excellent testbed for addressing the
AI grand challenges presented by scientific discovery: The demand for new
materials for applications ranging from energy technologies (batteries, solar
cells, energy harvesting technologies) to sensors, artificial organs and
computing technologies (e.g., quantum computers) far exceeds the capabilities of
traditional materials design and synthesis, and takes years to decades of
effort. This project brings together an interdisciplinary team of researchers
with complementary expertise in AI and Material Science to launch a planning
effort to lay the groundwork for an AI-Enabled Materials Discovery, Design, and
Synthesis (AIMS) Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Realizing the AIMS vision requires synergistic advances across multiple areas of
AI, including: (i) knowledge representation frameworks for encoding,
communicating, and reasoning with models or abstractions of scientific domains,
scientific artifacts, e.g. data, experiments, hypotheses, models; (ii) planning
for optimizing scientific studies, experiments, etc.; (iii) machine learning and
causal inference methods that can provide explanations of their results in the
context of available knowledge, and recommend experiments to validate the
predictions using the available experimental techniques); and (iv) algorithmic
abstractions of AI-enabled human-machine, AI-enabled human-human, and machine-
machine collaborations in science. Addressing this AI grand challenge would
unify many of the sub-fields of AI, yield fundamental advances across multiple
areas of AI, and AI mediated human-machine systems that support collaborative
team science. The AI advances would go hand-in-hand with use-inspired research
driven by some of the most pressing challenges in materials discovery, design,
and synthesis, yielding scientific insights into the relationships between
materials structure and their properties, as well as new ways of rapidly
optimizing material properties for specific applications. Thus, AIMS will
catalyze and establish interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary collaborations
that transcend institutional and organizational boundaries. It will prepare the
next generation AI workforce by training a diverse cadre of individuals,
including women and underrepresented minorities, students as well as working
professionals, in diverse training environments (academia, industry, national
labs) and diverse career paths. AIMS will produce AI advances and technologies
that yield not only transformative advances in materials design, discovery and
synthesis, but also provide organizing frameworks, infrastructure, collaborative
human-AI systems and tools, and best practices to dramatically accelerate
scientific discovery, but also enable new modes of discovery across diverse
scientific domains. Towards this end, the planning project will organize
workshops and idea labs to further develop the vision, initiate
interdisciplinary research at the interface between AI and Material Science,
identify the AIMS infrastructure needs, develop education and outreach plans,
establish synergistic partnerships, and develop the requisite organizational
structure and processes for realizing the AIMS vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.