* 2020982
* Determining the independence of face dimensions through an extended multidimensional signal detection theory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Fabian Soto, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 487,075.00

People can easily perceive several separate properties of a face, such as its
identity, emotional expression, age, and movement. An important question is
whether the brain processes each of those properties independently, so that, for
example, it is easy to identify a friend regardless of whether she is happy,
angry, moving her eyes, shaking her head, or even if we have not seen her in
years. Although influential theories of face recognition propose that some face
properties are indeed processed independently from others, a review of the
literature shows that it is full of contradictory results, probably due to lack
of critical experimental controls. The present project seeks to determine
whether face identity, expression, and motion are processed independently, using
both behavioral and brain measures of independence. A better understanding of
how face properties are perceived in healthy individuals could in turn lead to a
better understanding of the reason behind impairments in face perception in some
disorders, such as depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, and
autism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To resolve the contradictory findings from previous
research, the investigator proposes to use a novel methodology in a series of
experiments that use both behavioral and brain measures of face perception.
First, tight control over the properties of faces presented to participants is
achieved using computer graphics: three-dimensional models of faces and
expressions are created, and images and videos are obtained from those models.
Because of advances in computer graphics, such images and videos look quite
naturalistic, but their shape and movements can be controlled with high
precision. Second, mathematical models of perception are used to analyze the
data. These models provide rigorous definitions of features of perceptual
processing such as independence, and ways to measure those features while
separating them from decision-making strategies used by participants in
behavioral tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.