* 2020156
* Summer Institutes for Cross-Cultural Anthropological Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Carol Ember, Human Relations Area Files
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 329,282.00

This award supports the training and professional development of scientists is
anthropological science by supporting the Summer Institutes for Cross-Cultural
Anthropological Research. These institutes will train faculty, researchers, and
advanced graduate students in the theory and state-of-the art methods for
conducting regional and worldwide comparative research so that these methods can
be incorporated into courses and cross-cultural research using anthropological
data. Cross-cultural findings derived from anthropological data are critical to
many social sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology, economics, political
science), particularly when testing the generalizability of important theories
for policy. Anthropology departments differ in their ability to offer training
in appropriate and modern quantitative methods for cross-cultural analysis, and
these institutes fill a critical gap in training for a new generation of
researchers. To expand the training to a wider circle of faculty, post-docs, and
students, institute instructors will prepare learning modules (presentations,
datasets, exercises) that will be made available online in an open-access format
at the conclusion of the institutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institutes
consist of instruction that covers all phases of regional and worldwide
comparisons from project conception through statistical analysis. Instructors in
the institute will teach strategies consistent with scientific principles,
including selecting samples that adequately represent a population, which is
especially important for answering descriptive questions, deriving testable
hypotheses from specified theoretical principles, designing appropriate
operational measures from theoretical constructs, taking steps to minimize
random and systematic error, deploying appropriate analysis strategies, and
exercising appropriate caution in the nature of conclusions that can be drawn.
Each participant will design and execute a pilot project during their time at an
institute. Prior to the experience, two types of preparatory materials will be
produced. First, to facilitate using data from different cross-cultural samples,
a concordance between commonly used cross-cultural samples will be expanded,
upgraded, and put into an online open-access format. Second, instructors will
prepare statistical materials so that accepted participants can brush up on
basic statistics and learn the rudiments of R (an open-source statistical
environment) prior to attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.