* 2020424
* AccelNet: International Tropical Forest Science Alliance (ITFSA): A global multi-network science and training
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Lauren Krizel, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,999,818.00

Tropical forests are vital to the functioning of Earth, providing essential
services to society by storing half of all terrestrial biomass and carbon,
absorbing a quarter of human-caused carbon emissions, and helping to stabilize
climate and water cycles. Global changes, including deforestation, forest
degradation, and climatic and atmospheric changes, are greatly affecting
tropical forests. How these changes will impact tropical forests in the future
remains highly uncertain. This AccelNet project establishes a global alliance of
tropical forest research networks designed to accelerate the research and
training that are needed to improve understanding of how tropical forests
function and to predict how they will respond to and influence future global
changes. The International Tropical Forest Science Alliance (ITFSA) includes 11
tropical forest research networks that manage 11,656 forest research plots in 56
countries that will coordinate through in-person workshops, virtual meetings,
public webinars, and international fellowships and internships. By leveraging
the vast and complementary knowledge and resources within the individual
networks, ITFSA will rapidly advance tropical forest science, develop data
management and analysis tools, and help build a new generation of scientists
with the global networking and interdisciplinary science skills required to
achieve a more complete understanding of how tropical forests contribute to a
healthy, functioning Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the diversity,
structure, functioning, and dynamics of tropical forests involves multiple
domains including biogeography, ecology, remote sensing, and modeling. Despite
operating at different spatial and temporal scales, progress in all these areas
depends on long-term, field-based observations of tropical forests across the
globe. The ITFSA will integrate these science domains to provide critical
insights into: (i) forest diversity and distributions by resolving taxonomic
issues and providing improved understanding of the ecology and evolution of
tropical tree species; (ii) drivers of tropical forest dynamics through
synthetic analyses of vast long-term demographic datasets; (iii) scaling-up
ground-based observations of forest biomass, diversity, and dynamics with remote
sensing to provide a global assessment of forests; and (iv) predicting tropical
forest structure and function through improved process-based knowledge and
benchmark data for developing and testing Earth System Models. This multi-
network science and training program will foster science synthesis and
innovation, capacity-building in science and international networking, and the
development of analytical and bioinformatics tools. By accelerating science and
expanding capacity for international collaboration, ITFSA will transform global-
scale understanding of tropical forests in both fundamental and applied ways
that will advance scientific knowledge for the public and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.