* 2020814
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Common Pool Resource Theory as a Scalable Framework for Catalyzing Stakeholder-Driven Solutions to the Freshwater Salinization Syndrome
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Jesus Gomez-Velez, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2023
* USD 464,161.00

Inland freshwater salt concentrations are rising across many regions of the
United States and globally—a trend that directly threatens water quality,
ecosystems, and drinking water supplies. The research team will test a
potentially generalizable approach to reverse inland freshwater salinization
that relies on local agencies and other stakeholders—in partnership with
engineers, hydrologists, social scientists, and policymakers—to craft locally
tailored “bottom-up” solutions to this growing problem (as opposed to
regulatorily driven “top-down” solutions). The test case for the study will be
the Occoquan Reservoir, a drinking water supply for nearly 2 million people in
Northern Virginia. The reservoir is salinizing and to better understand the
underlying causes, the researchers will focus on two major salt sources:
effluent from a wastewater treatment plant and deicer use in upstream
watersheds. Through convergence research, education and outreach they will
identify mechanisms that promote collaboration between stakeholders to
effectively manage the salt budget of this regionally important drinking water
supply. Lessons learned will be upscaled nationally and globally in partnership
with the Water Research Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its core, inland
freshwater salinization is a common pool resource (CPR) problem, because inland
freshwaters are available to all actors and restricting access would be
prohibitively expensive. From detailed studies of collective action arrangements
in the water sector, Nobel-laureate Elinor Ostrom developed a social-ecological-
systems (SES) framework for diagnosing the conditions under which local actors
are likely to band together to manage a CPR without outside interference. This
project hypothesizes that Ostrom’s SES framework can be used to diagnose, and
resolve, the challenges and barriers that limit, or outright prevent, bottom-up
management of inland freshwater salt budgets. Through semi-structured interviews
with local water and wastewater managers and other stakeholders, multi-
stakeholder deliberations featuring shared learning and exploration, biophysical
and social science field and modeling studies, and longitudinal studies of
stakeholders’ evolving understanding of the problem, the researchers will test
the hypothesis that Ostrom’s framework can “propel knowledge into action” and
catalyze bottom-up solutions to threats to ecosystem sustainability and human
water security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.