* 2020632
* RUI: Boulder beaches—the understudied archive on high-energy coasts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ronadh Cox, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 343,953.00

As sea level rises and high-energy wave attack on coastal infrastructure becomes
more frequent, there is a growing need for studies of high-energy coasts, both
to understand coastal response to storms and coastal hazards, and also as a
resource for engineers as they work to improve coastal protection approaches.
Boulder beaches are the tangible record of storms on high-energy coasts, but
they have been so little studied that a lack of data and understanding have
prevented their integration into coastal modeling. This study will provide a
better understanding of how boulder beaches respond to waves over time,
contributing to the knowledgebase for sustainable coasts in the face of sea
level rise and climate change. Several tiers of broader impacts span education,
societal value, and outreach. The investigators will engage undergraduate
researchers in every phase of this work with particular attention to diversity
and inclusion. The data will be valuable to engineers, because boulder beaches
are natural analogues for riprap and rubble, commonly used for coastal
protection, performance and failure of which are still being studied. Finally, a
collaboration with professional musicians will use percussion and vocal music to
produce original musical representations of wave spectra, the generation of
large waves by interactions among smaller wave sets, and wave impacts on boulder
beaches. Bundled with contextual educational information (written and spoken
word, field photographs, models and videos, integrated into presentations and
pitched for general audiences), this innovative crossover approach will transmit
coastal geoscience information to the general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigators, students, and collaborators will measure clast
populations and beach morphology—including boulder sizes, shapes, orientations,
sorting, and packing, as well as topographic profiles—at twenty-two sites in
Ireland, using both hands-on measurements and aerial photogrammetry. They will
also quantify bedrock platform erosion using micro-measurements of clast
abrasion trails and establish geomorphic context for the relationship between
boulder beaches and supratidal coastal boulder deposits. Repeat measurements
over multiple years will be analyzed via numerical differencing of
photogrammetric DEMs. This will provide detailed and precise records of boulder
beach response to storms, at all scales from quantifying changes in beach
topography (identifying zones of erosion and/or aggradation), to tracking the
movement of individual boulders. This will be the first multi-parametric study
of the boulder beach environment, and should generate a synthetic understanding
of this complex coastal system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.