* 2020906
* CompCog: Bridging Levels of Analysis: Characterizing Algorithmic Models by Extreme Bayesian Priors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Matthew Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 491,532.00

The field of cognitive modeling seeks to understand human thought and behavior
using the languages of mathematics, statistics, and computers. A cognitive model
is a set of equations or a computer program that can mimic how people act in
experimental or real-world settings. These models are useful in many ways. They
can predict how people or groups will act in new situations. They can guide
development of educational materials and training systems that maximize
learning. They can give insight into the inner workings of the mind, which can
contribute to treatment of psychological and brain disorders. They can help to
explain human intelligence and creativity, leading to new methods in artificial
intelligence and machine learning. This project aims to further these goals
through mathematical advances and human behavioral experiments that together may
lead to new, more accurate models. A variety of interdisciplinary collaborations
and outreach efforts will then explore application of these models to improving
psychiatric diagnosis, developing new analysis methods for neuroimaging data,
making artificial intelligence more comprehensible to the user (explainable AI),
and making psychological models, statistics, and AI more accessible to
undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
portion of this project investigates connections between two types of cognitive
models: algorithmic and rational. Algorithmic models describe the mind in terms
of information processing, specifying mental representations and the processes
that act on them in going from perceptual input to observed behavior. Rational
models explain a person’s learning and decision making in terms of his or her
goals and beliefs about the how the world works. They assume the mind is highly
tuned to its environment, and thus that it acts optimally relative to the
inherent uncertainty in the world. Researchers usually think of algorithmic
models as heuristics (i.e., simplified shortcuts) that approximate rational
ones. Under this interpretation of algorithmic models, cognition falls short of
being optimal because of physical limitations of the brain, such as how much it
can remember or how much information it can process at once. This project will
develop a different connection. Using formal mathematical analysis, the
investigators will show how influential algorithmic models in psychology exactly
match certain rational models under the assumption that the world is extremely
uncertain and unpredictable. This connection will be used in several ways to
develop new models: more sophisticated rational versions of existing algorithmic
ones, more efficient algorithmic versions of existing rational ones, and
intermediate models that combine the strengths of rational and algorithmic ones.
Four series of experiments, each spanning tasks of decision making, reward
learning, and concept acquisition, will test which models best predict human
behavior, and also which yield the best objective performance in natural
settings. If successful, the project will yield new mathematical foundations for
the field of cognitive modeling, specific models that more accurately match
human behavior, new tools for AI and statistics, and a new perspective on
foundational questions of rationality of the human
mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.