* 2020666
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: Clean Air Monitoring and Solutions Network (CAMS-Net)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Albert Presto, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Air pollution is causing a global public health crisis, responsible for around
4.9 million premature deaths worldwide each year. Air pollution-related disease
and death increasingly occur in places least equipped with the technical
capacity, planning, and resources to address them. The Clean Air Monitoring and
Solutions Network (CAMS-Net) establishes an international network of networks
that unites scientists, decision-makers, city administrators, citizen groups,
the private sector, and other local stakeholders in co-developing new methods
and practices for real-time air quality data collection, data sharing, and
solutions for air quality improvements. CAMS-Net brings together at least 32
multidisciplinary member networks from North America, Europe, Africa, and India.
This AccelNet project establishes a mechanism for international collaboration,
builds technical capacity, shares knowledge, and trains the next generation of
air quality practitioners and advocates, including graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. A crucial component and key service to society of the
network of networks is the provision of publicly available, open-access and
high-quality air pollution data, which is timely because air quality is poised
to degrade further in many highly populated places as climate changes and as
economies grow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMS-Net will accelerate effective
solutions for clean air by promoting novel research into a promising but largely
untapped resource for cost-effective air quality monitoring. A traditional
approach for improving air quality in cities is the development and
implementation of a management plan, which is typically anchored by a network of
high-quality, research-grade measurement devices collecting real-time data
coupled with the technical expertise to analyze and make decisions based on that
data. So-called low-cost sensors (LCS) have the potential to revolutionize clean
air solutions and spur regulatory action, especially in lower- and middle-income
countries. LCS are being deployed all over the world. Yet no global consortium
exists to help standardize best practices, share deployment strategies, ensure
quality control, and calibrate sensors towards research-grade quality. CAMS-Net
seeks to maximize the value to science and society of the current proliferation
of unknown quality data acquired by LCS through capacity building, knowledge
exchange, and acceleration of novel research. CAMS-Net research directions also
include applying LCS networks to evaluate air quality models, refining
satellite-derived air quality products, informing the implementation of air
quality standards, and estimating fine-scale pollutant exposure for health
impact analyses. Students and postdoctoral researchers will participate in
scholar exchanges and take on leadership roles within CAMS-Net, preparing them
for careers in global air quality. CAMS-Net will create a strong, sustained
global network of networks focused on closing the air pollution data and
knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.