* 2020323
* 2020 Polymer Networks Group Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Kevin Cavicchi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2021
* USD 0.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for student attendance at the 25th Polymer Networks Group
Meeting, which will be held May 17-21, 2020 in Potomac, MD. This meeting
provides a forum for scientists and engineers across disciplines to gather,
present, and discuss current research on the theoretical and fundamental aspects
and advances in the synthesis, characterization and application of polymer
networks and gels. The Polymer Networks Group is an international organization
aimed at promoting interdisciplinary studies of polymer networks, encompassing
both experiment and theory/computation across all types network-forming
polymeric systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific areas to be discussed include:
Neutral and Polyelectrolyte Gels, Phase Transition in Gels, Responsive gels,
Structure-property relationships in polymer networks, Self-Assembly and Fiber
Formation, Organogels, Nanostructures in Gels, Transport and Dynamic Properties,
Computational Modeling and Simulation of Network Formation, Structure and
Dynamic Properties, Novel Chemistry of Crosslinking, Surfaces and Interfaces,
Gels as Biomaterials, andApplications of Polymer Networks and
Gels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus on polymer networks and gels will
give students working in different topical areas as chemists, physicists, and
engineers a broader perspective of the field. There will be multiple learning
opportunities for the students including attending lectures and participating in
the question and answer sessions, and informal interactions and discussion with
their fellow students and more established scientists in the field. In addition,
many students may choose to give a poster at the meeting, which will give them
an opportunity to engage in in-depth discussion of their own research with a
broad audience of experts in the field from academia, industry, and national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.