* 2020227
* AI Institute: Planning: Construction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Derek Hoiem, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Improvements in the design, construction and operation of buildings and
infrastructure projects will have a tremendous impact on the competitiveness of
the U.S. Construction industry, by making projects more efficient, cheaper,
faster, safer and more equitable.   Nevertheless, enhancing project workflows
poses problems that challenge current understanding of Artificial Intelligence
(AI).  This National Artificial Intelligence Research Institutes Planning award
supports research and coordination activities to build collaborations among AI
researchers, construction researchers, and industry partners, with the aim of
forming an Institute for AI in Construction. Key goals are the identification of
critical scientific problems, performance metrics, data sources, and future
grand challenges.  The team will also develop opportunities for educational
activities that attract and retain skilled workforce in the industry. To do so,
the team will offer a new course on Construction AI, formulate a new
"CS+Construction" major, and design a Masters' capstone project sponsorship
program, each with a strong element of entrepreneurship education. A mentoring
program that aids students from underrepresented groups will be established
particularly around their engagement in construction projects in the form of
Women and Minority-Owned Business Enterprise (WMBE)
firms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many planning, monitoring, and control workflows
involved in the design, construction, and operation of the built environment
expose new challenges and opportunities for research in computer vision, natural
language processing, and machine learning.   Key technical problems, as
identified by the National Academy of Engineering, include data-driven
construction planning, monitoring work in progress, and real-time worker safety
assessment.  Solving these problems requires fundamental research in AI, such
as: machine learning with many interconnected small-data problems; optimizing
for application-specific objectives; leveraging both recognition and
correspondence to recover geometry from images; and learning from loosely
structured text documents.  This research will identify AI problems in the
construction domain that can serve as model problems, uncover novel conceptual
challenges to AI research from construction applications, and identify likely
dataset needs to support future research on AI in construction.  Research
findings will be disseminated through publications, presentations, and posting
of datasets and software through a central project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.