* 2020831
* Collaborative Research: Creating Earth’s earliest continents—an integrated investigation of the growth and modification of western Australia’s Pilbara Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Vervoort, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 337,980.00

The formation of Earth’s earliest continents is topic of significant interest in
the Earth Sciences. A major issue is that rocks preserved from Earth’s earliest
history are rare; there are few rocks from the first billion years of Earth’s
history, and no intact rocks at all remaining from the first 500 million years.
Geologists must use a very fragmental record to determine when first continental
crust formed, what was it composition, and how much of it existed. This grant
will support geologists to study the Earth’s oldest, unmodified fragment of a
tectonic plate – the Pilbara terrane of West Australia – to address these
issues. The approach is to first determine the age of the rocks through the
formation of minerals, such as zircons, that act a radioactive clocks
(geochronology). Once the age is known, the chemistry of the rocks can determine
if they were derived from an earlier crust or extracted directly from the
Earth’s mantle (geochemistry). The patterns and fabrics of these rocks
(structural geology), when integrated with geochemistry and geochronology, will
determine how and when the rocks were added to the crust to create these early
continents. The major outcome of this work will be a better understanding of the
history of the Earth’s earliest crust and the processes that formed it. The work
includes student training, mentorship and support for a junior scientist (post-
doctoral fellow), and international collaboration. Additionally, work with a
cognitive scientist will help students envision geological processes over large
time scales. The proposal will allow technique development of sophisticated
geochemical and geochronologic analyses and their use in the WSU isotope
laboratory by national and international visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to address the fundamental processes of crustal formation,
modification, and stabilization by examining granitic complexes—the Mt Edgar and
Corunna Downs—and associated surpracrustal rocks of the 3.5 – 2.8 Ga East
Pilbara terrane of West Australia, through an integrated geochronological,
geochemical, and structural study. The East Pilbara terrane is one of the best-
preserved examples of Paleo- to Mesoarchean crust on Earth, displaying the
classic dome-and-keel pattern in which granitic complexes (domes) are surrounded
by steeply dipping volcanic and volcaniclastic supracrustal lithostratigraphy
(keels). Two central, interlinking questions guide our research: 1) What were
the mechanisms and timing of emplacement of the granitic complexes; and 2) What
were the mantle and crustal source regions for the rocks of the East Pilbara
terrane. To investigate these questions, our work will focus on: 1) The
geochemistry and structure of the compositionally and deformationally
heterogeneous granitic dome complexes; 2) The timing, metamorphic conditions,
and structure in the deformed regions of the supracrustal lithostratigraphy
(“greenstone keels”); and 3) The geochemistry of the metavolcanic rocks in the
supracrustal lithostratigraphy and the grantic domes, in regions of minimal
deformation, to address the mantle and crustal source regions. This integrated
geochemical and structural approach will provide information on first-order
tectonic processes that resulted in the formation, modification, and
stabilization of one of Earth’s earliest cratons and, therefore, provide
important insights into the formation and preservation on some of the earliest
continental crust on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
both the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and Tectonics
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.