* 2020790
* GCR: Convergence for Innovative Energy Solutions: Empowering Off-Grid Communities with Sustainable Energy Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Emilio Moran, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,087,555.00

This GCR project brings together a team of experts in communication studies,
social sciences and engineering working with stakeholders in a new form of
engagement to jointly design and implement sustainable energy technologies. The
goal is to deliver transformative advances in science and technology to
communities where energy is too expensive or unreliable. This is a major
challenge particularly in communities in that are off-the-grid. A crucial factor
for innovation adoption is compatibility of the technology with the values,
beliefs, and past experiences of people in that social system. The focus of this
project will be on a new technological solution, employing in-stream turbines
without dams, that permit fish and vessels to move freely, allow fishers to
maintain their livelihoods, and eliminate the need for resettlement. The project
includes the training of students in convergence research and the production of
an audiovisual record for further analysis and use in teaching. A new graduate
course on how to go about building convergence, interacting, and co-designing
new technology to meet the needs of specific communities will be developed as
part of a dual PhD program for engineering, social science and natural science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team of researchers will produce a prototype
in-stream turbine through a convergent dialogue between scientists and
stakeholders in communities that need sustainable and affordable forms of
energy. Creating this convergence model requires that scholars from engineering,
communication studies and social sciences work together to discover what
modifications in the engineering may be necessary for these solutions to gain
social acceptance. To that end, the researchers will work in a convergent manner
to ensure that innovative off-the-grid energy solutions are right-sized,
embraced by, and sustainable for those communities. This work will build on the
literature on diffusion of innovations, the process by which information about a
new idea is communicated through various channels among members of a social
system through convergence processes to advance knowledge. The researchers will
determine the extent to which various communication processes operate to
influence social acceptance of a technological innovation that empowers local
communities. They will then introduce a prototype and work with communities to
enhance the characteristics of the technology to further adapt it to community
energy needs. Beyond energy solutions, this model can provide a template for
other sectors interested in developing innovative solutions with sustained input
from stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.