* 2020404
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Coastal OceAn SusTainability in Changing Climate
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Robert Orttung, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 02/29/2024
* USD 328,677.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams to address critical issues in ocean
sustainability including, conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development. This complex challenge
required that the projects utilized integrated, transdisciplinary and cross-
sectoral approaches and bring together natural and social sciences as well as
policymakers, resource managers, industries, citizens and other societal
partners. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in
consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries to increase our knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways needed
to accelerate sustainable use of oceans and minimize the effects from global
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project centers on the sustainability of the
coastal ocean under the impacts of ongoing and projected climate variability and
change. The project addresses the various impacts of climate change and
increased human activity on coastal zones by integrating the natural and social
domains of the coastal ocean and tracking how changes will affect the use and
the infrastructure of today and in the future. The project will focus on coastal
areas where human impact on marine ecosystems is relatively high, sea level
varies, and there are increasing impacts of waves and surges on coastal erosion
and intensified coastal hydrological cycles. This integrated, transdisciplinary
research approach will ensure the development of society-relevant
recommendations and environmentally friendly business solutions for ocean
coastal areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.