* 2020670
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating adaptation in ancient and contemporary Indigenous peoples
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Deborah Bolnick, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 32,047.00

Humans thrive in diverse and extreme environments around the world thanks to
biological and social mechanisms including adaptation by natural selection,
habitat construction, and cultural innovations. While many studies have
investigated the genetic basis of adaptation to extreme environments, there is
much to be discovered about how social and cultural processes also interact to
contribute to human survival and flourishing. This doctoral dissertation project
combines genetic, archaeological, ethnohistorical, and ethnographic analyses to
investigate adaptation through time to both natural and social environmental
pressures. The multifaceted approach of this project will advance the
understanding of human adaptation as well as expand the currently limited
representation of Indigenous peoples of the Americas in genomic studies of human
variation. The project provides mentorship and training in anthropological
genomic methods to graduate and undergraduate researchers and contributes to
community and public science outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
employs biocultural theoretical frameworks to integrate evidence from
archaeology, ethnohistory, ethnography, and genomics and develop a more complete
and nuanced picture of human survival and flourishing in extreme environments.
The study employs next-generation genome sequencing technology, isotope and
radiocarbon analyses, statistical tests for natural selection, and
reconstructions of population history to assess genetic variation and identify
genes under selection in ancient and contemporary Indigenous peoples over a
timespan of about six thousand years. These data will be used to shed light on
possible parallel adaptation in extreme environments where cold temperatures and
limited diets may have had similar effects on human populations. Additionally,
this study will investigate adaptation after European contact when the
introduction of novel diseases may have acted as a strong selective
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.