* 2020525
* Understanding Mechanical Activation of Chemical Reactions on Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Wilfred Tysoe, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,604.00

The development of advanced materials is essential for manufacturing new
products and for economic and national security, with applications across
multiple industrial sectors including defense, energy, transportation,
aerospace, and healthcare. Machines made from these new materials will require
lubricants to lower friction and mitigate wear that are tailored to the specific
material. New lubricants are often designed by trial and error, which can be a
long and uncertain process. Unfortunately, little is understood of the
fundamental chemical processes occurring at a sliding interface that lead to
formation of friction and/or wear reducing films. The goal of this work is to
exploit an array of surface analytical tools and novel theoretical approaches to
obtain fundamental insights into the way that forces acting on the surface
influence the chemistry to take the guesswork out of designing new lubricants
for advanced materials. The work will also significantly improve our
understanding of mechanically induced processes in general. Mechanochemical
syntheses have been widely used in organic chemistry to make molecules in a
solvent-free environment, to synthesize pharmaceuticals and novel inorganic
materials, and mechanical processes are ubiquitous in biology. This work will
provide fundamental molecular-scale insights into mechanochemical reactions that
will positively impact the United Statesâ€™ economy. Students gaining experience
in the experimental and theoretical methods will provide them with a broad
multidisciplinary education in chemistry, physics and materials science and will
be specifically targeted at including females and minorities in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the gas-phase
lubrication of copper by small molecules such as dialkyl disulfides and
carboxylic acids. The reaction pathway for the formation of lubricating films
will be studied in ultrahigh vacuum to identify the elementary step reactions.
Density functional theory calculations carried out under quasistatic conditions
have yielded activation energies in good agreement with experimental
measurements of mechanochemical reaction kinetics under compression using an
atomic force microscope tip. Thus, the research exploits this experimental and
theoretical toolbox developed during previous studies to addresses two
fundamental issues: 1. To understand and predict the effect of combined normal
and lateral stresses on the rates of tribochemical reactions on surfaces and 2.
To understand the way in which binding to the substrate and the moving
counterface influences tribochemical reactivity. The project will involve
outreach to underrepresented undergraduates as well as outreach to Latin America
and West Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.