* 2020110
* New Tools to Access the Fungal Metabolome and its Ecological Function
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Sandra Loesgen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2023
* USD 462,455.00

With this?award, the Chemistry of Life Processes?Program in the Chemistry
Division is supporting?Dr. Sandra Loesgen?from Oregon State University to
examine the chemical structure and ecological function of compounds produced by
fungi. Fungi are critical members of most ecosystems. Many fungi produce a
diversity of secondary metabolites, chemical compounds that have important roles
in their defense, communication between individuals of the same species, and
communication between different species. Fungal secondary metabolites have also
been used by humans for biomedical and agricultural applications, such as the
antibiotic penicillin, the fungicide strobilurin, and the immunosuppressant
cyclosporin. However, identifying these compounds and understanding their
ecological function remains difficult and labor intensive. This research project
aims to implement new approaches for isolating and studying the chemicals
produced by fungi, using methods including gene activation and metabololite
profiling. These experiments contribute to an improved understanding of the
complex chemical ecology of fungi. This work also has potential to identify
novel secondary metabolites with practical applications. The Loesgen Lab
regularly participates in OSU's Discovery Days, a semiannual education fair that
serves 3500 children from schools around Oregon. This project expands the lab's
collaboration with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) and
establishes an interactive exhibit that introduces children and their parents to
natural products chemistry. Microbial chemistry is an interdisciplinary field
with important ecological applications, and is thus very well positioned to
serve as a vehicle for chemistry education. This team participates in the
Chemistry Undergraduate Mentorship and Empowerment (ChUME) Initiative
at&lt;br/&gt;OSU. ChUME enhances undergraduate student success by providing
students with a strong professional support network and personal
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three prominent challenges in modern microbial
chemistry are driving expression of silenced gene clusters, identifying novel
secondary metabolites, and understanding the ecological role of identified
compounds. Dr. Loesgan and her group will study the environmental, chemical, and
epigenetic perturbation in fungi to access previously repressed secondary
metabolites. They will investigate metabolomics methods used to rapidly identify
newly expressed natural products and integrate metabolomics methods with
bioassay data to enable the elucidation of the ecological role of secondary
metabolites. Aim 1 establishes a method for de-repressing gene clusters using a
novel class of chemical epigenetic modifying agents. Aim 2 uses metabolomics
methods to analyze liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS), high
performance two-dimensional NMR, and RNA expression data in order to detect and
isolate newly expressed secondary metabolites. Aim 3 tests secondary metabolites
for effects on bacterial, fungal, and plant growth in order to determine the
likely ecological role of these molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.