* 2020127
* Collaborative Research:  Ammonia Phase PARtitioning and Transport (APART)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Emily Fischer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 864,914.00

Atmospheric emissions of ammonia (NH3) contribute to the formation of fine
particles and nitrogen deposition that affect human and ecological health, yet
little is known about NH3 transformation and fate. In this project, the research
team intends to perform airborne and ground-based measurements of NH3 emitted
from major cattle and dairy feedlots in the foothills of the Rocky Mountain
National Park (RMNP). Results will help inform atmospheric chemists and test a
forecasting tool for the downwind transport of reduced nitrogen into a sensitive
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative project between 2
institutions and 4 PIs, a 10-week field campaign is planned in the foothills of
RMNP to determine (i) fluxes and deposition timescales of NH3 within 10 km
downwind of large sources, and (ii) spatial distribution and partitioning of NHx
~100 km downwind of same sources. The main sampling platform is the University
of Wyoming King Air (UWKA) research aircraft equipped with new measurement
capabilities that allow for enhanced sampling strategies of gases and
particulates. Gaseous species include reduced and oxidized nitrogen (NH3 and
HNO3), methane (CH4), ethane (C2H6), carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2)
and water vapor (H2O), while particulates include aerosol concentration and size
and their water-soluble species concentrations. CH4 and C2H6 allow to track the
plume and distinguish between different source types. Integration of flight data
with ground-based observations collected from mobile monitoring and existing
sampling sites, provides a means to better interpret consistently available
ground-based data in the future. Results will also contribute to improved
representation of NH3 in transport models, help predict local air quality and
inform stakeholders. Two graduate and several undergraduate students will obtain
valuable hands-on experiences in a collaborative field
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.