* 2020459
* AccelNet: Accelerate Integration of Engineering and Agricultural Research using Artificial Intelligence (AI2EAR)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Linda Kinkel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2024
* USD 749,441.00

Food production is a complex global enterprise. Scientific gaps, technical gaps,
and social barriers hinder the ability to meet global food security needs. This
catalytic-level AccelNet project (Accelerate Integration of Engineering and
Agricultural Research using Artificial Intelligence â€“ AI2EAR) will promote
strategies to improve yield, reduce crop loss, decrease crop resource demands,
and increase food nutrition. AI2EAR will create links across international
collaborative efforts focused on sensor science, multiscale modeling, and data
analytics, particularly through artificial intelligence. The emerging network of
networks will enable researchers to better address challenges associated with
environmental, ecological, and biological variabilities seen and expected in
agriculture. AI2EAR provides a means participant networks to use principles of
responsible research and innovation and continual stakeholder engagement to
change, shape, and influence the path of innovation expected in 21st century
agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AI2EAR will address key challenges to food
security: 1) the inability to sense, quantify, and predict physical and chemical
variables in the environment, including the microbiome; 2) the lack of data
analytics and models that transform concurrent multi-scale datasets into
decision-making strategies; and 3) the lack of open-source cyber-infrastructures
for accessing, analyzing, and sharing the insights extracted from biological,
agricultural, and environmental datasets. Collaborative learning, on-farm
technology training, cooperative extension, and international exchange
opportunities for students and postdoctoral scholars will prepare future
transdisciplinary leads in this field. AI2EAR will develop and disseminate
products and practices to integrate and transfer knowledge. Interactions
developed as part of the network of networks, including from AI2EAR workshops
and survey participation, will accelerate sharing and adoption of technologies
urgently needed to facilitate innovation for next-generation precision-ag
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award is provided by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Plant Genome Research
Program in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.