* 2020183
* Collaborative Research Data Afterlives: The long-term impact of NSF Data Management Plans on data archiving and sharing for increased access
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Megan Finn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 09/30/2023
* USD 174,054.00

In 2011, the National Science Foundation began requiring that all funded
projects provide data management plans (DMPs) to ensure that project data,
computer codes, and methodological procedures were available to other scientists
for future use. However, the extent to which these data management requirements
have resulted in more and better use of project data remains an open question.
This project thus investigates the National Science Foundationâ€™s DMP mandate as
a national science policy and examines the broad impacts of this policy across a
strategic sample of five disciplines funded by the National Science Foundation.
It considers the organization and structure of DMPs across fields, the
institutions involved in data sharing, data preservation practices, the extent
to which DMPs enable others to use secondary project data, and the kinds of data
governance and preservation practices that ensure that data are sustained and
accessible. Systematic investigation of the impact of DMPs and data sharing
cultures across fields will assist funding agencies and research scientists
working to produce reproducible and open science by identifying barriers to data
archiving, sharing, and access. The principal investigators will use project
findings to develop data governance guidelines for information professionals
working with scientific data and to articulate best practices for scientific
communities using DMPs for data management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to enhance understanding of the role data management plans (DMPs) play in
shaping data lifecycles. It does so by examining DMPs across five fields funded
by the National Science Foundation to understand data practices, archiving and
access issues, the infrastructures that support data sharing and reuse, and the
extent to which project data are later used by other researchers. In phase I,
the investigators will gather a strategic sample of DMPs representing a wide
range of data types and data retention practices from different scientific
fields. Phase II consists of forensic data analysis of a subset of DMPs to
discover what has become of project data. Phase III develops detailed case
studies of research project data lifecycles and data afterlives with qualitative
interviews and archival documentary analysis to help develop best practices for
sustainable data preservation, access, and sharing. Phase IV will translate
findings into data governance recommendations for stakeholders. The project thus
contributes to research about contemporary studies of scientific data production
and circulation while assessing the effect of DMPs as a national science policy
initiative affecting data management practices in different scientific
communities. The comparative research design and mixed methods enables theory
building about cross-disciplinary data practices and data cultures across fields
and advances knowledge within data studies, information management studies, and
science and technology studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.