* 2020969
* What are we learning from language?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Gary Lupyan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 744,405.00

Much of our world knowledge (also known as "semantic" knowledge) comes from our
direct experiences with the world. For example, people can learn that snow is
cold through touch and that sparrows fly through sight. But analyses of language
reveal that a large amount of information about the world is contained within
the structure of language itself. That is, by tracking which words occur with
which other words, it is possible to learn things that seem to require direct
experience. Moreover, the co-occurrence of words in different languages seems to
reflect somewhat different bodies of knowledge. The project's principal aim is
to 1) explore the scope of semantic knowledge embedded in the structure of
different languages and 2) understand the extent to which people use this
embedded information to learn about the world. Our educational systems depend on
the ability to transmit knowledge via language in both its spoken and written
forms. Understanding the kinds of semantic knowledge typically learned through
language can help reveal the consequences of inequities in language exposure,
such as those caused by reading difficulties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand
the relationship between people’s knowledge and information embedded in the
structure of different languages, the investigators will compile a corpus of
semantic features and generic statements from native speakers of eight
languages: English, French, German, Dutch, Italian, Spanish, Mandarin Chinese,
and Russian. They will then compare this information, generated by people, to
information automatically derived from the distributional structure of each of
the eight languages. This will allow them to determine whether cross-linguistic
differences in people’s knowledge are predicted from differences in the
information embedded in the different languages. The investigators will estimate
the causal impact of language on people’s semantic knowledge using a quasi-
experimental approach, rather than the more typical correlational analyses. The
data will be compiled into a user-friendly, large-scale data resource (all with
open source code and data) and integrated with existing multilingual text
resources. The multilingual feature norms and ratings of generic statements will
be an important resource for artificial intelligence and NLP research and may
help identify sources of biases in training sets used in machine learning. This
approach brings computational and empirical methods to the study of one of the
oldest of human questions: how do we know what we
know?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.