* 2020504
* Collaborative Proposal: Structured Use of Metacognitive Activities in a Flipped Undergraduate Engineering Course to Enhance Learning and Professional Skill Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Renee Clark, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,548.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by promoting metacognition
within the engineering curriculum and investigating the impact of metacognitive
activities on student learning. Metacognition is the ability to reflect on,
understand, and control one’s learning. Learning theories have shown that self-
regulated and reflective learning are important for acquisition and application
of new knowledge. Metacognition is therefore important for learning in the
engineering classroom as well as for success in the professional engineering
workplace. This project will design and implement systematic metacognitive
activities in a fluid mechanics course at the University of South Florida. This
course uses a flipped classroom model in which class time will be used for
students to work collaboratively, including work on metacognitive activities. To
determine the impact of the metacognitive activities, students who are taught
fluid mechanics using the metacognitive approach will be compared with a control
group of students who are taught in the traditional way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate cognitive, reflective, and
affective student outcomes associated with systematic metacognition. The flipped
classroom pedagogy will be used to ensure that there is sufficient time
available for in-class metacognitive practice activities consisting of
Plan/Monitor/Evaluate cycles embedded within fluid mechanics problems.
Assessment of student outcomes will include direct assessment of cognitive
knowledge, as well as student reflections related to their metacognitive
activities. Additionally, indirect assessment of student metacognition will be
accomplished through a validated inventory. The multiple assessment methods are
intended to enable data triangulation to obtain valid and reliable conclusions.
Diverse student perspectives on systematic metacognitive instruction and
practice will be gathered using focus groups that include female,
underrepresented minority students, and community college transfer students.
Systematic, formal integration of metacognitive activities is expected to
enhance student learning. Learning materials, best practices, and outcomes will
be shared with other STEM faculty at the institution. The findings and lessons
learned will be disseminated via open educational courseware, conference
presentations, journal articles, and workshops. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.