* 2020853
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and environmental drivers of dengue risk across urban landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Maria Diuk-Wasser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 17,999.00

This project investigates the social and environmental conditions in cities that
contribute to mosquito-borne diseases such as dengue. This work is motivated by
the dramatic rates of urbanization seen across the world, and the complex role
that urban environments play in maintaining mosquito populations and driving
disease transmission. Despite the public health importance of dengue, there is
little known about how factors such as city structure, human population density,
and human behaviors come together to affect disease risk. To examine these
factors, these scientists will gather information from diverse sources such as
public health records, household mosquito collections, satellite imagery, and
community-based conversations. On-the-ground work will be conducted in an urban
environment that has a high incidence of dengue. This work is part of a
collaboration with the local health department, so that findings will support
ongoing disease prevention strategies. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are no widely-available vaccines or effective treatment options for dengue.
Therefore, disease prevention is centered around controlling mosquito
populations. The scientists propose that to effectively control mosquito
populations and disease transmission, there must be a greater understanding of
the social and environmental dynamics in cities that affect mosquito ecology,
human exposure to mosquitoes, and virus transmission. This project asks (1) what
factors drive differences in rates of dengue across cities; (2) how does dengue
risk vary within a city, based on the interactions between every-day human
behaviors and social and environmental conditions; and (3) how will improvements
to public services and environmental conditions affect rates of dengue in a
city? These efforts will contribute to an inter-disciplinary framework for
studying urban mosquito-borne diseases, grounded in spatial sciences. The work
will also result in disease modeling tools that can be used to plan public
health interventions in growing cities around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.