* 2020625
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Fast Algorithm Originated Fault Detection Scheme for Ring-LWE based Cryptographic Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jiafeng Xie, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 130,253.00

Post-quantum cryptography (PQC) refers to cryptograhic algorithms that are
thought to be resistant to attacks by quantum computers. Recently, PQC has
received significant attention from the research community. Ring-Learning-with-
Errors (Ring-LWE) based cryptography is regarded as one of the most promising
PQC candidates because of its strong security proof and ease of implementation.
When the cryptographic algorithms are implemented in hardware circuits, fault
detection is an essential protection strategy to fight against both natural and
maliciously injected faults in cryptographic circuits. This project aims to
develop novel fault detection scheme for the standard Ring-LWE based
PQC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop multiplication algorithms
that allow quick detection of faults for Ring-LWE based PQC. The project
envisions three tasks. The first task will develop mathematical foundation for
fast multiplication in Ring-LWE based PQC circuits. The second task will develop
efficient fault detection scheme for the Ring-LWE based cryptography. The final
task involve simulation and testing to validate above
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to make significant impact.
The outcome from this project will lead to the design of efficient Ring-LWE
based PQC on hardware platform. The fault detection scheme is expected to
generate secure implementation of Ring-LWE based PQC. The results and data from
this project will be broadly disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The repository
of this project will be stored and documented as per Villanova University policy
and will be accessible through:
http://www.ece.villanova.edu/~jxie02/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.