* 2020444
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the evolution of the southern Himalayan-Tibetan orogeny: What happened during Paleocene-Eocene time?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Delores Robinson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 12/31/2023
* USD 327,591.00

The ongoing tectonic collision between India and Asia began about 59 million
years ago, creating the highest mountains on Earth. While the tectonic history
of the last 28 million years is well documented in the Himalayan Mountains, the
earlier phase of the collision remains poorly understood. During this earlier
phase of collision sedimentary rocks were intensely folded and buckled in the
region north of Nepal in southern Tibet. This project will use new field and
laboratory analytical techniques to determine how the rocks in this region were
deformed during the early phase of the collision. Results from this work will
help discriminate between models for the India - Asia collision and evaluate
whether the southern Tibet region contains ~2,000 km of shortening. In addition,
this project will: 1. enhance multi-disciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups; 2. strengthen
international scientific collaborations; and 3. develop new, and augment
existing, science-focused outreach opportunities for K-12 students from
historically underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the Tethyan fold-thrust belt on the southern margin of the Himalayan-Tibetan
orogen in order to determine the style, magnitude, and timing of shortening.
Little is known about the evolution of the fold-thrust belt from collision at
~59 million years ago until the oldest dated Himalayan thrust at ~28 million
years ago. A complete study from the Indus-Yarlung suture zone in the north to
the South Tibetan detachment system in the south will establish a minimum
shortening estimate that incorporates all scales of deformation, and determine
what happened during Paleocene-Eocene time (60 to 30 million years ago).
Research will focus on four transects that combine structural field studies with
laboratory analyses of apatite fission track, (U-Th)/He in zircon, and U-Pb
detrital zircon geochronology. These data will inform new balanced cross
sections and four thermokinematic models. Results will be used in new models for
the evolution of the Tethyan fold-thrust belt, which will be combined with
existing cross sections in Nepal and Bhutan to provide a lithospheric evolution
of the entire system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.