* 2020506
* Collaborative Research: Experimental testing of thermoregulatory principles: Re-evaluating ecogeographic rules in living humans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Cara Ocobock, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 46,643.00

Human morphology varies widely around the world, but claims that adaptive
benefits of certain physical features contribute to this variation have rarely
been experimentally tested. This research will evaluate how differences in head,
trunk, and limb anatomy influence the ability of individuals to regulate their
internal body temperature when exposed to different environmental conditions,
thereby, experimentally testing long-held assumptions regarding patterning of
human body form. The investigators will share the results of this project
through publications, STEM outreach activities, public talks, and interviews on
a nationally recognized podcast. Graduate, undergraduate, and medical students
will be trained in data collection and analysis, and field trip demonstrations
of the project equipment and methods will be used to expose economically
disadvantaged Texas high school students to potential careers in science and
medicine. This project will also produce high-quality, whole body CT scans which
will be made readily available to other researchers through an online data
archive. Finally, this research will shed light on issues important to both the
broader scientific community and the general public, including the significance
of human biological diversity and the potential implications of global
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will experimentally
test proposed relationships between thermoregulatory benefits and
environmentally patterned variation in human anatomy. While climatic pressures
are widely cited as contributing to global variation in human head shape, torso
dimensions, limb proportions, and overall body size, specific links between
physical features and body function in different environmental conditions have
not been experimentally established. Furthermore, studies of adaptation to
climate have historically focused on separate regions of the body (e.g.
braincase, nose, torso, upper limb, lower limb), with minimal attention to how
these different anatomical structures interact with one another to function as a
whole. To remedy this, the research uses state-of-the-art technologies,
including computed tomography imaging and an environmental chamber simulating
different climactic conditions, to measure the physiological responses of
physically diverse living participants. Validation of proposed thermoregulatory
benefits of specific body forms is essential for guiding future research on
adaptation. Further, by employing a whole-body approach, this study will clarify
the role of different anatomical regions in overall thermoregulatory function.
In sum, this study will explicitly link hard and soft tissue morphology to
physiological outcomes, permitting more confident assessment of environmental
adaptation in both modern populations and the fossil
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.