* 2020103
* AI Institute: Planning: Foundations of Intelligence in Natural and Artificial Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Melanie Mitchell, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,918.00

This project will develop a blueprint for a future artificial intelligence (AI)
institute that will study the foundations of intelligence across a broad array
of natural and technological systems. Given the pervasiveness of AI technologies
in everyday life and the expected increased impact of these technologies in
upcoming decades, it is imperative that AI researchers develop more reliable,
general, and adaptable systems, ones that are trustworthy and that can more
successfully collaborate with humans. New breakthroughs in AI research are most
likely to come from concentrated collaborative efforts between AI specialists
and researchers who think deeply about the nature of intelligence in different
disciplines. Via focused workshops, seminars, and numerous education and
outreach activities, this project will bring together experts from a broad swath
of disciplines to map out ways in which insights from intelligent systems in
nature can inform and inspire AI progress. The results will be disseminated via
workshop reports and educational materials, and, most importantly, a detailed
proposal for an institute that would advance AI through a broader and deeper
view of intelligence, both natural and artificial, taking the time to formulate
longer-term questions and approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
planning project are to (1) map out the important research themes, questions,
methods, and applications that would be the topics of the prospective institute,
as well as the needed infrastructure; (2) build research collaborations and
perform preliminary research; (3) plan for how the institute will engage with
the overall national and international AI community, and for the instituteâ€™s
education and outreach programs. This two-year planning project will explore
five research themes that are central to the study of intelligence and
representative of the kinds of interdisciplinary problems that the envisioned AI
institute would address: &lt;br/&gt;1. A Taxonomy of Intelligence across
Disciplines; &lt;br/&gt;2. Development and Life History of Intelligent Systems;
&lt;br/&gt;3. Concept Formation, Abstraction, and Analogy; &lt;br/&gt;4.
Collective Intelligence; &lt;br/&gt;5. Evolutionary and Co-Evolutionary
Intelligence. &lt;br/&gt;These themes will be explored in numerous workshops,
project meetings, and educational and outreach activities that will bring
together researchers from diverse disciplines to map out questions and methods
as well as to engage in preliminary research driven by these questions. The
results of all of these activities will be summarized in publicly available
reports, and synthesized in a detailed blueprint for an envisioned AI
institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.