* 2020305
* AGS-PRF: Understanding Tropical High Cloud Feedbacks via Machine Learning and Super Parameterization
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Zane Martin, Martin, Zane Karas
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2022
* USD 173,250.00

Convective rainfall often takes the form of deep cumulus clouds, which appear as
bright red spots on a radar image, embedded in a larger region of weaker
rainfall colored orange or yellow. These broad areas of weaker rainfall
typically contain high, relatively flat clouds similar to the "anvils" seen
above isolated thunderstorms. The high stratiform clouds are a consequence of
the convective cells, just as the anvil forms only after a thunderstorm is fully
developed. But the presence of a broad region of upper-level stratus can affect
the subsequent development of convective clouds, or in other words it can
promote large-scale convective aggregation and organization. Upper-level clouds
encourage new cloud formation by blocking outgoing infrared radiation, heating
the column below and promoting rising motions. The effect is thought to be
important over tropical oceans where the frontal weather systems that organize
convection in higher latitudes are largely absent. But understanding of this
infrared cloud-radiation feedback and its effects on tropical weather and
climate is currently quite limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award
addresses the role of cloud-radiation feedback in the development of the Madden-
Julian Oscillation (MJO), in which a large region of convection organizes over
the tropical Indian Ocean and propagates slowly eastward for a period of 30 to
60 days. Cloud-radiation feedback has been invoked as a cause of convective
organization in the MJO and as a key factor in determining its propagation
speed. A second issue addressed in the proposal is the possible role of
convective organization in determining the Earth's climate sensitivity, meaning
the amount of global warming or cooling that results from a given increase or
decrease in greenhouse gas concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
conducted through a combination of observational analysis and numerical
simulations. The observational analysis uses artificial neural networks (ANNs)
applied to satellite and weather balloon data to determine how stratus cloud
development relates to ambient temperature, moisture, and stability in the cloud
layer. The relationships identified by the ANN are interpreted using layer-wise
relevance propagation (LRP), a technique that identifies the inputs which matter
the most for generating an ANN result. The value of machine learning tools like
ANN for basic science is often questioned because of their "black box" nature:
while machine learning methods can have uncanny predictive power, their results
do not come with any explanation for why a particular set of inputs produces a
given result. LRP is thus a means to open the black box and gain physical
insight and understanding from the empirical relationships identified through
the ANN machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance due to
the worldwide effects of the MJO, which influences weather and climate phenomena
including tropical cyclones (particularly in the Gulf of Mexico), the amount and
timing of monsoon rainfall, and the onset of El Nino events. MJO events are
predictable in principle given their slow propagation, but prediction skill is
limited in current weather and climate models. The possible influence of
convective organization on climate sensitivity is also of societal interest
given the rapid rise of greenhouse gas concentrations. The project also
contributes to workforce development by providing support to an early-career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.