* 2020446
* CC* Compute: Deep Bayou: Accelerating Scientific Discoveries with A GPU Cluster
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Thomas Kutter, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 398,760.00

Modern science increasingly relies on high performance computing (HPC) and data
analytics to make discoveries about our world. In recent years, graphics
processing units (GPUs), a specialty computer hardware originally developed for
graphic applications with a unique, highly parallel architecture, has become a
key enabling technology for both types of workloads. Through this project,
Louisiana State University (LSU) expands its existing computing facilities with
the addition of Deep Bayou, a GPU cluster consisting of 12 compute nodes and 26
NVIDIA GPU devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial research projects enabled
by Deep Bayou include particle physics, gravitational wave source
characterization with LIGO, ocean and ocean-atmosphere modeling, bioinformatics,
infrastructure modeling for disaster management, material sciences,
computational biology, and fundamental GPU architecture design. The Deep Bayou
infrastructure and organization is also open to additional initiatives and
projects through an application process. In addition to researchers across LSU
campus, the project partners with the Open Science Grid (OSG) to share the GPU
resources among the research community across the nation. Deep Bayou will make a
significant contribution to the building of future HPC workforce, as many
training and education activities plan to leverage its availability. Through
existing state- and federal-sponsored programs such as Louisiana Optical Network
Infrastructure (LONI), Baton Rouge: Bringing Youth Technology, Education and
Success (BRBYTES) and Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU), K-12
students and undergraduates can have access to courses and workshops facilitated
on the cluster, many of whom are from underrepresented minority
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.