* 2020277
* AI Institute: Planning: Novel Neural Architectures for 4D Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yi Ren, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Description: High-fidelity predictive modeling of complex
materials under extreme conditions (high temperature, high stress, corrosive
environment etc.) is crucial for accelerating material design and optimization
to address the pressing challenges in our world. This project will aim to
leverage both fundamental and use-inspired artificial intelligence (AI)
research, coupled with cutting-edge experiments, to revolutionize and transform
traditional materials science and engineering (MSE). The novel approach, rooted
in the fundamental principle in MSE, that microstructure controls properties,
focuses on the development of novel neural architectures that naturally capture
the physical causal relations across key microstructural features at multiple
length and time scales for predictive modeling and optimal material design. The
methodologies and experimental frameworks for constructing novel physics-based
learning models developed in this project will be applied to a variety of
compelling problems in complex material systems including ceramics, metals and
metallic alloys, composites, and porous materials. It is expected that this
project will impact many areas including aerospace, microelectronics, petroleum
industry, and consumer products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
The theme of this institute involves the development of revolutionary approaches
enabled by fundamental and use-inspired AI research, coupled with 4D X-ray
microtomography and correlative microscopy, to develop and understand structure-
property relationships in vastly different materials systems for both
predictively modeling and optimal material design. The goal of the institute
will be to accelerate converging research on new learning theories,
experimentation methodologies, and validation protocols that will facilitate
scientific modeling of the evolutionary and hierarchical structure-property
mappings of complex materials systems. In this planning project, researchers
mathematically formulate the ubiquitous challenges in modeling complex material
structure-property mappings across critical application domains (metals and
metallic alloys, multi-functional composites, porous geo-materials, nuclear
fuels, etc.), demonstrate the necessity and preliminary feasibility of machine
learning and AI in addressing these challenges, and correlate with 4D
experiments through x-ray microtomography and correlative microscopy. A
consortium of industrial collaborators will be developed to transfer the
fundamental knowledge from this program knowledge into practical solutions and
to educate a new class of skilled practitioners in the workforce. This project
will inspire one to re-think the utility of machine learning in materials
science: From knowledge-agnostic feature learning to reasoning mechanisms
adaptive to domain-specific knowledge. It will provide the key infrastructure
for potential automated materials characterization, research, and
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.