* 2020234
* Cultural Models of Pain and Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Craig Hadley, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 45,967.00

Millions of Americans suffer from chronic pain or other musculoskeletal pain
disorders. For many, the etiology is not well understood, clear evidence of
underlying tissue damage is not present, and the pain is highly contextual.
Physical activity is an effective therapeutic tool for some forms of chronic
pain, yet many sufferers feel movement is painful. Emerging theory and evidence
suggest that individuals learn to encode and interpret bodily sensations as pain
signals linked to tissue damage; they attach meaning to the pain and related
sensations. The investigator proposes to examine the relationship between the
meaning given to pain and the physiological correlates of the meaning attributed
to sensation among a group of individuals for whom pain and suffering are
voluntarily induced. The aim of the project is to use athletes to explore if,
and how, meaning, pain, and movement are interrelated and to use those insights
to generalize to non-athlete populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is
designed to assess if the meaning humans attribute to their world influences
their perceptions and performances in the world. To do so, the investigator will
1) interview 30 endurance athletes to generate an understanding of their
cognitive models of pain and suffering, and then 2) use this understanding of
cultural models of pain to develop an online survey that will be deployed to
athletes and non-athletes to test whether endurance athlete’s understanding of
bodily sensations differs from non-athletes. Then 3) within a sample of
endurance athletes, the investigator will further test whether athletes’ meaning
attribution is associated with actual measures of physical performance. The
study will allow a test of the theory that meaning attribution and pain are
linked within athletes, which may then provide more general insights to pain
treatment and therapies in a non-athlete population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.