* 2020276
* Statistical Models for Three-Way Social Network Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nynke Niezink, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 290,000.00

This research project will develop models for the dynamics of social networks in
which relationships involve three social entities. Conventional models for
social network data focus on two-party (sender-receiver) relationships.
Complementing these models with an extra dimension is critical to understanding
social phenomena ranging from network perception biases (perceiver-sender-
receiver relations) to gossip (sender-receiver-target relations). The methods to
be developed will be applicable to many substantive fields, including education,
political science, psychology, and sociology. A large-scale study on the
dynamics of gossip among children and adolescents and its consequences on health
and performance outcomes will constitute one of the major applications of this
project. Through established collaborations, the project will directly influence
policy and help to construct successful prevention strategies for social
exclusion. The development of publicly available software and the creation of
training materials and cross-disciplinary workshops will ensure broad access to
the new models. Graduate students in the social sciences and statistics will be
trained and mentored as part of the research process. The results of this
research will be incorporated into the undergraduate course
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models for the dynamics of three-way network
data will be formulated in the stochastic actor-oriented modeling framework.
These continuous-time models will enable researchers to study individuals'
network decisions and the micro-level social mechanisms governing network
change. Project results will include estimation procedures for both time-stamped
relational event data and for longitudinal network panel data. To account for
individual heterogeneity, a random effects model for the study of three-way
network dynamics will be developed. Using the newly developed methods, the
project will explore both substantive and methodological questions of interest.
For example, the assumption that individuals base their relational behavior on a
shared cognition of a 'true' network is standard in social network models. At
the same time, it is questionable since people's network perceptions are known
to differ. Simulation studies using the new methods will evaluate the impact of
this assumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.