* 2020918
* Collaborative Research: Leader Behaviors and Experiences across Life Domains
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Zhiqing Zhou, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 172,688.00

Individuals in leadership roles represent a large group of the nation’s
workforce, and their behaviors not only affect organizational effectiveness but
also influence the prosperity and welfare of people in their nonwork domains.
Despite their importance, prior research has paid limited attention to the
nonwork domain, including family, community, and personal life, contexts that
are antecedents and consequences of leadership role occupancy, leadership
development, and day-to-day variation of leadership behaviors. This project
takes a life-span and holistic approach to analyze how nonwork domain variables,
such as community involvement and volunteering activities, lead to and are
shaped by leadership role occupancy. Further, the project provides critical
insights on how nonwork domain experiences might promote leadership development
and how leadership development might contribute to leaders’ growth and thriving
in other nonwork domains. Lastly, the project will help to uncover how and when
leaders’ day-to-day behaviors and their nonwork domain experiences mutually
influence each other. These findings will inform business organizations seeking
to promote leadership to facilitate their economic competitiveness, and will
also inform society regarding how leadership in one context may contribute to
the welfare of organizations more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We know very
little regarding how leadership in one organizational context may influence
leadership and work behavior more generally, or the reciprocal relationships
between leadership in multiple domains. Adopting a multi-method approach, this
project will conduct three empirical studies. First, the project will use
archival data (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, NLSY) collected by the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (NLSY 79, NLSY 79 Children and Young Adults, and
NLSY 97) to examine how individuals’ nonwork experiences and their leadership
role occupancy at work influence each other reciprocally. The project will use
mixture latent Markov modeling to capture and predict the leadership role
transition patterns. Second, the project will use a longitudinal design
collecting multi-wave, multi-source data to examine the interplay between
leaders’ nonwork experiences and their leadership development processes using
latent change score models. The third study takes a within-person perspective
and analyzes how leaders’ work and nonwork experiences and behaviors are
interconnected on a daily basis. The project will conduct an experience sampling
study over 10 consecutive days, capturing fluctuations of leaders’ work and
nonwork behaviors and experiences that are otherwise missed by surveys separated
by longer time intervals; it will use dynamic structural equation modeling
(DSEM) in data analysis. Lastly, by triangulating findings of three studies
using different methods, the project will promote a more comprehensive
understanding of how leaders’ work and nonwork experience affect each other
across different time frames and life stages. Findings from the project will
inform organizational theories regarding leadership, as well as life course
perspectives that focus on the interplay between work and non-work domains,
especially regarding leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.