* 2020972
* Online Deliberate Practice to Develop Questioning and Discussion Techniques of Undergraduate STEM Students Who Plan to Become Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,04/30/2023
* John Pecore, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 292,888.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in excellent STEM education by
creating a practice-based online learning experience for future STEM teachers.
Many STEM teachers enter the classroom with limited experience asking effective
questions and facilitating productive STEM class discussions. This project will
develop online experiences to help future STEM teachers develop valuable
teaching, questioning, and discussion skills before beginning classroom field
experiences. Teacher skills have been correlated with teacher turnover, job
satisfaction, and student outcomes. Thus, improving teaching skills has the
potential to increase persistence in teaching careers. To foster teaching skill
development, the online learning experiences in a simulated classroom will
provide repeated opportunities for STEM undergraduate students to practice
teaching skills. This approach includes deliberate practice within simulations,
timely peer and mentor feedback, and guided self-reflection. All feedback will
be based on the Danielson (2013) rubric allowing transferability of findings to
other settings and providing information that is independent of the experts
providing the feedback. Anticipated project outcomes include the development of
effective practice-based teacher education learning experiences, replication of
online instructional activities, and preparation of future teachers to ask
effective questions and encourage stimulating STEM
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages undergraduate preservice
STEM students through the online instructional platforms, Mursion™ and Canvas™.
Canvas™ provides a comprehensive learning management system that will enable the
undergraduate pre-service teachers to engage in deliberate practice. For
example, they can record their actions, post the recording, receive feedback,
and use the feedback to improve their actions. Mursion™ provides a simulated
classroom environment using avatar students. Through these virtual platforms,
the future teachers can engage in repeated practice to develop skills in
creating and posing specific questions to elicit evidence of STEM student
understanding. Using a mixed-methods research design, the project has potential
to advance: (1) practice-based undergraduate preservice STEM teacher
preparation; (2) the use of online platforms to create synchronous and
asynchronous STEM teacher skill practice opportunities; and (3) an
infrastructure to develop questioning and discussion techniques that could be
replicated for other important teaching skills. Results of this project will be
disseminated through professional avenues (i.e. national and local conferences
and peer-reviewed journals), the NSF video showcase, and a project website. This
project will benefit the STEM education community by providing online,
replicable practice-based approaches that can be used for teacher preparation.
This project’s practice-based teacher preparation approach, practice-based
instructional activities, and online infrastructure will be replicable by other
teacher preparation programs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.