* 2020713
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sign language spatial modulation across sociohiohistorical contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Diane Brentari, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 12,723.00

Sign languages (SLs) are situated in the visual-spatial modality, and the body
and hands are directly visible during communication. This affords SLs the use of
three-dimensional space in fundamental ways. Space is used, or modulated, to
refer to locations in an iconic way, allowing signers to place or move referents
based on their real world locations or relative spatial configurations. Space is
also modulated to track grammatical arguments—i.e., to introduce and maintain
discourse referents. How signers weave both person and location referents
throughout a discourse has been of great theoretical interest in the sign
language linguistics literature. Among proposed frameworks, some reconcile these
two uses of space within a single linguistic agreement analysis, while others
employ both linguistic (morphemic) and non-linguistic (gestural) analyses rather
than an entirely linguistic one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to better
understand the origins and development of these two referent functions in
differing linguistic environments, this research analyzes the distribution of
spatial modulations (locative and argument) across three languages–American Sign
Language (ASL) a well-established sign language over 300 years old, Nicaraguan
Sign Language (NSL) young sign language of approximately 50 years old that is
developing autonomously without outside influence, and Lengua de Señas
Costarricense (LESCO) a young sign language that is developing in a situation
with strong language contact with ASL. The student researcher will obtain
language samples from three sub-groups of NSL and LESCO that represent earlier
stages of grammatical development, using the “apparent time” hypothesis, and
compare them with equivalent samples from the well-established sign language,
ASL. The goal of this work is to tease apart the factors involved in deictic
reference tracking in spatial events from its use in argument structure. The
proposed research will also serve to further document under-studied sign
languages, and to archive the data collected in a permanent, institutionally-
maintained repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.