* 2020805
* SBP: How does improved speech perception impact higher-level processing?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Melissa Baese-Berk, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 355,554.00

When people listen to other talkers, they experience many different voices and
accents. Although unfamiliar talkers and those with unfamiliar accents are often
less intelligible to a listener, intelligibility improves as the listener
becomes more familiar with the talker. In this proposal, the investigators
examine whether there is a similar impact on the comprehension or understanding
of a talker’s intended message. That is, does lack of familiarity with a talker
or with a specific foreign accent negatively impact comprehension or memory,
even when intelligibility is unimpaired? For example, does listening to an
unfamiliar teacher in a classroom (e.g., a substitute teacher) make it harder to
understand and remember the content of the lesson? Our society includes people
with many different accents, both regional US and international. If a person’s
accent interferes with a listener’s comprehension or memory for a conversation,
even if all the words are accurately perceived, this could influence how the
person is perceived. For example, if comprehension and memory for the
conversation is enhanced when the talker’s accent is familiar, it could
perpetuate current biases in educational and occupational opportunities. In a
job interview, people with unfamiliar accents would be judged as less
understandable and hence less qualified than those with the interviewer’s
accent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the current project, the investigators will
examine the extent to which familiarity with a talker’s voice or a specific
foreign accent improves memory. This will be accomplished by first familiarizing
listeners with a specific talker or foreign accent and then testing whether
words and phrases said by those people are remembered better than words and
phrases said by unfamiliar people or by talkers with an unfamiliar foreign
accent. In addition, they will examine the extent to which familiarity improves
listeners’ memory for new information presented in a longer lecture. The results
should allow development of a framework for understanding how challenging
listening situations impact memory and comprehension and how to ameliorate the
effects through auditory training paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.