* 2020915
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Collective Behavior and Patterning of Topological Defects: From String Theory to Crystal Plasticity
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Alan Newell, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2025
* USD 194,487.00

This project seeks to develop a unifying mathematical and conceptual framework
to describe topological defects and understand their interactions and motions,
capitalizing on a convergence of insights from engineering, physics and
mathematics. Topological defects show up throughout a stunningly wide range of
phenomena, ranging from patterns in the cosmos, to rupture fronts on fault
planes in our planetâ€™s crust, to the microscopic structure of the metal in an
automobile or a jet engine or a skyscraper, to the arrangements of molecules in
our phone screens, and potentially all the way down to the subatomic
constituents of matter itself. Potentially, new knowledge from this research can
be leveraged to seed advances in technology relevant for grand challenges in
seismic forecasting, infrastructure renewal, and energy-efficient
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will work on
establishing a convergent quantitative language of topological defect dynamics
in physical systems that addresses commonalities between seemingly unrelated
physical phenomena. They will develop theoretical and computational tools for
probing the structure, dynamics, and collective behavior of topological defects
by leveraging insights from currently disparate fields spanning engineering,
physics, and mathematics. The primary focus will be the scientific question of
how string theory/quantum gravity is related to the mechanics of defects in
crystalline solids, using holographic dualities developed to study string theory
in anti-DeSitter space to learn about strongly coupled condensed matter systems.
Understanding plasticity serves the pressing societal need for light-weight,
high-strength, resilient metallic materials for energy-efficient transportation,
built infrastructure, and defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.