* 2020491
* Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: Inclusive Mentoring in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Maura Borrego, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 05/31/2026
* USD 270,326.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through efforts to significantly increase the
numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority populations
(African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska Natives,
Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete high
quality STEM degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louis Stokes Inclusive
Mentoring in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (Louis Stokes IM
STEM) Center of Excellence will bring together experts dedicated to
investigating successful and promising practices for inclusive STEM mentoring
along several STEM pathways and in various learning environments. The Center
will collaborate with academic institutions, Department of Energy (DoE) national
laboratories, professional societies, and regional industrial partners in
researching and augmenting inclusive mentoring activities for historically
underrepresented minority (URM) students and students from other underserved
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the student population enrolled in higher
education institutions continues to diversify, a deep understanding and
widespread adoption of inclusive mentoring practices that promote student
success is needed. The IM STEM Center, with leadership from the lead
institutions of two NSF-funded LSAMP projects - University of Texas-El Paso
(UTEP) and Colorado State University (CSU), will serve the Southwest Rockies
region by conducting knowledge-building and diffusion activities on STEM
mentoring. Collaborating non-academic organizations include the Department of
Energy's Brookhaven National Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratories, and
professional STEM organizations including the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science, and the Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers. The three focal areas to be addressed in project
activities are mentoring of community college students in transition, mentoring
of undergraduate and graduate student researchers, and mentoring of experiential
learning students. An advisory board consisting of Presidential Awardees of
Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring (PASEMEM) and STEM
mentoring researchers, in addition to linkages to the existing Louis Stokes
Midwest Regional Center of Excellence, provides a broad national range for the
Center's research and dissemination activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
will disseminate inclusive mentoring knowledge via workshops, journal articles,
an edited monograph, institutional websites, and other varied formats useful to
diverse audiences and educational institutions. The workshops will train both
mentors and trainers interested in offering their own inclusive mentoring
workshops. The Center has the potential to expand, elevate and influence
conversations about effective mentoring among communities of STEM faculty,
graduate students, and government and industry professionals committed to
developing a strong, diversified STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.