* 2020840
* Evaluating meaning-based explanations of syntactic island effects cross-linguistically
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 303,990.00

A core problem in understanding constraints on syntax in human languages is
understanding constraints on long-distance dependencies, such as in “Which
sportscar did the color of __ delight the baseball player?” The long-distance
dependency between the wh-phrase (a question word or phrase beginning with “wh”)
“which sportscar” and its interpretation position following “color of” is not
acceptable in English. This kind of observation led Chomsky to propose that
constraints on long-distance dependencies may be innate and unlearnable: part of
Universal Grammar. An alternative approach proposes that the difficulty of a
long-distance dependency depends on the discourse status of the extracted
element in the construction at hand: the extracted element is a focus
(corresponding to new information) in wh-questions, but not in relative clauses.
The current project investigates predictions of the two kinds of accounts. The
results will inform theories about the form of extraction constraints in English
and French, and human language more generally. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training to a postdoctoral student and to undergraduate
students, including under-represented minorities. This research will build
connections between the fields of experimental psychology, cognitive science and
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be conducted here consists of
behavioral acceptability experiments in English and French, in cases of
extraction out of subjects, and in extraction out of adjuncts, which have also
been claimed to be difficult to extract from in the syntactic literature. For
example, according to a discourse-based theory, extractions from subjects will
improve even in wh-questions if the extraction position can be marked as a
focus, e.g., with contrastive focus markers like “even” and “only”, as in “Which
sportscar did even the color of __ delight the baseball
player?”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.