* 2020313
* High Resolution Dating of the Hawley-Bell Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Gregory Hodgins, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 216,052.00

The research team will determine the age of building material from monuments and
villages in the Eastern and Midwestern U.S. For roughly the last millennium,
most people in the Mississippi River Basin began living in villages and towns.
The histories of these communities – the reasons and rate of their development –
are points of scientific debate. Evidence-based explanations for historical
change prior to written records is a major contribution of archaeological data,
but the science requires accurate and precise dates for objects and events in
the past. This project will apply radiocarbon and tree-ring analysis to wood
curated in a large museum collection that, due to recent methodological
developments, can contribute unique information to questions surrounding the
development of complex societies. Both the public and experts have long had an
interest in the history of the indigenous societies of the Mississippi River
Basin, particularly the construction of the large pyramid mounds at the center
of ancient towns in the region. This study will contribute the most precise
calendar dates ever obtained for the construction for some of these monuments,
and the data will aid research on the importance of population change and the
use of monuments to structure social and political relationships in the
past.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The systematic application of tree-ring based
methods significantly improves knowledge on the timing of past events and
enables theoretical advances in archaeology. This study will apply these
techniques on a large scale in the Eastern and Midwestern U.S. and will generate
high precision calendar dates for the timing and tempo of monument construction,
the duration of village occupation, and the spread of culture attributes
characteristic of “Mississippian” society. The size of the tree ring collection
and the diversity of contexts mean that the results would represent a major
improvement in the precision of Mississippian culture history. This will
contribute significantly to archaeology in the region and help extend millennial
length tree-ring chronologies. Overall, our results will contribute to the goal
of developing event-based histories of monumentality and culture change in
emergent complex societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.