* 2020703
* Development of a Data-driven Magnetohydrodynamic Simulation Model for Flux-Emerging Active Regions Leading to Coronal Mass Ejections
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Qiang Hu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 437,188.00

Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are major drivers of extreme space weather in the
near-Earth space, hence a matter of serious concern for our modern,
technologically-dependent society. The development of advanced models that could
simulate the CME generation and propagation through interplanetary space is an
important step toward our capability to predict the arrival times of CMEs at the
Earth and their geo-effectiveness. CME generation models of varying complexity
and accuracy have been developed for a number of decades now, ranging from over-
pressured plasmoid models, such as the blob model, through to flux rope-based
models with or without the necessity of energy build-up before the eruption. In
almost all the cases, they have model parameters that need to be adjusted from
one event to another. This 3-year project aims to develop a self-consistent,
data-driven magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) simulation model for CMEs extending from
lower chromosphere to 1 AU that is entirely based on first principles with
minimum setup effort and free model parameters. This 3-year research
investigation is also expected to increase the public awareness about space
weather. As part of the project, the team will develop a website, which will be
self-explanatory about CMEs and their role in space weather, including images
based on the original project’s results that will be regularly posted. As such,
it will provide a valuable educational tool to the general public. The project
team will archive their data sets and share them with interested parties, such
as different space physics and astrophysics groups on request. Hence, their new
model will contribute to the space weather forecasting modeling efforts as a
valuable scientific tool for the solar-heliospheric community at large. The PI
of the project is the Program Coordinator of the Heliophysics REU program at the
University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). There are also other summer
internship programs ongoing at the UAH’s Department of Space Science and Center
for Space Plasma and Aeronomic Research (CSPAR). Within the framework of these
programs, the project team will offer compelling research projects to
undergraduate students at the UAH, giving preference to students from
underrepresented minorities. The research and EPO agenda of this project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year
project aims to develop a new data-driven MHD simulation model for CMEs
extending from lower chromosphere to 1 AU that is entirely based on first
principles with minimum setup effort and free model parameters. This new model,
which will be driven by vector magnetograms on the photosphere (taken by SDO’s
HMI) through a physically-consistent characteristic boundary condition
formulation, will track the evolution of active regions (ARs), mainly the build-
up of free energy and magnetic helicity into the ARs through flux emergences.
The main goal of the project team is to obtain the formation of flux ropes near
polarity inversion lines and eventually their eruptions resulting from the torus
instability. The investigators will then follow the CME propagation through the
corona and inner heliosphere up to 1 AU and validate their results with various
spacecraft data at every stage. They have already developed separately their
local simulation model consisting of lower chromosphere, transition region, and
lower corona and global simulation model covering global corona and inner
heliosphere within our Multi-Scale Fluid-Kinetic Simulation Suite (MS-FLUKSS)
code. During this project, the team will couple the local and global components
of their simulation model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.