* 2020624
* AccelNet: Accelerating Research on Neuromorphic Perception, Action, and Cognition
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Shihab Shamma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,754,074.00

Artificial intelligence is becoming ubiquitous in modern life. To build systems
under the current paradigm, large amounts of energy are required for computing
and sensing. This causes environmental problems, pollution, and challenges for
small-sized systems, as well as privacy issues. The field of neuromorphic
science and technology offers an alternative by seeking to understand principles
of biological brains and build on their basis artificial systems using low-power
hardware and software solutions. While its advantages have been demonstrated,
further advances are necessary and will require common computational tools and
principled experimental approaches. This AccelNet project, NeuroPacNet, links
international experts in neuromorphic engineering with computational
neuroscientists, roboticists, control theorists, and researchers of perception
from seven global networks to set the foundations for building systems that can
robustly process real-world signals in time and adapt to changes. This network
of networks will facilitate the development of new methods and approaches for
intelligent system design and prepare the next generation of leaders in
neuromorphic science and technology. As different industries adopt neuromorphic
hardware, society will have access to new applications, such as in computing on
cell phones, neuroprostheses, intelligent hearing aids, and smart sensory
systems with predictive capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NeuroPacNet will
advance computational research on modeling the integration of perception,
action, and cognition. The network of network will coordinate across those
research thrusts and develop new approaches grounded in theoretical neuroscience
for sensorimotor control, motor learning, event-based computations, and learning
in spiking neural networks. NeuroPacNet will also include robotics research in
the areas of drone navigation and human activity understanding for humanoids and
will address social and ethical issues in humanoid robotics. The network of
networks will use innovative hardware design and mixed signals computational
systems to address computation for emerging and unconventional technologies.
International collaboration and knowledge exchange will include an immersive
research exchange program providing scholarships to students and postdoctoral
researchers, an annual workshop to discuss common issues and concerns in a
stimulating environment and to engage in hands-on projects, meetings to define
challenges, opportunities, and actions to accelerate progress, and competitions
with two challenges to be solved by teams of researchers and students. An
interactive project website will become a portal for archived webinar talks,
tools, and data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this
project is provided by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.