* 2020126
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Understanding Resilience and Long-Term Ecosystem Change in the High Arctic: Narrative-Based Analyses from Svalbard
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Astrid Ogilvie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 292,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
focus on Resilience in a Rapidly Changing Arctic. Integrated teams of scientists
and stakeholders will address key areas of arctic resilience understanding and
action. This collaboration of academic and non-academic knowledge systems
constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that will advance not only
understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but also spur action,
inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for resilience. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SVALUR project seeks to advance resilience building
and adaptation to current changes in the Arctic by focusing on the creation of
knowledge of the environment in the archipelago of Svalbard, situated north of
Norway in the Arctic ocean. The prevalence of long-term monitoring programs to
capture environmental change is increasing, but such initiatives typically
capture highly specific parameters and mostly cover relatively short periods of
time. Environmental understanding of people living, working and exploring parts
of the Arctic is multifaceted, relational and often concerns much longer time
periods. However, compared with scientific monitoring, such knowledge is rarely
utilized, thus hindering holistic knowledge generation with agency in arctic
areas subject to rapid environmental change. The project will capture detailed
understanding of environmental change experienced by people living, working
and/or exploring different parts of High Arctic Svalbard. This information will
be compared environmental monitoring data, in terms of overlap, mismatch and
possible synergies. The results will help provide valuable, holistic insights
into long-term environmental change and how current monitoring programs can
become more sensitive to peopleâ€™s lived experiences and optimize their relevance
to people living in and visiting the Arctic. Increasing levels of transience
throughout the region mean that developing ways in which narrative-based
understanding can complement scientific monitoring are pressing. SVALUR will
develop research methods that are holistic and co-owned, and vital for the well-
being of both current and future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.