* 2020387
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: Accelerating discoveries at Greenlands marine margins through international collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* An Nguyen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,992.00

Most of Greenland is covered by the expansive Greenland Ice Sheet, which, if it
all melted, would cause sea level to rise by more than 20 feet. Greenland has
been losing ice at a particularly rapid rate since the mid-1990s, with impacts
for local and global fisheries. This AccelNet project (GRISONET) is designed to
facilitate rapid and effective collaboration-building and foster discovery about
the Greenland ice sheet, the ocean, the marine ecosystems and their
interactions. GRISONET will address current knowledge gaps and community-
identified needs by establishing international and interdisciplinary
collaborations to assess, plan for, and accelerate ice-ocean-ecosystem research.
The network of networks will develop strategies for the sharing of knowledge,
data and syntheses, which will improve projections of future changes in
Greenland and of their impact on global societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GRISONET
will advance understanding of the role that ice sheet/ocean exchanges of heat
and freshwater play in driving ice loss and in routing the meltwater away from
the ice sheet. The network of networks engages oceanographers, glaciologists,
atmospheric and climate scientists, marine ecosystem and fisheries experts to
tackle the community-identified needs. GRISONET objectives include the
establishment of a publicly-accessible database of existing ice/ocean data,
protocols for the shared collection of future measurements, improved
representation of ice/ocean exchanges in models, and a collaborative network
structure that can be sustained. Activities will leverage resources from
different networks within the US (e.g. US Arctic Observing Network, Interagency
Arctic Research Policy Committee), international programs (International Ice
Patrol, Ice Sheet Modeling Intercomparison Project, International Arctic Science
Committee) and facilities of partners from Europe, Canada and Japan. Through
working groups, international workshops, yearly summer schools for junior
scientists, scholarly exchanges and professional training, GRISONET will prepare
over 40 junior US scientists in science collaboration and the relevant cross-
disciplinary science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this
award is being provided by Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program one of NSF's
10 Big Ideas. NNA supports projects that address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic, empower new research partnerships,
diversify the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal
and informal education, and integrate the co-production of knowledge where
appropriate. This award aligns with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.