* 2020863
* Integrating Trust and Feedback Intervention Theories to Predict Behavioral Change in Response to Algorithmic Feedback
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Landers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 498,664.00

As organizations increasingly integrate algorithms into their decision-making,
(such as by providing decision aids and algorithmically generated advice to
employees), it has become evident that we lack a scientific understanding of
when and why people heed such advice. In this project, an integrative theory
linking the characteristics of algorithmic advice to advice-taking behavior is
proposed and tested. To test this theory, we develop a web-based application
that allows internet users to complete automated virtual job interviews and
receive algorithmic feedback or human feedback on their performance. In doing
so, we improve scientific understanding of how people respond to algorithmic
feedback while simultaneously providing people with authentic feedback on their
interview performance, a societal benefit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, organizational trust theory, which specifies a theoretical structure
for trust and likely consequences, has been integrated into feedback
intervention theory, which describes the process by which people act upon
received feedback, to better predict behavioral change in response to
algorithmic feedback. This study thus fills theoretical gaps about the influence
of feedback source on interview performance while also informing broader
questions regarding algorithms, trust, and behavioral change. The studyâ€™s core
propositions will be tested with a between-subjects experimental design and
authentic job seekers to maximize generalizability to the present-day
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.