* 2020246
* AI Institute: Planning: AI-Enabled Secure and Responsive Smart Manufacturing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Ashutosh Sabharwal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Advanced manufacturing is on the cusp of a Fourth Industrial revolution,
captured by the term Industry 4.0 or Smart Manufacturing. However, challenges
abound in realizing the smart manufacturing paradigm. Rapidly reconfigurable
production systems envisaged in smart manufacturing are inherently tied to
acquisition of large amounts of continuous streaming data from machines and
automated robots on the shop floor, as well as from entities dispersed in the
supply-logistics chain, using heterogeneous sensors. The data has to be
transmitted over wireless channels with tight latency and security guarantees,
and coupled with real-time analysis to allow precise trouble-shooting,
coordination, and monitoring. The inescapable conclusion is that to enable smart
manufacturing, a tight integration – and, in fact, cross-layer optimization – of
manufacturing technologies, robotics and control, networking protocols such as
5G, and machine learning paradigms such as inference on the edge is needed.
Achieving this vision is the goal of the institute envisaged in this planning
grant.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Realizing an effective institute will require
experts in advanced manufacturing, AI, sensing, computation, and sensing, as
well as collaboration with industry and federal research labs. The major
activities in this planning grant aim at developing such a team through a range
of activities. The intellectual bulwark of the institute is the enabling of
smart manufacturing through a tight integration and cross-layer optimization of
manufacturing technologies, networking protocols such as 5G, robotics and
control, and machine learning paradigms such as inference on the edge. This
integration will also generate and revitalize new research areas that encompass
fundamental materials science to large-scale supply networking and cybersecurity
to AI-enabled collaborative robotics and human-robot interaction and beyond. The
activities also include new curriculum development both at the participating
universities and community colleges, as well as plans for outreach through local
governments and high schools, for developing the workforce for such a paradigm
and broadening participation into AI-related technology among
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.