* 2020476
* Collaborative Research: Tailoring Energy Landscapes to Harness the Multistability for Reconfigurable 3D Buckled Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Teng Zhang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 255,665.00

This grant will focus on fundamental studies on the multistability of three-
dimensional (3D) structures for well-controlled, active architectural
reconfigurability. Reconfigurable structures can actively change their
geometries and thereby their functionalities upon external stimuli (like
mechanical forces, magnetic fields, electric fields, hydration, temperature, and
pressure). Such smart, stimuli-responsive structures have a diverse range of
applications in deployable solar panels, electromagnetic metamaterials,
photonics, biomedical devices, soft robotics, metasurfaces, and many others.
Most existing reconfiguration mechanisms, however, require persistent external
stimuli to maintain the deformed shape. Reconfigurability through harnessing
structural instabilities has emerged as a popular and powerful means of
designing various multifunctional reconfigurable devices that can maintain their
deformed shape without the need for persistent external stimuli. Despite
intensive studies, the difficulty in realizing well-controlled architectural
reconfigurability has significantly hindered the rational design of
reconfigurable structures, especially for those composed of thin films. This
research project will focus on understanding the fundamental relationship
between the geometry and mechanical properties of 3D thin-film structures and
their multistability and identifying the energy-efficient reconfiguration path
from one stable state to another. In addition to the research activities, the
project will contribute to the education of students at the graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 levels by supporting interdisciplinary doctoral student
training, undergraduate research opportunities, and outreach activities to grade
6-9 girls and K-5 students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to unravel the
fundamental mechanics that govern architectural reconfiguration among
multistable, symmetric and asymmetric configurations of flexible, three-
dimensional (3D) thin-film structures. To achieve this objective, the specific
aims of this project include: (1) maximize the energy barrier and eliminate
intermediate local minima between stable states of 3D thin-film structures
through energy landscape biasing, and (2) minimize the energy cost for shape
change from one local minimum state to another, and realize the
reconfigurability of 3D thin-film structures through magnetic force control. The
research outcomes of the work will significantly advance our knowledge in the
mechanics of multistable structures by (i) establishing relations between
geometries and material compositions of thin-film structures and the energy
landscape of different stable states, and (ii) determining the active forces to
efficiently maneuver the structure from one stable state to another following
the minimum energy path. In addition, the project will ultimately facilitate the
design of well-controlled, smart reconfigurable structures and generate broad
impacts on other fields, including physics, materials science, and smart
materials and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.