* 2020667
* The Role of Gene Duplication in Resolving Sexually Antagonistic Selection in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Manyuan Long, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Sexual selection is a major driver of evolution, often resulting in drastically
different characteristics between males and females. Recently it has become
clear that gene duplication is also a powerful contributor to evolutionary
diversification. This research seeks to understand how young gene duplicates
evolve sex-specific essential functions under sexually antagonistic selection.
Males and females, while sharing most of their DNA, satisfy different functional
requirements for reproduction and survival. Sexual selection on traits with a
shared genetic basis can have opposing effects in the two sexes, causing sexual
conflict (SC) that may reduce fitness until the conflict is resolved by new
genetic changes. This project addresses the hypothesis that gene duplication is
an effective mechanism to resolve sexual conflict, using the fruit fly as a
convenient model organism. In pursuing these aims, postdocs, graduates,
undergraduates and high school students will be trained in molecular and
evolutionary biology. The project will also partner with the Illinois
Mathematics and Science Academy to involve diverse high school students in the
research through lectures and summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on a pair of recently duplicated genes (Apl and Arts) in
Drosophila that have opposing fitness effects in the two sexes. The functional
evolution in the protein sequences will be characterized to understand the role
of protein divergence in mitigation of sexual conflict. The ancestral gene from
which Apl and Arts were derived will then be computationally reconstructed and
experimentally synthesized. A series of engineered Drosophila strains will then
be created using gene editing technology, with different versions of the
synthesized ancestral gene replacing the wildtype gene locus which harbors Apl
and Arts. Divergence in expression of constructs with different regulatory
regions will reveal their role in mitigating sexual conflict. The generality of
the duplication-mediated SC resolution model will be tested by examining a score
of recent gene duplicates with sex complementary expression patterns using gene
knockout and rescue analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.