* 2020880
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Determination of the Influence of Water on the Strength of Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* David Goldsby, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 119,720.00

At the high pressures and temperatures prevailing within the Earth, and over
geological times, solid rocks can flow like viscous fluids. The flow of rocks is
involved in important geological processes such as the movement of tectonic
plates. It also controls Earth’s surface rebounds after the melting of large ice
sheets, and the way stresses buildup on earthquake-producing faults. Models of
these processes, which inform past and future events, rely on our understanding
of how rocks flow. Estimates of rock viscosity - that is, their resistance to
flow - come primarily from laboratory experiments. Much effort has been directed
towards measuring and predicting rock viscosity in various conditions. The
amount of water present in minerals has been shown to have a critical effect on
rocks viscosity at high temperature. Yet, there are essentially no data on this
effect at low temperature. This limits our ability to understand processes
within tectonics plates and assess the corresponding hazards. Here the
researchers fill this data gap by carrying out low-temperature deformation
experiments on wet rocks. They study two important minerals, olivine and quartz,
which are major constituents of the Earth's mantle and continental crust. They
use state-of-the-art high-pressure devices set at a national synchrotron
facility. There, powerful x-rays allow measuring the viscosity of cold rocks at
the extreme conditions of Earth’s interior. Coupled with deformation tests at
room pressure and theoretical modeling, these data gradually unveil the effect
of water on the flow of cold rocks. This project also provides support for two
female early-career scientists, as well as training for undergraduate students,
notably from groups underrepresented in Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the
team aims to determine the microphysical mechanism(s) of water weakening at low
to moderate temperatures. Several theoretical models exist to describe how water
affects mineral flow. Yet, their predictions vary greatly which allows testing
them experimentally. The team carry out experiments to determine whether
dislocation velocity is controlled by the concentration of kinks or the velocity
of kinks. Samples are hydrated during synthesis at high temperature in a
Paterson rig at the University of Minnesota. Deformation experiments are
conducted with instrumented nanoindentation at the University of Pennsylvania,
and with the Deformation-DIA at the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne National
Laboratory). Run-product microstructures are characterized by electron
backscatter diffraction (EBSD). Nanoindentation experiments are conducted at
room temperature and allow material behavior to be evaluated for different
components of the microstructure. Deformation-DIA experiments, conducted at
temperatures ranging from room temperature to 1000°C, allow the bulk material
behavior to be evaluated. The project’s ultimate goal is to evaluate the effect
of water - i.e., hydroxyls dissolved in minerals - on important geological
phenomena. These include the flexing of plates at subduction zones, the
relaxation of stresses at the base of fault zones, and the evolution of
roughness on frictional fault surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.