* 2020179
* Modern Approaches for the Analysis of Social Media Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* William Rand, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

This research project will develop statistical methods for the analysis of high-
resolution data arising from social media applications. Technological growth has
made possible the accumulation of data from social media platforms at
unprecedented speed and volume. However, current methods for analyzing these
data either lack interpretability, are computationally intense, or require a
rigid data regimen. This project will use a flexible modeling framework to
extract relevant information on a user's behavior. Although the project
primarily will focus on Twitter data, the methods to be developed will be
applicable to other social media data, such as Facebook, Instagram, Reddit, or
TikTok, or any form of digital interaction. The results of this research will
help managers, policymakers, and stakeholders better understand the types of
actors they are interacting with on social media. The methods and code created
by this project will be made publicly available. The investigators will mentor
undergraduate and graduate students and interact with K12 students who are
interested in using valid statistical approaches to solve problems arising in
online social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop
statistical methods for binary and categorical functional data structures. The
standard analysis of functional data relies fundamentally on the assumption that
the intrinsic functions are continuous over the compact interval. The complexity
of social media data, however, requires different assumptions. A Twitter user's
posting pattern can be defined as a time series of some feature of the posting
activity. The user's data then can be viewed as a binary-valued or categorical-
valued random function defined over a time domain and observed at a fine grid
point. The project will develop classification methods for non-continuous
functional data, propose computationally efficient estimation algorithms, and
study their theoretical properties. The methods to be developed will be extended
to adapt to multiple binary-valued or categorical-valued curves per subject,
acquired in a longitudinal design, as well as to account for additional
covariate information. Regression models with categorical-valued functional
covariates and their associated significance tests also will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.