* 2020875
* Collaborative Research: Eye movements and retinotopic face encoding in children, adults, and developmental prosopagnosia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bradley Duchaine, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 541,445.00

Face recognition is central for social interaction, and people with face
recognition impairments suﬀer from diﬃculties that impact their personal and
professional lives. Previous research has indicated that face recognition
ability is strongly inﬂuenced by where on the face people look, and that this
tends to be consistent for a given person. For example, some people always look
between the eyes, while others look close to the tip of the nose or the mouth.
It has also been shown that each person recognizes faces best when they look
near the location they normally ﬁxate. These habits suggest that each person's
face processing and eye movement systems have been mutually shaped, or tuned, to
optimize recognition ability. However, little is known about how these factors
contribute to diﬀerences in face recognition ability, how they change in adults,
and how they develop in children. This project will address these fundamental
questions, and could prove important in treating patients with deficits in face
recognition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of three components:
In the project’s ﬁrst component, the investigators will examine where adults
between the ages of 18 and 50 usually look on faces and where their “sweet spot”
(optimal match between fixation and processing) lies. Preliminary results
indicate that adults tend to look lower on faces as they age, indicating that
the tuning of our face system changes even in adulthood. This study will examine
whether this holds for a larger sample by comparing across ages and will explore
the dynamics of gaze changes for individuals by measuring the same participants
once and then again three years later. In the second component, the
investigators will examine where people with developmental prosopagnosia (DP), a
condition characterized by severe face recognition impairments, look on faces
and whether they show a good match between where they look and their sweet spot.
In the third component, the investigators will determine where children look on
the face and how their tuning to faces changes as they age. It is expected that
where children look will not change but that their face tuning will become
sharper as they age. These possibilities will be tested by comparing children
across diﬀerent ages and through longitudinal testing of the same
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.