* 2021488
* Data Path: Creating a New STEM Pathway for Undergraduates from Statistics Into Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Denise Hum, San Mateo County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,972.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the number and
diversity of STEM students. To do so, it will establish a new path into STEM
majors and careers through statistics and data science for students at a
Hispanic-serving two-year college. This new path is expected to improve STEM
learning and teaching and increase the diversity of students pursuing STEM. The
first step in the pathway will be a redesigned Introduction to Statistics course
that incorporates project-based learning. This change is expected to engage more
students and spark their interest in pursuing a STEM pathway. The next step in
the pathway will be a new introduction to Data Science course, which will meet a
transfer math requirement The Data Science course is expected to serve as an
onramp into STEM for students who do not necessarily see themselves in a STEM
career. The project will actively recruit students from the new statistics
course into the new Data Science course, thus transforming the statistics course
into a STEM talent pipeline instead of a terminal math course. Additional
students will be recruited into the Data Science course via a new Data Scholars
Program, which will provide a supportive STEM community for students who may not
be initially interested in STEM majors. Finally, the project will provide
professional development to mathematics faculty on implementing project-based
curriculum pedagogy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quasi-experimental design will be
used to measure the overall effectiveness of project-based learning in the
introductory statistics course. Students in the new project-based learning
statistics course will be compared with students in statistics courses using
traditional pedagogy. Analysis of variance will be used to examine differences
between the two types of courses on measures of student experience, student
attendance, course success, degree completion, and transfer rate to four-year
universities. Furthermore, qualitative methods, such as focus groups and open-
ended survey questions, will be used to evaluate the fidelity of implementing
the project-based learning model. This project project may serve as a model for
other community colleges looking to build a data science program and a new
pathway into STEM. Lessons learned and insights gained into how changing
pedagogy impacts student interest and success in STEM will be shared through
conference presentations and publications. Anticipated outcomes during the
project period include increased student success rates in the project-based
statistics course, increased enrollment in the data science course, and
increased participation in the Data Scholars program. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.