* 2021345
* Cybersecurity Modules Aligned with Undergraduate Computer Science and Engineering Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Xiaoli Yang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 159,417.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving how cybersecurity
concepts are taught in undergraduate computing curricula. The need to design and
maintain cyber-secure computing systems is increasingly important. As a result,
the future technology workforce must be trained to have a security mindset, so
that they consider cybersecurity during rather than after system design. This
project aims to achieve this goal by building plug-and-play, hands-on
cybersecurity modules for core courses in Computer Engineering, and Computer
Science and Engineering. The modules will align with the curricula recommended
by the Association for Computing Machinery and will be designed for easy
adoption into computing programs nationwide. Modules will be designed for
integration into both introductory and advanced courses, thus helping students
develop in-depth understanding of cybersecurity as they progress through their
computing curriculum. It is expected that the project will encourage more
students to pursue careers or higher degrees in the field of cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine how the modules may be best
integrated into existing curricula and the effects of the modules on student
learning and interest in cybersecurity. Assessment will leverage several methods
including (a) a task load index to quantify rigor, (b) surveys to gain insight
into the development of students' security mindset and perceptions of
cybersecurity, and (c) analysis of learning using analytical course rubrics.
Deliverables of this project will include a suite of plug-and-play cybersecurity
modules for Computer Engineering and Computer Science and Engineering courses
that span from introductory to advanced levels and that meet standards for
content breadth and depth. The results will be disseminated through
publications, presentations, press releases, and social media to ensure that
project outcomes are shared widely. The NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Education and Human Resources Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.