* 2021160
* Collaborative Research: Using Complex Problem Based Learning in Undergraduate Engineering Classrooms to Prepare Creative Engineers with the Skills to Solve Global Problems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Roni Reiter-Palmon, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 60,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
engineering education. Specifically, it will create a new teaching approach
called Complex Problem Based Learning and use it in undergraduate civil
engineering courses. The approach is designed to enhance students' ability to
solve transdisciplinary, complex problems. Such problems often have a global
scope and can only be solved through the work of collaborative teams that
include scientists, engineers, social scientists, humanities experts, and
others. The ability to tackle such complex, global problems is important in
today’s workplace. As a result, engineering graduates need both disciplinary
knowledge and skills such as creativity, design thinking, trans-disciplinary
teamwork skills, and the ability to communicate with non-technical stakeholders.
The goal of the project is to use the Complex Problem Based Learning approach to
provide multiple opportunities for civil engineering students to develop and
practice these skills. This goal is well aligned with the National Academy of
Engineering’s vision for engineering (The Engineer of 2020), which encourages
recognition of the leadership role engineers will have in industry, government,
and the non-profit sectors of the future economy. The project will also
contribute new knowledge about engineering education by investigating the impact
of this Complex Problem Based Learning approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Complex Problem Based Learning approach will be implemented in five engineering
design courses ranging from freshman to senior year, enabling its impact to be
evaluated across a range of student proficiency levels. Through this approach,
students will be guided through a facilitated problem-solving process built
around consensus, problem driven research, and stakeholder-driven problems.
Multiple sources of data will be collected to evaluate the success of the
Complex Problem Based Learning approach. Data from student self-assessments will
be collected via survey tools. The CATME platform hosted by Purdue will be used
to collect student self-assessments of teams and participatory decision-making.
A factorial experimental design methodology will be used to investigate impacts
of Complex Problem Based Learning on civil engineering education and outcomes.
The assessments of creativity will focus on both the person and the product, and
evaluate whether there is a strong correlation between the two. The Kaufman
Domains of Creativity Scale instrument will be used for self-assessment of
personal creativity and the Consensual Assessment Technique will be used for
assessment of the product’s creativity. The broader impact of this award
includes the development of the Complex Problem Based Learning approach, which
might be used for education of students at any age and in any STEM discipline.
By fostering creative mindsets and creative problem-solving skills, this
approach can help develop a creative and reflective STEM workforce that can
thrive in the future of increased automation. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.