* 2021898
* BII-Implementation: The causes and consequences of plant biodiversity across scales in a rapidly changing world
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Jose Eduardo Meireles, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 10,111,955.00

This Biology Integration Institute will use the tools of remote sensing and
spectral biology to develop new techniques for measuring individual plants and
landscape vegetation so as to understand the causes and consequences of
biodiversity change. Biodiversity loss and climate change are major global
crises that threaten humanity’s life support systems and its ability to cope
with major challenges. It has never been more important for us to bring together
our knowledge of life’s diversity from cells to continents to better understand
the causes and consequences of its change for the biological processes that
impact our well-being. As the biological sciences have become increasingly
fragmented, new ways to integrate biological processes across scales are needed
to understand the basis of Earth's life support systems. Spectral biology takes
advantage of the way that energy interacts with matter to reveal immense amounts
of information about the chemistry, structure, function, and evolution of
plants. The project harnesses the technology and platforms now available, such
as the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)—and those emerging even at
the global scale with forthcoming satellites—to quantify building blocks of life
at every biological scale using the same currency: photons from the sun that are
reflected by plants. While doing so, the Institute will train the next
generation of diverse and integrative biologists, including the mentoring of
young scientists from marginalized groups. It will focus on engaging Native
American communities, K-12 teacher training, and public outreach through Market
Science modules, Minute Earth videos, a museum exhibit and public engagement and
educational activities through the Bell Museum of Natural History, the Cedar
Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve (CCESR), and the Wisconsin Tribal Conservation
Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will investigate the causes and
consequences of plant biodiversity across scales in a rapidly changing world,
from genes and molecules within cells and tissues to communities, ecosystems,
landscapes and the biosphere. The Institute focuses on plant biodiversity,
defined broadly to encompass the heterogeneity within life that occurs from the
smallest to the largest biological scales. A premise of the Institute is that
life is envisioned as occurring at different scales nested within several
contrasting conceptions of biological hierarchies, defined by the separate but
related fields of physiology, evolutionary biology, and ecology. The Institute
will emphasize the use of spectral biology and process-oriented predictive
models to investigate the ways that biological components at one scale give rise
to emergent properties at higher scales by addressing five themes: &lt;br/&gt;
Theme 1. The genetic and environmental (i.e., GxE) drivers of trait variation at
the leaf and whole plant scale linked by transcriptomic, metabolic and
morphological variation; &lt;br/&gt; Theme 2. How evolution generates the
functional and spectral variation across the tree of life and its utility for
biodiversity detection; &lt;br/&gt; Theme 3. How functionally and spectrally
distinct taxa, sampled across the tree of life, interact locally, leading to the
assembly and dynamics of communities at multiple spatial scales, under current
and future environmental conditions; &lt;br/&gt; Theme 4. The consequences of
biodiversity for ecosystem functioning and its response to global change;
&lt;br/&gt; Theme 5. How to improve parameterization of tissue- to ecosystem-
scale properties at various spatial scales and advance land surface models that
incorporate plant functional diversity. &lt;br/&gt;The Institute will integrate
biology in new ways by harnessing the potential of spectral biology,
experiments, observations, and synthetic modeling in a manner never before
possible to transform understanding of how variation within and among biological
scales drives plant and ecosystem responses to global change over diurnal,
seasonal, and millennial time scales. In doing so, the institute will use and
advance state-of-the-art theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.