* 2021305
* BII-Design: Does variable genome instability impact lifespan differences between males and females and across species?
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* James Walters, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2022
* USD 226,000.00

This project will design a new institute to investigate why males and females of
some species differ in how long they live. In humans, like in many other
animals, females tend to live longer than males. However, this lifespan
difference between males and females is not universal. In some species females
live longer, and in other species there is no lifespan difference between males
and females. Why there are differences in aging and lifespan between males and
females is currently unknown. This project will address this question by
bringing together experts from diverse fields of biology to form the Integration
Institute: Sex, Aging, Genomics, and Epigenetics (IISAGE). IISAGE will develop a
coordinated research plan to investigate the contribution of genome instability
to differences in lifespan between males and females across species. IISAGE will
also establish an interdisciplinary training program for participating students.
The project will conduct outreach to the scientific community through
conferences and a website, and will specifically recruit underrepresented groups
to participate in the institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome instability
increases with age in many species and is considered an important contributor to
aging. However, there is a significant gap in knowledge concerning how genome
instability variably impacts males versus females in aging and lifespan, and
whether this differs across species with diverse life histories and mechanisms
of sex determination. IISAGE will build a community of scientists with various
expertise in molecular biology, physiology, ecology, and evolutionary biology to
comprehensively address how genome instability impacts sex differences in
lifespan across the animal kingdom. Specifically, the goals of IISAGE in the
BII-Design phase are to: 1) Refine the specific questions addressed and methods
employed by future IISAGE research; 2) Develop an interdisciplinary
training/career development program for the members of IISAGE; and 3) Establish
the procedures necessary for efficient data management and information exchange
between the members of IISAGE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.