* 2021288
* Collaborative Research: EHR-Polar DCL: Addressing the Technical and Narrative Challenges in the Undergraduate Science Classroom
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Cohen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 256,754.00

Researchers at the University of Delaware (UD) and at Colgate University will
revise and implement a course on polar science in the media. The course will
equip students with the technical skills, including computer programming skills
taught using a pair-programming approach, to evaluate geoscience data reported
in the media and will place this data within a personal context using narratives
that convey scientific information. Over the course of the project, ~100 non-
geoscience major students will be immersed in a student-centered, data-driven
course. Evaluations will focus on improving students' ability to analyze and
understand the implications of data and on the transferability of the course
materials to different institutions. The impact of this project will extend well
beyond the award period through continued offerings at UD and Colgate
University, by distributing the course and pedagogy content through the NSF-
sponsored Science Education Resource Center (SERC) as the primary conduit to
geoscience educators and through professional development workshops offered to
new and existing geoscience instructors at major geoscience conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new polar science course for non-STEM majors will be
designed and implemented. The course is based on a combination of cognitivism
and constructivism and with quantitative metrics for assessing student progress
on technical and narrative challenges. Evaluations will address the hypothesis
that student exposure to a pair-programming pedagogy will improve their
technical data access and interpretation skills and the hypothesis that students
exposed to developed narrative structure exercises will demonstrate improved
perspective-taking skills and will be able to demonstrate better understanding
the narrative context in which the data are presented. The project is co-funded
by the Office of Polar Programs and the Division of Undergraduate
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.