* 2021013
* Exploring the Impacts of Data Science Education through a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience and Short Lab Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Frederick Tan, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2024
* USD 348,963.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a scalable data-
science Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) in genomics for
increasing quantitative literacy and persistence in undergraduate students. The
project will employ a CURE to engage students in genuine scientific research as
part of the course curriculum. Data science projects will be developed to create
a scalable CURE that can be offered at both community colleges and four-year
teaching institutions to impact diverse student populations. As such, this
project will increase access to research opportunities for primarily teaching
colleges and their students to increase participation in data science. By
exploring the efficacy of a data science CURE as an intervention, this project
will provide insights on how to increase quantitative literacy and persistence
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to investigate how CUREs can
increase student persistence and improve analytical skills. In particular, the
project aims to generate knowledge on how a data science intensive CURE impacts
the student learning outcomes. The outcomes will be evaluated for student
populations at a research university (Johns Hopkins University) and a community
college (Clovis Community College, a teaching institution with a student
population that is 40% Hispanic and 20% first-generation). A validated tool
assessing factors linked to persistence in STEM (PITS) will be used to
investigate whether a data science CURE can produce increases in these factors
similar to those seen in previously established CUREs. Similarly, the recently
validated BioSQuaRE tool will be used to assess improvements in quantitative
skills. Evaluating these measures with two very different student populations
and institutional settings will expand knowledge of CURE impacts and lay the
groundwork for comparisons across a wide range of student populations. The
project will also investigate student attitudes towards data science and
evaluate whether incorporating data science lab modules in a lower-division
undergraduate course is an effective strategy to attract and prepare students to
participate in scientific research opportunities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.