* 2021362
* BII-Design: Integrating Biological Resilience Across Scales
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* J. Michael Reed, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The concept of resilience - the ability of any system to return to a previous
state after a perturbation â€“ provides an ideal opportunity to unite different
scales of biological research. The ever-increasing specialization of scientific
research has made it challenging for researchers in different fields of biology
to exchange ideas. The study of system resilience, however, is common to all
biological fields of study. The overarching objective of this project is to use
the theme of resilience to bridge cellular, organismal, and community-level
scales of biology by synthesizing the tools, concepts, and approaches used by
the different research fields. They will be integrated through 1) collaborative
research that includes undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs, and faculty,
2) curricular enrichment, and 3) outreach to other institutions, non-profits,
and industry. Conserved mechanisms of resilience identified through these
activities will be applicable to engineer and manage biological systems in
medical, agricultural, industrial, and natural
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will challenge scientists to span
disciplinary, taxonomic, methodological, and other divides in biology to build
and apply a unified framework for biological resilience. Many fields of biology
have described resilience in their systems of study, but rarely are there
integrative efforts to search for common patterns and processes of resilience
across temporal and spatial scales. The first step of the project is to examine
how existing models and metrics of resilience are implemented across biological
scales. The second step is to determine if there are common mechanisms across
scales that allow biological systems to maintain resilience. The final step will
be to identify how the basic science of biological resilience can be used to
design and manage cellular, organismal, and ecological systems. These areas of
resilience will be examined through interdepartmental seminars in biological
resilience, a regional symposium on biological resilience, a new graduate module
on biological resilience, and graduate research fellowships in biological
resilience. The investigators will carefully examine and refine the existing
lexicon for biological resilience that can be widely adopted by other biologists
and integrative biology research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.