* 2021651
* The Conference on Molecular-Level Understanding of Atmospheric Aerosols (MUOAA 2020); Lake Arrowhead, California; September 20-25, 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Cari Dutcher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 29,750.00

This workshop brings together scientists involved in studying atmospheric
aerosols at a fundamental level in the laboratory and in the field. The
objective of the gathering is to provide molecular level perspectives on aerosol
properties that are critical to the impact of aerosols on air quality, climate,
and environmental and human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus will be on
the fundamental understanding of atmospheric processes that is needed to
interpret and predict climate at both short and long time scales, and on the
atmospheric aerosols that are key players that influence these processes. The
intellectual merit of this workshop includes the discussion of challenges that
exist in understanding the formation of aerosol particles from gaseous
precursors and the initial growth of these particles, the internal structure of
aerosols, aerosol phase behavior, heterogeneous and multiphase (photo)chemistry,
gas-surface interactions, the ability of aerosols to initiate ice and cloud
nucleation, the evolution of aerosol optical properties, and the role of
bioaerosols in the atmosphere. The workshop will be held at the UCLA Lake
Arrowhead Conference Center in September, 2020. NSF support for this meeting
will go towards travel for student, postdoctoral, and early career
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.