* 2021795
* BII-Implementation: Behavioral Plasticity Research Institute (BPRI): Transforming the Study of Phenotypic Plasticity through Biological Integration
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2025
* Spencer Behmer, Baylor College of Medicine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jodie Jawor
* 10/31/2025
* USD 10,379,318.00

Locusts are grasshoppers that can form enormous migrating swarms, once vividly
recorded in ancient texts, but still occurring to this day and affecting the
livelihood of one in ten people on Earth. Currently, multiple continents are
experiencing locust plagues that threaten food security both locally and on a
larger, potentially global, scale. What makes locusts particularly devastating
is their ability to change their behavior depending on population density – this
is known as locust phase polyphenism. At low density, they are solitary and
harmless grasshoppers, but at high density, they become gregarious and voracious
pests that migrate. This plasticity, or variation, in behavior, appearance, and
physiology is striking and how population density facilitates this change is
still not fully understood. Studying the mechanism of this transformation holds
the key to developing effective methods of control for this organism, ensuring
food safety, and understanding how social/population pressures can fuel radical
change in these animals. This undertaking will require comprehensive scientific
integration across different biological disciplines to be accomplished. To
address this challenge, a group of researchers has formed a cross-institutional,
cross-disciplinary Biological Integration Institute – the Behavioral Plasticity
Research Institute (BPRI). Using cutting-edge technologies in research projects
spanning from molecules to landscapes, the BPRI will greatly enhance our
understanding of locust phase polyphenism and plasticity in other organisms.
With a commitment to improving diversity, inclusion and equity, the institute
will train the next generation of integrative biologists who can efficiently
navigate across different disciplines. The institute will communicate
groundbreaking research to the general public and the scientific community
through video documentaries, symposia and workshops. The BPRI will partner with
the Global Locust Initiative to translate the scientific advances to management
for improving global food system sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic plasticity – the ability of a single genotype
to produce different phenotypes in response to different environmental
conditions – is ubiquitous in nature and occurs across all scales of biological
organization. To understand its mechanisms, maintenance, and evolution, complete
biological integration is needed. Locust phase polyphenism represents one of the
most striking examples of phenotypic plasticity. It also provides a powerful
comparative system for understanding how gene expression patterns and epigenetic
regulation are linked to shifts in behavior, physiology, and ecology that result
in outbreaks, collective movement, and mass migration. The Behavioral Plasticity
Research Institute (BPRI) will comprehensively dissect this phenomenon and use
it as a model system to transform the study of phenotypic plasticity.
Specifically, the BPRI will carry out ten integrative research activities, using
three locust and three non-swarming grasshopper species with varying degrees of
plasticity in the genus Schistocerca. The BPRI research will provide in-depth
understanding of proximate mechanisms of locust phase polyphenism by generating
high-quality reference genomes, complemented by tissue-specific and time-
resolved transcriptomes and epigenomes, as well as CRISPR/Cas9 and reverse
genetics tools to understand functional genetics. These mechanistic approaches
will be integrated with organismal biology and ecology to investigate phase-
associated nutritional physiology and ecological factors contributing to
swarming under laboratory and field conditions. All research activities will be
performed across species in a phylogeny-based comparative framework. The
feedback among these activities will create synergies and lay the groundwork for
the integrative study of phenotypic plasticity across model organisms from
genomes to ecology and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.