* 2021546
* Building the Foundation for Institutionalizing Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences in Community Colleges to Improve STEM Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Zovar, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 173,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by laying the foundation for
increased access to research experiences at community colleges. Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) enable students to do original
research as part of their regular coursework. CUREs have the potential to
advance equity goals by providing research experiences for all students, not
just a select few. In addition, because two-year colleges have high enrollments
of students from underrepresented groups, making CURES widely available has the
potential to increase diversity in the STEM workforce. A group of faculty
members at Whatcom Community College have been implementing CUREs in different
STEM disciplines, including biology, geology, and engineering. An increasing
number of other faculty are interested in implementing CUREs in their classes.
The proposed project would leverage this interest to examine how the institution
can widen the use of CUREs and, thus, generate an institutional transformation
in STEM instructional practices. The two-year project will also contribute to
national interests by completing a study on institutional change at a two-year
college, which can inform the efforts of other institutions to improve STEM
teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to: (1)
identify Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) for
institutional capacity for CURE expansion and institutionalization; (2) support
current CURE adopters through community building and feedback; (3) revisit the
SWOT analysis to determine the institutional capacity to reform curricular
efforts; and (4) disseminate key findings. The SWOT analysis will be part of a
multi-day strategic planning retreat with CURE-implementing faculty and
administrators. Participating CURE faculty members will develop a learning
community to guide and support the process of developing CUREs. Considering the
COVID-19 Pandemic, the project will have a focus on designing CURE experiences
for online learning. The project will include a series of faculty interviews to
provide rich descriptions of the mechanisms and reasons for implementing CUREs.
Using these data, along with collaboration with an expert on institutional
change, this project has the potential to produce a model of institutional
improvement that is grounded in the experiences of faculty members at two-year
colleges for which there is limited research. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.