* 2021806
* Understanding Task- and Resting-State Neural Activation in Relation to Real-World Social Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Beer, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 725,673.00

A fundamental goal of neuroscience research is to characterize brain operation
in relation to both typical and atypical behavior. Prior research, however,
identified operations that are specific to the well-controlled yet somewhat
artificial lab environment. The goal of understanding neural operations in
relation to social behavior is particularly challenging in neuroimaging
environments; it is difficult to model interactions with other people as
experienced in everyday life. For example, many studies have identified patterns
of neural operations theorized to support socioemotional function such as
empathy and prosocial behavior. The presumed goal of these studies is to
understand how individuals who exhibit high levels of empathy and/or prosocial
behavior differ in their neural operations from individuals who show lower
levels. However, these studies have experimentally manipulated empathy,
prosocial behavior, and other socioemotional functions, without interactions
with other people and without contexts found outside the lab. Therefore, it
remains unknown whether the neural operations observed in the experimental
context can help to predict people’s personalities and behavior outside of the
lab. The project will take a new approach to bridging neural patterns with
behavior by investigating whether neural activation typically characterized by
socioemotional function in the lab predicts the extent to which people show
differences in their personalities and social behavior outside the lab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation incorporates a unique blend of cutting-
edge theory and method from researchers in disciplines that do not often
interact. It includes research at the forefront of measuring neural operations
and rigorous measurement of everyday social behavior. This project will
investigate how personalities and everyday behavior relate to neural operation,
over a large sample of people who perform a diverse set of socioemotional tasks.
Specifically, this project will test how variation in task-related activation
and resting state connectivity mediates the relationship between individual
differences in socioemotional factors (such as dispositional empathy) and real-
world behavior (such as prosocial action). Measurements of real-world behavior
will be drawn from long-term social media behavior. The project will provide
data and training in interdisciplinary, cutting edge measurement at each level
of analysis in social-personality psychology, cognitive neuroscience, computer
science, and communication. The project will also generate a publicly accessible
data set that bridges dispositional individual differences, multiple measures of
variation in neural activity, and real-world social behavior, to facilitate
multidisciplinary collaborations and to investigate relations between levels of
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.