* 2021074
* Developing and Investigating an Asset-Based Supplemental Course to Increase Student Success in Undergraduate General Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Hannah Sevian, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project seeks to serve the national interest in excellent undergraduate
STEM education by providing a model to enhance equity for students in general
chemistry courses. Previous studies have shown that remediation and deficit-
based approaches to supplemental general chemistry instruction do not provide
significant long-term benefits to students. This lack of impact is particularly
noticeable for students in groups underrepresented in STEM. This project will
develop and study a novel asset-based supplemental course that leverages the
students’ many strengths to help them succeed in general chemistry. This one-
credit supplemental chemistry course will run alongside the General Chemistry I
course. Students who are at risk of failing the general chemistry course will be
invited to participate. The new supplemental course will seek to support student
success by providing opportunities to practice key skills needed for success in
general chemistry, such as mathematical and study skills. It will simultaneously
recognize and rely on strengths that students have developed in other areas of
their lives, to channel these strengths toward their own and each other's
academic success in chemistry. The intended project outcomes include reducing
failure rates in General Chemistry I, characterizing the asset-based
supplemental chemistry course, and developing resources to support replication
of the course by other institutions. The research goal is to contribute to
understanding how and why at-risk students at a diverse university can succeed
in general chemistry, and the role of the institution in supporting this
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and study an asset-based
supplemental chemistry course for students at risk of attrition from General
Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Boston, a public, urban, primarily
commuter campus with an undergraduate population that is among the country’s
most diverse. Design of the supplemental course will follow an asset model based
on activity theory, with four design principles: (a) adopt the perspective of
the student; (b) provide structure that lowers the activation barrier for
students to increase their agency; (c) encourage collaborative and social
engagement in culturally and personally relevant activity; and (d) support
dialogue, chemical literacy, and resourcefulness. The impact of the course will
be studied using a mixed methods approach based on the Anti-Deficit Achievement
Framework for Research on Students of Color in STEM, and will address the
following research questions: (1) Which elements of the supplemental course
design are productive in supporting student success in general chemistry, and
how so? (2) What are the lasting impacts of the intervention on student success
in academic work for two semesters beyond general chemistry? (3) How does the
University's system of supports function toward participants' negotiation of
challenges and cultivation of meaningful relationships that support their
academic success? and (4) How do the experiential realities of the supplemental
chemistry students empower them to succeed as they intersect with the processes
of support that surround them in the course, at the university, and in their
lives? Student interviews and counter narratives will be the primary data
sources to understand student success and experiences. These data will be
supplemented by instructor diaries as well as interviews with faculty and staff
involved in institutional support, including instructors, advising staff, and
care counselors. The project’s success will be assessed through cycles of
questioning and review by an external advisory board. Through two cycles of
implementation improvements and one year of fidelity testing, the research will
define the critical components of the course that relate to its successful
implementation in the context of a highly diverse university. Products developed
by the project will include modules that may be adapted by other higher
education institutions, a facilitation guide for instructors, and resources for
undergraduate learning assistants. This project is supported by the NSF IUSE:
EHR Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.