* 2021124
* Cognitive factors in bilingual lexical alignment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Iva Ivanova, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

People in conversation sometimes copy the language of their conversation
partners, reusing each otherâ€™s words. This phenomenon, known as lexical
alignment, benefits communication: It helps people understand each other better,
like each other more, and may lead to faster learning. Because of such benefits,
trainable conversational strategies involving alignment could potentially be
developed to improve communication (e.g., in clinical or legal settings or
between human and artificial conversational agents), rapport, and learning.
However, the possibilities for alignment may vary when conversation partners
have different levels of proficiency with the language being used. This project
aims to understand the basis for lexical alignment in bilingual speakers
(Spanish/English). The research will be conducted at a Hispanic-Serving
Institution and will increase diversity in research by including first-
generation university students and students from groups underrepresented in
science, both as participants and as trainees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lexical
alignment in bilingual participants will be studied using a picture-matching
game in Spanish that consists of two interactive tasks. While one participant
names black-and-white line drawings of common objects, animals, and human
professions, the other participant arranges the drawings in the same order in
which the other person has named them. Participants then switch roles with their
partner. Unbeknownst to participants, one partner is a confederate who names a
subset of the drawings with one of two possible names. The investigators will
examine alignment rates and production speed of the naive participant as a
function of his or her Spanish proficiency and the frequency with which the word
occurs in the language. The direction and degree of interaction of alignment and
response speed with proficiency and word frequency will adjudicate among
completing theories of the cognitive mechanisms that underlie lexical alignment.
Ultimately, the results will contribute to better understanding of the potential
for targeted use of lexical alignment training to improve communication and
learning in clinical, legal and educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.