* 2021162
* Development, Implementation, and Evaluation of Open-access, Interactive, Video-Supported Training Resources for Peer Leaders in STEM Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Joseph Dinnocenzo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,908.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the quality of
undergraduate STEM education. Specifically, it focuses on enhancing the
preparation of undergraduate students to serve as peer leaders in STEM courses.
Teaching approaches that emphasize peer instruction and collaborative learning
are known to increase student success and retention in STEM. These approaches
also benefit the students who serve as peer leaders. This project intends to
develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate a novel resource for training
undergraduate STEM peer leaders. This training will be designed to emphasize
practices that encourage feelings of inclusion in student groups and in STEM.
Prior research has shown that students who do not feel included in science or in
their STEM classrooms can be hesitant about participating in group activities,
such as collaborative learning. This project aims to improve the training of
peer leaders so that they are more aware of the factors that can impede a
student’s sense of belonging and can develop practices that facilitate
inclusion. Based on prior work, undergraduate peer leaders who participate in
this training are more likely to engage in inclusive practices in their
collaborative learning groups. This change in peer mentor practice is expected
to lead to broader student participation in collaborative learning and has the
potential to increase retention in STEM of traditionally underrepresented
groups, such as women and students from racial or ethnic minorities. Ultimately,
these efforts have the potential to contribute to increasing diversity within
the national STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to create
two interactive training modules that could be widely used to train peer leaders
in inclusive facilitation in STEM collaborative groups. These modules will be
based on the effective use of live actors and an interactive theater approach
for peer leader training at the University of Rochester. Each of the new
training modules will be interactive video versions designed to simulate the
previously used live-action experiences. These modules will be uploaded on a
freely accessible website and will include: (i) a video of a scene illustrating
barriers to participation in a simulated peer-led group learning environment;
(ii) interactive video interviews with student characters in the scene; and
(iii) a lesson plan with discussion prompts, assignments, and other resources
that STEM faculty, students, and learning specialists can use for discussions of
the videos. In this work, the University of Rochester, the lead institution,
will partner with the University of Texas at El Paso, the second largest
university with a majority Hispanic student population in the US, and the
Rochester Institute of Technology, home of the National Technical Institute for
the Deaf. This collaboration will enable the project team to test how these
interactive video resources can be used in different institutional and
pedagogical contexts, including peer-led team learning and learning assistant
approaches. Evaluative feedback from STEM peer leaders, students in
collaborative groups, and faculty will be collected to explore the direct impact
of these training resources as well as their potential to improve STEM
collaborative environments in undergraduate education. The project will generate
new knowledge by testing the feasibility of using a digital media platform to
support interactive training of student leaders for inclusive group facilitation
in STEM. The proposed range of evaluation activities could lead to a broader
understanding of how this type of training resource can improve STEM
collaborative learning environments. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.