* 2021414
* Teaching Undergraduates to Think With Algebra
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* David Feikes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,993.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
mathematics education, specifically beginning college algebra. Algebra is the
gatekeeper to higher level mathematics and science courses. Without a rich
understanding of algebra, students will not be successful in STEM. This project
will emphasize the generalization and symbolism aspects of algebra, to help
students learn that algebra is not just something to think about, but also
something to think with. To do so, the project will develop, pilot, and refine
curriculum for use in beginning algebra courses at universities and community
colleges. To support implementation of the units, the project will hold a
faculty workshop for college mathematics instructors, including a focus on the
nature of algebra. The project is based on the investigator’s prior project,
Conceptual Algebra Readiness for Everyone, which focuses on preparing students
in grades 3—8 for algebra. This new project will focus on helping college
students develop a conceptual understanding of algebra to better prepare them
for success in higher level mathematics and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
view of algebra is algebra as generalization and symbolization. Generalization
cannot be expressed without some form of symbolization and symbolization is
vitally important to developing algebraic reasoning (Kaput, Blanton, Moreno,
2008). Symbolization provides a compact way to express mathematical reasoning.
Extending the idea of Sfard (2000) on discourse and mathematical ideas,
mathematical concepts and symbolization reflexively co-create each other.
Symbolization of generalizations aids the reasoning process by making thinking
explicit. In this way, algebra is not merely something to think about but
something to think with, hence the title of the project. The goals of the
project are to develop college-level curriculum units on algebraic topics and a
workshop for college instructors. The research questions are: 1) What is the
impact of the curriculum units on students’ knowledge of algebra? and 2) How
effective is the professional development in preparing college instructors to
use the units with undergraduate students? A concurrent mixed-methods research
model will be used to assess the impacts of this program. Project materials will
be open access and project results will be disseminated through conference
presentations and publications in scholarly journals. Ultimately, the project
has the potential to improve undergraduates’ success in algebra, in higher level
mathematics courses, and in other STEM courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students including underrepresented students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.