* 2021932
* BII-DESIGN: Defining the point of no return in microbe mediated symbioses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2024
* USD 192,258.00

Interactions between microbes and plants or microbes and animals are common. In
many cases, both parties benefit from these interactions to the extent that they
are dependent on one another and over time their interaction becomes
irreversible. This project will bring together researchers working with a range
of investigatory tools (such as measuring nutrient exchange, signaling and
chemical communication, genomic approach, and mathematical modeling) in a range
of systems (including plants and mycorrizal fungi, fungus growing ants,
cockroaches with endosymbiontic gut microbes, carnivorous pitcher plants) so
that they can lay the groundwork for developing a model that predicts the point
of no return: that point at which the individual species in the system lose the
ability to function independent of their partner. By seeking connections across
the diversity of these systems, we hope to better understand the factors that
lead to the development of partner dependence. A major outcome of the project
will be the development of training programs at three levels. Outreach and
training will be developed for students at Metro High School in Columbus. This
diverse urban school serves as a magnet for talented high school students with
an interested in STEM fields. Training activities will include summer research
projects in affiliated labs. A training program for undergraduate and graduate
students at Ohio State University, and hold two workshops, one for faculty and
students at regional universities in Ohio and one for people from HBCUs and
HSIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a Biology Integration
Institute application that seeks to determine the factors that push microbial
symbioses past the point of no return to partner dependence. Partner dependence,
which occurs when a symbiont requires an association with a partner for
successful reproduction, represents a major evolutionary transition. Symbioses
are complex adaptive systems, in which patterns emerge from the interactions and
responses among partners and interactions between the partnership and other
organisms. The development of symbioses relies on communication below the level
of the organism and is often driven by molecules and cellular responses within
the partners, but the advantages of the association may relate to community and
ecosystem interactions, and the processes by which the partners adapt and
respond are governed by evolutionary forces. Understanding and predicting the
patterns of dependence and other phenomena within and across taxa requires
understanding the evolutionary and ecological dynamics of these systems. While
this Design proposal is focused on process instead of products, we expect to
produce synthetic papers that will make connections across scales and lay the
groundwork for future theory development and work in empirical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.