* 2021710
* Global Sensitivity Analysis enabled Uncertainty Domain Reduction for Euglycemic Control of Type 1 Diabetics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tarunraj Singh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 371,300.00

The scourge of diabetes afflicts over ten percent of the US population. In 2017,
the cost of diabetes care was estimated to be over $300 billion. Five to ten
percent of those diagnosed are Type 1 diabetic who constantly monitor their
blood glucose to regulate it with insulin for survival. There have been profound
improvements over the past few decades in continuous glucose monitors and
insulin pumps, which now make it feasible to deploy an artificial pancreas. This
device aims to emulate the function of a healthy pancreas and thus reduce the
burden of managing the ailment for diabetics. The tremendous variability across
diabetics in how the body responds to insulin and the fear of extremely low
blood glucose (which can be fatal) mandates the development of robust
controllers to account for this variability. This grant supports fundamental
research to model well-recognized daily variation in insulin response
characteristics and synthesize automated meal detection algorithms. This, in
conjunction with comprehensive global sensitivity analysis, will enable the
development of deployable real-time controllers for blood-glucose regulation.
Results from this research will help reduce the cost of health care for millions
of diabetics and improve the patient’s productivity, helping the US economy and
well-being of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the full potential of an
artificial pancreas, the research supported by this grant will model diurnal
insulin sensitivity, which includes the dawn and dusk phenomena, and develop a
meal detection algorithm to respond to unannounced meals, or rectify incorrectly
counted carbohydrates in announced meals. These two goals will enhance the
existing glucose-insulin models. However, the increased complexity of the
proposed model will be burdened with increase in the dimension of the uncertain
parameters. This mandates the development of a framework for non-moment based
global sensitivity metrics to rank order parameters contributing the most to
uncertainty in forecasting blood-glucose concentration. The resulting reduced
dimension of the uncertain space will permit accurate uncertainty quantification
and aid the development of robust controllers that maximize the time-in-range
performance metric for blood-glucose regulation. A Food and Drug Administration
approved software for validating the developed controllers and a 300-patient
dataset will buttress the research outcomes. Although the immediate
beneficiaries of the research are Type 1 diabetics, once matured, the research
has the potential to also benefit people with Type 2
diabetes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.