* 2021213
* Collaborative Research: Polar (NSF 19-601): RUI: Computational Polar ENgagement through GUided INquiry (Computational PENGUIN)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Steven Neshyba, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 95,874.00

Researchers from the Northwest Research Associates Inc. and the University of
Puget Sound will explore the pedagogical benefits of using computational guided
inquiry (CGI) to integrate products of contemporary polar research into
undergraduate courses. In CGI-structured learning, the instructor guides
students in hands-on scientific inquiry using computational tools for analysis
and visualization of data. The PIs propose to develop twelve, 2-3 week
undergraduate teaching modules based on the analysis of polar data. The modules
will be tested in a variety of undergraduate classrooms, including those at two-
and four-year institutions. Students will gain computational skills working with
Python programming and with critical thinking and analysis of polar data sets.
The proposed work offers a range of broader impacts, including education of
undergraduate students, development of new course materials, advancement of
active learning methods, and engagement of undergraduate student researchers in
polar and pedagogical research. Benefits to society include increasing climate
and computational literacy and the understanding of polar regions and their role
in the climate. The educational materials developed as part of this proposal
will directly impact a variety of undergraduate courses at a range of
institutions, including state universities, liberal arts colleges, and community
colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to test whether working
directly with polar data via CGI can improve undergraduate climate literacy
while enhancing learning outcomes in a variety of undergraduate courses. The
work builds on proven educational practices: active learning and guided inquiry.
Working with CGI-experienced instructors who will teach the modules,
undergraduate researchers and an education research specialist, the PIs will
refine the modules, guided by a constructivist framework that includes
development of a mental model and hypothesis formulation and testing. An
external evaluator will develop questions to measure student knowledge gains and
deploy pre- and post-module knowledge surveys. Student survey results will be
analyzed to assess knowledge gains and attitudinal shifts. Dissemination to the
wider educational community will be accomplished through webinars, conferences,
and via the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) educational website portal.
This project is funded by the Office of Polar Programs and the Division of
Undergraduate Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.