* 2021393
* Exploring the Effect of Shared Identities Between Instructors and Students in the Undergraduate Biology Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Sara Brownell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by making STEM classrooms and
disciplines more welcoming to all students. Individuals from marginalized groups
often feel unwelcome and unrepresented in STEM. Students who encounter such
feelings are less likely to persist in STEM majors than their peers. Instructors
with a marginalized identity can positively impact students who share the same
identity. However, it is unclear to what extent marginalized students know or
know of instructors who share their identity, and whether this knowledge affects
students’ college experiences. This project intends to assess impacts on
students when biology instructors’ share their LGBTQ+ identities, including
impacts on LGBTQ+ students’ sense of belonging in biology classrooms and college
STEM communities. This knowledge may help to identify strategies that improve
undergraduate students’ sense of belonging and capability in STEM, thus
supporting greater success of students from diverse marginalized groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marginalized stigmatized identities that carry negative
stereotypes can be invisible because a person who carries these identifies must
choose to reveal them. Currently, it is unclear how an instructor’s sharing of
an invisible stigmatized identity may impact students both who do and do not
share that identity. The project team has a strong record of leading successful
projects that address issues of diversity and identity in STEM education. In
this project, the researchers will use in-depth interviews and a national survey
to examine the extent to which instructors share their LGBTQ+ identities with
their students. The project has already recruited a substantial number of
volunteers to participate in the interviews. Using the framework of invisible
stigmatized identities, the project team hopes to identify factors that
influence an instructor’s decision to share a marginalized identity with their
students. Additionally, through a quasi-experimental study, the project intends
to explore the impacts when instructors briefly mention their LGBTQ+ identity.
The project will examine the general impacts on all students and specific
impacts on those students who share this identity, with a focus on students'
sense of belonging, science identity, and self-efficacy in science. These
outcomes have been established as important predictors of students’ persistence
in science. The project team will also examine how instructors’ sharing of their
LGBTQ+ identity affects students’ perception of instructor likeability,
competence, and relatability. A strong data management plan is in place to
ensure data security and privacy. Although this work will focus on biology, the
results of its efforts will likely be applicable in other STEM disciplines. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.