* 2021230
* SHF: EAGER: Toward Energy-Efficient Heterogeneous Computing Integrating Polymorphic Magnetic and CMOS Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Shaloo Rakheja, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,420.00

The integration of non-conventional materials and devices with silicon
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) technology can enable a new type
of computing platform with potential benefits related to area, energy
efficiency, and resiliency. In this regard, storing and manipulating information
in magnetic devices is promising. This is because, unlike CMOS devices,
information in magnetic devices can be stored without any energy dissipation,
while energy is needed only to read or write information. This low-power
operation of magnetic devices is highly advantageous for applications such as
Internet of Things and intelligent sensing that have low operating power
requirements. This research will connect the physics of such magnetic devices
with their use in circuits in which magnetic devices co-exist with and
complement silicon devices for enhanced functionality and user experience.
Results from this research will be incorporated into a hands-on circuit design
workshop organized annually at New York University (NYU). Specifically, students
will learn about the physics of magnets in table top experiments and interactive
online learning tools. The project will also develop content on magnetic memory
that will be introduced in a course on nanoelectronics devices and circuits
taught annually at NYU. The project will also publicly release the device models
and simulation data generated in this research via the science and engineering
gateway hosted at Purdue University, known as the nanoHUB, to benefit
researchers and educators working in related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
other possibilities exist, this particular project will focus on two specific
magnetic devices, namely the voltage-controlled topological-spin switch (vTOPSS)
and the magneto-electric spin-orbit (MESO) device. These magnetic devices offer
10 to 100 times superior energy efficiency for binary operations compared to
their magnetic counterparts. Another unique feature of these devices is that
their logic functionality can be configured post-fabrication, which translates
into resilience and area- and power benefits at the circuit and system level.
Physics-based models of the latency, energy dissipation, thermal stability, and
error-rate of vTOPSS and MESO device will be developed and calibrated against
large-scale Monte-Carlo simulations. Impact of potential interconnects,
including metallic and semiconducting nanowires, on device performance will be
quantified. Device-level models will be used to develop a standard cell library
of Boolean logic gates with vTOPSS and MESO as the switching elements. The cell
library will enable the quantification of performance metrics of magnetic-CMOS
computing platform at scale. The physics-to-circuits approach adopted in this
research will drive innovative concepts in circuit design that can maximize the
competitiveness of the proposed technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.