* 2021159
* Center for Integrative Research in Computing and Learning Sciences (CIRCLS)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeremy Roschelle, Digital Promise Global
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,987,935.00

Artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies are transforming
learning across the lifespan within home, community, educational and workplace
settings. Harnessing these advanced technologies to address nationally-important
learning needs in STEM (and STEM-enabling areas) requires the integration of
interdisciplinary research in the learning and computer sciences. The mission of
the Center for Integrative Research in Computing and Learning Sciences (CIRCLS)
is to: a) connect NSF-funded learning technology researchers and serve as a
community-based hub across the interdisciplinary research community (to include
learning sciences, computer sciences, social sciences, and engineering); and, b)
support the field by synthesizing emerging insights, findings and advances in
ways that strengthen learning with emerging technology. As a center, CIRCLS will
bring investigators together to share expertise, coordinate efforts, and
synthesize knowledge across projects. This includes a strong focus on broadening
participation among graduate students, early career scholars, equity scholars,
and practitioners - aiming to serve a field with over 1,000 active participants.
In addition, CIRCLS will communicate widely to broader research and development
audiences and policy makers regarding research advances through its newsletter,
website, reports and events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, CIRCLS will
lead six activities that go beyond the reach of existing conferences, societies
and journals to foster synergies among computer scientists, learning scientists
and relevant disciplines. The interrelated activities include the following: (1)
Hosting bi-annual multi-disciplinary research convenings in a highly interactive
format that builds relationships, identifies priority issues for emerging
learning technologies, and focuses on collectively advancing research to address
tensions and challenges; (2) Building capacity around artificial intelligence
synergies within education via working groups for graduate students and early
career scientists across locations to tackle tough problems that transcend any
individual project; (3) Organizing field-driven research syntheses, to generate
concise, compelling summaries across projects on topics that are foundational to
the work or reflect emerging designs and insights; (4) Expanding reach,
engagement and dissemination of the fieldâ€™s research, focused on broader
audiences to include researchers, policy makers, educational practitioners, and
other interest groups, through a mix of social media, newsletters and other
effective formats; (5) Curating the portfolio of awards to collect and report
detailed, consistent information about funded research, which will help the
field to understand the state of the art, to analyze of advances and gaps, and
to plan the future; and (6) Gathering community feedback and engaging an
advisory group composed of leaders from multiple disciplinary perspectives to
guide continuous improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.