* 2021744
* NRT-HDR: Science Museums Advance Research and Training through Convergence of Objects, Data, and Inference
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Christopher Witt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,999.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award engages
faculty and students in a new graduate education model centered in the science
museums at the University of New Mexico. The program enables trainees to
generate new knowledge about objects from anthropological, biological, and
geological museum collections, that will enable multidisciplinary research about
how natural, physical, and human systems change through time and space. A
central goal will be to understand past changes in the arid Southwestern United
States through time, and how life, including diverse human communities, might
respond to future changes in climate and water availability. Through research
and educational activities, trainees will enhance the informational value of
museum objects and collections by harnessing data science and cutting-edge
techniques such as high-resolution image analysis, DNA sequencing and
informatics, and elemental chemistry. This information will be intersected with
data on biodiversity and social or physical systems, with the aim to describe
and model biological and cultural responses to environmental and geological
change in an environmentally and culturally diverse region. Working together,
faculty and student research teams will address coupled human-natural impacts of
climate change, water dynamics in drylands, effects of landscape transformation
on ecosystem processes, and analytical linkages of object-based information with
large-scale data infrastructure. This award enables education, training, and
mentoring activities to recruit and train a diverse set of professionals with
unique intersectional expertise, and directly supports 40 trainees at the MS and
PhD levels, and extends program elements and benefits to 35 additional graduate
(75 total) and 40 undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This museum-based
NRT program addresses significant academic, structural, and cultural barriers
that hinder cross-disciplinary initiatives in basic and applied object-based
research. Ethical justification for scientific collecting and long-term support
of the vast infrastructural investment that the US has made in building
collections of physical materials revolves around their utility for answering
scientific questions that are critical for societal well-being. Research and
education activities include amplifying the information value of museum objects
by linking those that share times and places into an Extended Object Network
(EON). The EON framework spans across collections, incorporates biodiversity,
social, and physical system databases to facilitate the description, testing,
and modeling of biological and cultural responses to environmental change. The
program prepares students for careers that require: (1) understanding or
designing environment- or socio/economic-related research that leverages
scientific collections; (2) innovative and effective use of museum resources in
educational settings; (3) engaging the broader environmental research and policy
community; and, (4) effectively working in collaborative teams, including
development of mentoring skills. Program elements include co-mentorship in a
cross-museum setting, modular courses that converge epistemological systems
across disciplines, activities that provide both generalized and specialized
insights into computation and data integration, and training in ethical issues
affecting museums collecting and collections-based research. The geographic
focus of research and training themes is the American Southwest, a region with
rich cultural and natural histories and a well-known history of environmental
change. Such place-based research allows trainees to dig into complex problems
and is particularly effective at reaching underrepresented students because it
is relevant to their own lives, experiences, and communities. Through
interactions with external non-academic partners and thematically similar NRTs,
this program creates pathways to several careers for trainees who have vital
roles to play in science, policy, and resource management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.