* 2021146
* A Multi-institutional Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience in Genetics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kayla Bieser, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,983.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing undergraduate
students’ participation in authentic STEM research. Research experiences are
known to improve student performance and retention in STEM classes and majors.
However, research opportunities can be limited and inequitably available. As a
result, many institutions are developing course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs) in which all students in a course participate in a research
project. This proposal aspires to develop a national consortium of undergraduate
laboratory courses that implement a CURE based on the analysis of genetic
mutations in the fruitfly. The project, called Fly-CURE, allows students to
engage in authentic, inquiry-based research by mapping the location of mutations
in the fruitfly genome and studying the mutations’ anatomical and behavioral
effects. Fly-CURE is currently active in seven institutions. The project intends
to expand Fly-CURE to include a network of 20 institutions. The plans for
expansion are targeted to institutions, such as community colleges, that have
limited capacity to provide their students with research experiences. The
project intends to hold annual workshops for faculty and to pair experienced
Fly-CURE faculty with novice faculty, to support and guide new faculty as they
establish Fly-CURE on their campuses. As Fly-CURE expands, the project team
plans to gather information about how participating in Fly-CURE affects student
performance, and to compare this performance with that of students enrolled in
traditional genetics courses without CUREs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CUREs transform
traditional undergraduate laboratory courses into places where undergraduates
can participate in an authentic research project. Providing students with
authentic research experiences as undergraduates has been demonstrated to have
lasting impacts on students’ knowledge and attitudes toward research and can
positively impact the number of students from underrepresented groups pursuing
STEM degrees. Two major obstacles stand in the way of more widespread CURE
implementation. First is the creation of a sustainable research project that can
be completed by undergraduates in a classroom lab setting, and the second is the
development of a CURE project that exposes students to a similar spectrum of
learning objectives as a traditional laboratory course. This project proposes
expand a sustainable CURE project that overcomes both obstacles. Specifically,
it plans to grow the Fly-CURE from seven universities to twenty, creating a
sustainable Fly-CURE Consortium of institutions that all implement a common
undergraduate genetics laboratory component involving mapping and
characterization of novel Drosophila melanogaster mutants identified in a
genetic screen. Expansion of the Fly-CURE will be accomplished through
recruitment and training of new faculty who will implement the research project
in their genetics laboratory. The project will measure the impact of the CUREs
on student attitudes towards research and gains in common genetics learning
objectives, comparing students who participate in Fly-CURE with a comparison
group that do not. These findings are anticipated to be widely applicable to
undergraduate departments working to provide across-the board research
experiences for undergraduate STEM majors. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.