* 2021871
* NRT-HDR: Data-Driven Sustainable Engineering for a Circular Economy
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Elke Rundensteiner, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,289.00

The current ‘take-make-waste’ economic model relies on the irreversible
conversion of non-renewable raw materials to products. The health,
environmental, and economic burden of hazardous byproducts of this process falls
disproportionately on the most vulnerable communities. To drive change towards a
sustainable future and improved outcomes for all, there is a need to train
future leaders in the circular economy that maximizes use of renewable
materials, increases the efficiency of manufacturing processes, upcycles wastes
into valuable byproducts, and minimizes the harm of irreducible waste streams.
Despite much effort, educational models training students to become experts in
increasingly isolated fields and without regard for communication with
stakeholders have not yielded the desired results. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship award to Worcester Polytechnic Institute will
address this demand by establishing the CEDAR Program (Circular Economy and Data
Analytics Engineering Research for Sustainability) to educate an outward facing
community of scholars versed in data-driven sustainable engineering solutions to
the challenges preventing transition to a circular economy. The CEDAR
traineeship anticipates providing a comprehensive training opportunity for one
hundred and twenty (120) graduate students, including thirty (30) funded PhD-
level trainees, in disciplines ranging from chemical sciences (chemistry,
biology, physics, engineering) to data sciences (computing, business analytics,
statistics, mathematics) with a convergent focus on advancement of circular
economies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CEDAR traineeship interweaves technical and
social considerations and focuses on the well-being of our society. This
integrated traineeship in data and chemical sciences will develop leaders ready
to transform industrial chemical processes towards a green and circular economy
by addressing fundamental problems in three critical areas: (1) development of
atom and energy efficient processes, (2) understanding and deploying upcycling,
and (3) minimizing harm from the irreducible waste streams that cannot be
avoided. Communication and collaboration across traditional disciplinary
boundaries are fostered via professional workshops and convergent research
seminars team-taught by instructors from distinct disciplines. To drive change,
trainees learn leadership skills by participating in multi-way exchanges of
ideas and advocacy with audiences ranging from the general public to academia,
government, and industry. Connections with industry made by participating in
CEDAR community retreats, CEDAR External Advisory Board meetings and in the
internship program will strengthen trainee professional and career development,
and infuse talent into the sustainable economy. The CEDAR program will tackle
the underrepresentation of women and minorities in STEM disciplines by employing
innovative minority-centric recruiting strategies using peer ambassadors to
cultivate relationships with faculty and potential students at the program’s
partner universities, creating pipelines to CEDAR. Focus on social, ethical and
business implications will further help recruit a diverse cohort of students and
train well-rounded leaders that are advocates for the sustainable circular
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.