* 2021118
* An Integrated Faculty Professional Development Model Using Classroom Sensing and Machine Learning to Promote Active Learning in Engineering Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Stephen Gilbert, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,879.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing the teaching
effectiveness of engineering faculty. Faculty training is known to be a key
factor for successful integration of evidence-based teaching practices such as
active learning in STEM classrooms. However, faculty also need opportunities for
frequent feedback and reflection on the effectiveness of their use of active
learning strategies. The project will combine both training and feedback in a
faculty development model it calls TeachActive. The TeachActive model will be
implemented with 30 engineering faculty across multiple semesters. TeachActive
will use the EduSense open source platform to automatically gather real time
descriptions of student and teacher behaviors in the classroom. These classroom
analytics will be displayed in a dashboard to provide faculty with feedback
about the level of active learning in their classrooms. It is expected that this
feedback, together with faculty reflection, will promote systematic improvements
in evidence-based teaching by the faculty participants. As a result, the project
has the potential to accelerate engineering educators’ adoption and effective
implementation of active learning strategies in engineering classrooms, which,
in turn, can positively influence student engagement and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TeachActive professional development model
will embed automated classroom observation and analysis within a theoretically
grounded and evidence-based professional development framework. Integration will
include three consecutive components: (1) active learning training; (2) four-
week sessions of automated classroom observations with a one-year follow-up; and
(3) feedback and reflection. The research team will collect quantitative and
qualitative data to monitor changes in instructors’ use of active learning,
teaching beliefs, facilitation strategies, and reflective practices. The data
for the project will be collected in four stages: (1) pre-post teaching beliefs
survey; (2) classroom analytics; (3) reflection prompts; and (4) semi-structured
interviews of faculty. The Approaches to Teaching Inventory instrument will be
used to assess faculty beliefs about pedagogical strategies before and after
their participation in TeachActive. Classroom analytics tracked by EduSense (an
NSF-funded camera-based classroom sensing system developed at Carnegie Mellon
University) will reveal behavioral indicators of active learning facilitation
strategies in classrooms as well as students’ behavioral engagement data. The
machine learning techniques within the EduSense system will be validated for the
specific context at Iowa State and behavioral features of interest (e.g., sit vs
stand; hand raises; kinesthetic patterns) thus providing automated context-
sensitive feedback via the TeachActive dashboard. This project is supported by
the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.