* 2021536
* Improving Outcomes for STEM Students on Academic Probation
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Natalia Caporale, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 11/30/2023
* USD 399,908.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in a diverse, well-prepared
STEM workforce. Toward this goal, it will study a large population of students
who are on academic probation and at high risk of leaving STEM majors. Academic
probation is a designation given to students who are underperforming
academically and at risk of being dismissed from the university. Data shows that
around a quarter of all U.S. college students will find themselves on academic
probation at least once in their college career. As a result, the findings of
this study will be relevant to over 5 million college students in any given
year. The limited information available suggests that a significant percentage
of students who are placed on academic probation will eventually leave the
university. However, little is known about the factors, attitudes, and practices
that distinguish the students who recover from academic probation and go on to
graduate from those students who do not recover. This research study will be
designed to provide a better understanding of what factors affect the likelihood
that students on academic probation will return to good academic standing and
become active members of the STEM workforce. The findings from this study will
be used to develop data-driven, targeted interventions that focus on the needs
of different student populations, including those who are first generation
college students and/or are from low income families or races/ethnicities thus
far underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods to document in detail the
impact of academic probation status on STEM students, as well as use the
information to develop models and predict which students will recover. The
project will study the academic, demographic, cognitive, and affective factors
that are associated with increased likelihood of students on academic probation
returning to good academic standing and graduation. Specifically, it will use
multilevel regression to develop a predictive model of the relationship between
student academic and demographic factors and the likelihood of graduation for
students who are on academic probation. In addition, it will compare science
identity, self-efficacy, sense of belonging and commitment to STEM major between
students on academic probation and those in good academic standing. This project
aims to infer how science identity, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging in
STEM are differentially impacted by academic probation and how they correlate to
the likelihood of students returning to good academic standing. Finally, the
project will conduct a qualitative evaluation of student experiences while on
academic probation to identify barriers to recovery that need to be addressed
when designing targeted interventions for these students. Qualitative data will
be analyzed through the frameworks of intersectionality, Critical Race Theory,
and LatCrit. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This project is in the Engaged Student Learning track, through which
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.