* 2021768
* Physical Modeling of Long Period Events in a Controlled-Source Condition
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gregory Waite, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 452,128.00

Pressure changes in rock cavities filled with fluids produce specific seismic
signals. These signals are abundant in volcano "plumbing systems". They are
called long-period (LP) events because of their duration. LP seismicity is an
important precursor for volcanic eruptions because it is triggered by magma
transport preceding the eruptions. Yet, the source mechanism of LP events is
still poorly understood. A theoretical model developed in the 1980s, The
Chouetâ€™s model, has been widely used to describe this mechanism. The model has
been thoroughly explored with numerical simulations but not tested
experimentally. This is because producing LP signals in the laboratory is
challenging. Here, the researchers are developing a new apparatus to
artificially generate LP signals. The apparatus consists of a crack filled with
fluid and embedded within a large concrete slab. The slab is 6-meter long (~20
ft) and instrumented. Pressure in the fluid is varied while sensors record the
produced signals. Analysis of the signal allow unveiling the source mechanism of
LP events. The project outcomes have strong implications for volcanic eruption
hazard assessment. They also find applications in other disciplines, such as
glaciology where LP events are triggered by water-filled cracks or the
geothermal energy sector. The project provides support for an early career
scientist and a graduate student at Michigan Technological University. It also
provides training for undergraduate students, notably from groups
underrepresented in Science, as well as outreach to K-12 students. It is funded
by both the Geophysics and the Petrology and Geochemistry
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the researcher is to quantitively
characterize LP signals with respect to the fundamental parameters that
influence LP seismicity. These critical parameters include crack stiffness
(rheology contrasts of the materials), fluid viscosity, triggering location,
source frequency, crack orientation, and mass transport. The new apparatus is 6m
x 6m wide and 22-cm thick. The concrete slab is equipped with controlled
piezoelectric sources which generate pressure pulses from different
locations/orientations with respect to the crack. It is also equipped with
transducer and strain sensors to analyze the slab response and the produced
signals. The cracks can be filled with water or ethanol. In addition to
providing constraints for computational modeling, this research explores regions
of the parameter space which cannot be easily probed numerically. It, thus,
bridges a critical gap between theoretical models and the LP signals observed at
active volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.