* 2021497
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Design Teamwork Experiences and Learning in Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shun Takai, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 179,262.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in improving engineering
education. Specifically, it intends to improve team formation and collaboration
and thus enhance engineering students’ learning experiences in a team. Teamwork
is an essential component of all engineering undergraduate programs and is a
critical skill for professional engineering practice. For many engineering
students, unsatisfactory experiences on a student team can generate long-term
negative feelings about teamwork, which can negatively affect their performance
in the engineering workplace. Formation of effective student teams by
engineering instructors is a critical first step in ensuring that team-based
projects, labs, and design courses are successfully completed. Team composition
directly affects team deliberations, procedures, and learning outcomes. In this
project, Northern Illinois University and Rochester Institute of Technology plan
to extend knowledge about optimal student team-formation. This work will include
creation of a conceptual model for team formation, recognition of the
characteristics of an ideal team, and identification of gaps between the actual
and the ideal teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities include: (i) the
creation of a conceptual model that relates team inputs, team processes, and
team outputs; (ii) use of the conceptual model to identify ideal team
characteristics and establish a team-formation methodology; and iii)
investigation of the hypothesis that improved team member collaboration enhances
both team performance and learning. The approach taken is novel, evidence-based,
and data-driven. The project’s planned “regression” approach to team formation
uses data obtained directly from students deployed to work in teams for two
years in normal classroom settings. Comprehensive data will be collected using
variables that describe team inputs, processes, and outputs. A regression model
will then be constructed in the third year to correlate input variables to
desired outputs. Associations in the conceptual model will be tested through
investigation of multiple hypotheses using validated instruments and appropriate
statistical techniques. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.