* 2021785
* Collaborative Research: URoL: Epigenetics 2: Epigenetics in development and Evolution of Primate Brains
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 458,776.00

The proposed research will examine naturally occurring molecular variation in
the brains of humans and other primates to understand how modifications to the
function of genes in the brain relate to differences in developmental and social
experience across species. The proposal is highly interdisciplinary,
incorporating methods and perspectives from molecular biology, anthropology,
neuroscience and psychology, and will advance fundamental knowledge about
mechanistic processes underlying gene-environment interactions in the brains of
highly social species. In addition to offering interdisciplinary training for
graduate and undergraduate students during the proposed research, the PIs will
integrate research opportunities with outreach efforts for high school students,
high school teachers, and also for broader public audiences, including children.
Comparative studies of primates offer great educational and outreach potential
due to their deep implications for understanding humansâ€™ place in nature.
Furthermore, the brain is the most widely studied organ in genetic and
psychological studies, making the datasets this project will generate especially
worthwhile as open resources for the scientific community. All research
conducted will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals and
disseminated in scientific meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonhuman primates
have been important model species for the study of mechanisms underlying the
biological, genetic and neural basis of a variety of behavioral and cognitive
functions. Many aspects of primate brains, including size, structural variation
and rate of maturation are tightly associated with life history traits such as
cognition, gestation length and life span. These differences are also associated
with different developmental rates of primate brains. For example, human brains
are extremely immature at birth, followed by slow development, providing ample
opportunities for interaction between genome and environment to occur. This
research project aims to study the molecular record of such genome-environment
interaction in the context of primate brain development. Specifically, the
investigators will examine DNA methylation, which functions as cellular memory
of environmental input and thus moderates genome-environment interactions, and
hypothesize that natural variation in brain size and development of primate
species will be reflected in variation of DNA methylation, and in turn, gene
expression. Several primate species will be included, encompassing naturally
occurring variation in life history traits and brain size. Neocortical areas
with distinctive developmental patterns, at cellular resolution, will be
compared. In addition to phylogenetic variation, the research will utilize a
unique opportunity to investigate how early social experiences have shaped DNA
methylation and gene expression within species, using archived samples from
chimpanzees and baboon colonies. The proposed research will generate novel
opportunities to correlate molecular data with brain and cognitive phenotypes
across multiple scales of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the Understanding the Rules of Life: Epigenetics Program, administered as
part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.