* 2021276
* Integrating Project- and Place-based Research Experiences into General Education Courses to Increase Persistence of First-generation and Rural Undergraduates in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Brian McFarland, MORNINGSIDE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,359.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing retention and
academic achievement of rural or first-generation college students in STEM
fields. To this end, Morningside College will develop and test a two-year
pathway of four general education courses designed to serve undergraduate
biology and/or chemistry majors. These general education courses will integrate
project- and place-based STEM research experiences that are relevant to the
local community. Potential research themes include water quality and
availability, prairie restoration, and food safety. The courses and research
experiences will be designed to meet general education requirements for
developing skills in critical thinking, quantitative reasoning, communication,
and ethical analysis. They will also support the students’ development of
scientific reasoning skills. The STEM research/general education pathway is
expected to support greater success of rural and first-generation STEM students.
The project will examine this hypothesis by comparing learning outcomes of
students in the STEM research/general education pathway relative to students in
the traditional pathway of separate general education and introductory STEM
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop, implement, and evaluate
an innovative two-year general education curriculum aimed at increasing
representation of rural or first-generation students in the STEM workforce
pipeline. The project will measure the effectiveness of this pathway through
results from targeted surveys and reasoning skills assessments. Specifically,
the project will: 1) determine how a two-year pathway of general education
courses that integrate project- and place-based STEM research affects retention
of rural or first-generation students; 2) assess student progress toward
learning STEM skills, such as scientific reasoning; and 3) determine the impact
of the four-course pathway on student agency and motivation to persist in STEM.
The project will add to the evidence base regarding effective support for rural
or first-generation STEM students. The project will integrate intensive faculty
development to augment faculty members’ teaching skills and help define key
factors or issues needed to scale this work across STEM fields of study and to
other predominantly undergraduate institutions serving rural students. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.