* 2021446
* Multilingual Computational Thinking: Teaching Introductory Programming Classes Through Low-Level and High-Level Programming Languages
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dongeun Lee, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring a potentially
transformative approach for improving undergraduate computer science education.
Student success in computer science directly correlates with their performance
in introductory programming courses. Not only do these courses provide students
with basic computational skills, but they can also give students the confidence
they need to persevere and obtain computer science degrees. This project is
based on the hypothesis that learning introductory computer programming
languages is like learning a natural language. Research has shown that
multilingual children outperform monolingual children when learning English as a
foreign language. The project will apply this observation to computer science by
concurrently teaching students multiple programming languages, thus helping them
become multilingual in computer programming languages. It is expected that
multilingual learning in introductory computer programming will support
subsequent student confidence and success in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will focus on transforming the
Programming I, Programming II, and Data Structure courses to emphasize
algorithmic design and computational thinking. Each course will use three
different programming languages simultaneously: an assembly language and two
high-level programming languages. The learning activities will include
interactive videos, simulations, engaging projects, and assignments based on
programming for video game development. By simultaneously teaching multiple
computer programming languages, the research team expects to remove student
dependency on a single programming language as well as strengthen students’
development of a solid foundation in algorithmic design and computational
thinking. The research plan will investigate how students learn multiple
computer programming languages, and whether it is more effective to learn
multiple programming languages simultaneously or sequentially. It will also use
Neo-Piagetian cognitive development theory to identify the stages through which
students pass as they master algorithmic thinking, from the basics of syntax to
an understanding of patterns. These stages can also be used more generally to
assess students’ knowledge of programming. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources
Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.