* 2021988
* BII-Design: Evolutionary Morphogenesis and Biodiversity Institute (EMBody)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Gunter Wagner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,948.00

The well-being of humans and ecosystems relies on biodiversity on Earth.
Diversity emerged because animals and plants use a fantastic variety of methods
to survive in all forms of habitats. In the case of animals, survival depends
crucially on their ability to move around. Most animals use fins in water, wings
in air, and limbs on land. But these appendages have extraordinary morphological
diversity and can be repurposed for novel functions such as using fins to walk
and limbs to swim. This project will establish the Evolutionary Morphogenesis
and Biodiversity (EMBody) Institute to drive discoveries on how appendages are
formed and used in animals. Complex and poorly understood processes, ranging
across levels of organization from molecules through cells to populations and in
speed from milliseconds to hundreds of millions of years, drive the diversity of
appendages. The EMBody Institute will use multi-disciplinary collaborations to
produce novel techniques and tools to study the processes that shape animal
appendages. Additionally, learning how animals move over diverse environments
can lead to improvements in the design of robots used in disaster relief by
land, sea, or air. Importantly, the Institute will foster a culture of
inclusivity to broaden participation in research, education, and public
engagement with science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in biology is
how biodiversity on Earth emerged from the complex, multi-scale interactions of
biological processes with the physical and chemical environment. The
Evolutionary Morphogenesis and Biodiversity (EMBody) Institute will focus on
animal locomotion and the remarkable diversity of propulsive appendages,
essential for movement and survival in diverse habitats. This Design proposal
aims to establish a collaborative community that integrates the multiple
disciplines needed for propelling breakthroughs in understanding the evolution
of morphogenesis in vertebrate appendages such as fins, limbs, and wings.
Appendages develop through morphogenesis, a dynamical process that integrates
genetic patterning with biochemical and mechanical regulation. Form enables
function but does not dictate it. Rather, physical interactions with the
environment, governed by mechanical principles and neural control, leads to
function. Ultimately, natural selection operates on function, and the
evolutionary transformation of ancestral gene regulatory networks yields novel
forms and functions. From genes at the smallest level to selection on
populations at the largest scale, this inextricable loop is the central theme of
the EMBody Institute. The Institute will integrate experts from multiple
disciplines and multiple levels of biological organization: (i) development that
drives the emergence of diverse morphologies from shared gene networks through
regulation, (ii) biomechanics that generates function by neural,
musculoskeletal, and mechanical interactions, and (iii) evolution that
transforms ancestral gene networks to yield novel morphology and function. The
collaborative activities will generate and test novel hypotheses, innovative
measurement methods, and unique datasets to benefit multiple scientific
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.