* 2021313
* Anti-Deficit Learning and Teaching: A Community Learning Project Centering Race, Gender, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Marta Civil, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project at University of Arizona, a Hispanic Serving Institution, aims to
serve the national interest by transforming undergraduate mathematics teaching.
It intends to do so by creating positive learning environments that support all
students, particularly those from groups that are not yet equitably represented
in STEM. As an Institutional and Community Transformation project, it will bring
together undergraduate students, STEM peer mentors, mathematics graduate
students, and instructional faculty to support one another’s learning. Project
components include workshops on Inquiry Based Learning and anti-deficit
teaching, summer-bridge Precalculus and Calculus workshops, critical
conversations about race and gender in STEM, a Faculty Learning Community, and
faculty-led student interviews. The focus on anti-deficit pedagogy responds to a
critical need for STEM instructor professional development that attends to
issues related to race and gender. Expected project outcomes include shifts in
the instructors’ teaching practices, their perceptions of students, and their
understanding about how to challenge systemic inequities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project responds to a critical need for research on
community-based professional development programs that prioritize undergraduate
students from populations that are underrepresented in STEM. The project’s
research plan will investigate the impacts of the community learning process on
instructors’ teaching. Design-based research methods and process evaluation will
support implementation of the project activities and interrogate critical design
principles, to support design improvements over the award period. The project
will examine Inquiry-based Learning practices in classrooms that serve many
underrepresented minority students. By adapting the “teachers as ethnographers
method” from Funds of Knowledge research, instructors will participate in
critical conversations at the university’s cultural centers and conduct
individual interviews with students. These activities will support instructors’
development of awareness of relevant social and policy issues that affect their
students, their teaching, and the University as a whole. Written reflections and
surveys, together with focus-group and individual interviews, will document the
instructors’ developmental processes. The project has the potential to improve
the learning climate, especially for students from underrepresented groups, and
develop future change agents to design and deliver equitable teaching. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.