* 2021618
* Collaborative Research: New science, tools, and observations to couple geodesy with hydrology for modeling, water storage change, and streamflow forecasting in mountain watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Adrian Borsa, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,028,766.00

In a global context of rapidly changing water availability, information that
allows communities to better predict and manage their water resources will
become ever more critical to socioeconomic sustainability. This project bridges
traditional disciplinary boundaries in Earth and water sciences to generate new
knowledge about the storage and flow of water through mountain watersheds.
Mountainous regions of the world receive extensive precipitation and serve as
crucial year-round sources of freshwater for human populations and natural
ecosystems. Standard methods for estimating the total amount of water stored
within mountain watersheds involve single-point measurements with limited
spatial coverage or large-scale averages over hundreds of kilometers with
limited resolution. Recent advances in geophysics, including the development and
expansion of global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) that measure subtle
changes in the shape of the Earth caused by the weight of groundwater and
surface water, have transformed the ability to study Earthâ€™s water cycle,
especially at space and time scales that are relevant to complex mountain
watersheds. By precisely observing and modeling the centimeter-scale deformation
of Earth due to fluctuations in mountain snow and water storage, this project
aims to place new constraints on hydrologic models at the watershed scale,
create enhanced operational tools for water-resource management, and develop a
prototype hydrologic early-warning system that can alert downstream communities
to flood risk or flash droughts. Furthermore, demonstrating the capability to
make estimates of water storage at individual watersheds using a few inexpensive
GNSS sensors could change the way that freshwater resources are typically
measured and managed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines fieldwork, data
analysis, and modeling to investigate three hydrologically distinct mountain
watersheds in the western USA. High-resolution (in space and time) observations
of crustal displacement, streamflow, snow depth, precipitation, and atmospheric
conditions will be collected in all three watersheds. Research products will
include: (1) empirical calibrations that relate GNSS-inferred surface
displacements to hydrologic parameters such as streamflow and aquifer recharge;
(2) numerical tools for forward modeling of three-dimensional surface
displacements due to heterogeneous loads on a heterogeneous Earth and for
inverse modeling to calculate variations in water storage within the watershed;
(3) coupled geodetic and hydrologic models that incorporate critical feedbacks
between solid-Earth deformation, water storage, surface runoff, and groundwater
flow; and (4) a pilot operational product for hydrologic
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.