* 2021117
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Assembling Teams Supported by Augmented Intelligence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Noshir Contractor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 31,916.00

Diversity can yield measurable benefits for teams and organizations. Prior
research shows that functional diversity––the degree to which team members
differ in terms of their experience or background––can positively influence team
functioning through the increase of information, skills, ability, and knowledge
that diversity may bring. Though emerging societal norms advocate diversity and
inclusion, hardwired tendencies create an attraction to people who are similar
and familiar. This poses a challenge to organizations seeking to leverage the
benefits of diversity in teams. Can technologies help organizations and their
co-workers assemble more diverse teams? This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement Grant (DDRIG) seeks to understand how augmented intelligence
technologies can facilitate people to assemble in functional diverse teams. The
findings and applications of this research will contribute to stakeholder
communities that are invested in increasing diversity in teams. The research
will also deliver a team recommender system to the public for enabling
participants to assemble their own teams using augmented intelligence, and
enabling participants to discuss and learn about
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves a program of laboratory
experiments controlling the presence and absence of human agency and augmented
intelligence when individuals are assembling teams. The project will assess the
formation processes of teams assembled (a) randomly, (b) by participants, and
(c) by participants using augmented intelligence. The research will examine the
three team formation conditions and analyze participants’ search queries,
decisions to invite or accept invitations from potential teammates, their
resulting teams’ composition, and performance. The project will also study their
interaction processes and outcomes after the team is
formed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.