* 2021677
* Collaborative Research: Modes of melt extraction in silicic mushes: processes, efficiency and timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matej Pec, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 277,084.00

The most dangerous eruptions captured in the geologic record are related to
magmatic systems that erupt large volume of silica-rich magmas explosively into
the atmosphere. The deposits of such eruptions are generally well-characterized
both chemically and in terms of their physical attributes, however petrologists
have yet to fully understand the mechanisms by which these large volume of magma
with low crystal content emplace at shallow level in the crust and evolve prior
to an eruption. This project aims at combining laboratory experiments on analogs
as well as natural samples and developing physical models to constrain the
physics that allows for these systems to evolve as they do and the rates (or
timescales) required for a system to be susceptible for a large volcanic
eruption. The separation of melt from a crystalline residue has implications for
long-term volcanic hazards. The research of a graduate student will be funded
and collaboration with an experimental laboratory at MIT
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge to understand how viscous
silicic melts separate from their crystal cargo comes from (1) the small
discrepancy in density between these phases, (2) the large crystal fraction at
which melt extraction is occurring (1 and 2 imply that melt extraction should be
sluggish and likely inefficient process) and (3) the presence in many cases of
an exsolved volatile phase impacting melt-crystal separation. Understanding and
quantifying the efficiency of phase separation in crystal mushes is contingent
upon understanding the rheology of multiphase magmas specifically over
conditions where information is very limited (experimental or unambiguous clues
from the rock record). Novel syringe-type compaction experiments will be
executed, where interstitial fluid extraction can be measured over time and
correlated with changes in packing for the residual solid fraction. These
experiments will span various size and shape distributions for particles and
will be coupled to numerical simulations of 2 and 3 phase compaction to
understand how repacking (mush reorganization rather than deformation of
particles) impacts melt extraction. Samples from exhumed plutons will be used to
constrain how melt extraction processes studied in the lab and theoretically
extrapolate to nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.