* 2021791
* NRT-ROL: Interdisciplinary Studies of the Phenotype: EXPANDing Training in Research and Careers
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Deborah Roach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,999.00

The phenotype is at the center of virtually every process in the life sciences,
from disease susceptibility and pathogen virulence, to agricultural yield, to
invasions of introduced species, to the sustainability of management practices.
Discovering how the phenotype is built and interacts with the environment is a
key to solving the real-world challenges that range from human health and
disease, to food security, to managing biological and ecological diversity in
the face of anthropogenic impacts on the environment. 21st century life
scientists will need to transcend traditional disciplinary boundaries to
transform the understanding of complex traits and solve these problems.
Professionals in health care, agriculture, conservation, management and data
science all require a new integrative training to move past the constrained
thinking of traditional research silos. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship award to the University of Virginia will address these
demands through a new cross-scale graduate curriculum and a programmatic focus
on professional development and career preparation in the life sciences. The
traineeship anticipates providing a unique interdisciplinary training
opportunity to over 130 students, including 30 funded trainees, across the life
sciences from Biomedical Sciences, to Biology, Psychology, and Environmental
Sciences, developing an explicitly integrated approach to education and a
culture that embraces diversity, creates innovation, and fosters professional
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will vertically integrate ideas and
techniques from across the life sciences and generate a network of
collaborations across traditional disciplines that will transform the way that
the phenotype is investigated. The training program introduces a new graduate
curriculum that combines innovative cross-scale research training with
development of a broad quantitative toolkit. Professional development that
includes formal preparation for a diverse range of careers through career
exploration and internships, as well as communication and quantitative skills,
will be woven throughout graduate training to produce trainees that contribute
to a broad range of societal challenges. The program will enhance diversity in
the life sciences through a culture of inclusivity that runs from science to
scientist including recruiting, mentoring, and training for both non-academic
and academic careers. The program will develop connections with UVA Career
Services and the School for Data Sciences and enhance the fledgling PhD+
program, leading to lasting institutional change in graduate training. Program
innovations will be shared with other institutions through career services and
graduate training networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.