* 2021152
* Scholars: Affective Economies in Crowdfunding for Cancer
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Martha Lincoln, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 12/31/2023
* USD 145,801.00

Crowdfunding is a form of alternative finance wherein individuals appeal for
small donations via a third-party online platform. Originally intended to help
artists and entrepreneurs fund creative projects, U.S. crowdfunding economies
are now dominated by campaigns to help patients and their families afford health
care costs. Of the 250 million new campaigns launched annually to offset costs
related to medical treatment, almost half are fundraisers for individuals
diagnosed with cancer. While some crowdfunding appeals inspire the sympathy and
support of a large public, most fail to widely circulate or raise significant
sums. The median crowdfunding campaign for a cancer patient receives just 25% of
its funding target. Crowdfunding for cancer thus represents an increasingly
important but understudied phenomenon. This project investigates the social
dynamics shaping this new form of micro-philanthropy by researching how and why
donors’ sentiments and emotions motivate giving in some crowdfunding campaigns
but not in others, creating significant disparities among cancer patients. It
also explores how crowdfunding impacts cancer patients, and the ways in which
the fundraising process reshapes the experience of being ill. Project outcomes
will contribute to a broader understanding of how the growth of crowdfunding is
shifting cultural perceptions regarding health care, the meaning of illness, and
the rights and social roles of the sick.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study draws
data from participant observations, ethnographic interviewing, and focus group
interviews with cancer patients, donors to crowdfunding campaigns, social
workers and patient navigators, and employees of crowdfunding corporations. It
has three main objectives: (1) To investigate how crowdfunding exchanges are
informed by the digital interfaces and online environments where campaigns are
created and circulated; (2) To inquire into how the experience of illness is
reshaped by the experience of crowdfunding; and (3) To investigate how
crowdfunding campaigns affect cancer patients’ access to health care. This will
provide new insights in two domains relevant to public interest and national
policy debates. First, it sheds light on the understudied impacts of new digital
platforms on society and culture. Second, it develops new knowledge regarding
the predicaments that increasing health care costs create for sick and disabled
Americans. This project contributes to Science and Technology Studies by
advancing scholarship on technological transformations and their unintended
consequences. It contributes to Anthropology by developing new insights
regarding the impacts of cultural practices on the experience of illness, health
outcomes, and health disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.