* 2021181
* How do density dependent dynamics influence the efficacy of mimetic signaling?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sean Mullen, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 844,195.00

Mimicry is a classic example of evolutionary adaptation where organisms gain a
selective benefit by resembling a different species. In cases of Batesian
mimicry, palatable mimics gain protection from predation by co-opting an
unpalatable model’s signal to potential predators. Evolutionary theory predicts
that any mutation that improves the resemblance between the model and mimic
should be favored by natural selection. Therefore, the widespread occurrence of
mimetic polymorphism, the conspicuous variance in mimetic perfection, and the
existence of apparently static imperfect mimetic signals is puzzling. Although
numerous hypotheses have been proposed to explain these puzzling phenomena,
recent research in this field suggests that any factor that reduces a predator’s
ability to predict which potential prey items are toxic will lead to relaxed
selective pressure on imperfect mimics. Here, the researchers test the
hypothesis that density dependent effects, alone or in concert with frequency-
dependent effects, increase predator uncertainty and cause relaxed selection on
imperfect mimetic traits. Researchers will also partner with K-12 STEM teachers
to improve outreach to public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
importance of frequency-dependent dynamics is well established in the mimicry
literature, questions remain about their relationship to the evolution of
imperfect mimicry and the paradox of mimetic polymorphism. Finding evidence of
density dependent effects would be significant for at least two reasons. First,
it would improve understanding of the factors governing predator behavior. This
is important because predator communities likely vary significantly across both
spatial and temporal scales. Therefore, understanding how variation in prey
density and abundance influences predator learning is crucial to predicting the
conditions under which imperfect mimicry is expected to persist. Second, density
effects provide an intuitive hypothesis for the maintenance of polymorphic
mimicry because spatial and/or temporal variance in the absolute or relative
density of multiple, unpalatable models within a given predator community is
expected to generate a heterogeneous fitness landscape for palatable mimics that
could lead to the origin of, or further divergence between, polymorphic
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.