* 2021612
* Embodied Sensing and Control in Fish-like Swimming Robots via Passive Degrees of Freedom
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Phanindra Tallapragada, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 446,614.00

This Dynamics, Controls, and System Diagnostics award will support fundamental
research into the analysis and design of fish-like swimming robots, enabling the
use of passively articulated body segments to sense ambient flow characteristics
and respond to hydrodynamic stimuli. This type of embodied sensing and control
of locomotion is seen in swimming animals like fish, where sensory awareness of
velocity and acceleration is used as feedback for control. The project will also
incorporate active and passive internal rotors to extend beyond more familiar
bio-mimetic approaches. The project incorporates ideas from several disciplines
and combines theoretical models, numerical simulations, and experiments to
translate these ideas to mechanical systems. The new capabilities for swimming
robots will be particularly significant for power-limited underwater robots in
sensory-deprived environments. The results of the project will enable the design
of improved underwater robots for exploration, search-and-rescue, and inspection
and maintenance of underwater infrastructure. The project will provide research
training and career preparation to doctoral students, offer research and
educational opportunities for undergraduate students through design projects,
and will reach out to K-12 school students to attract them to STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to investigate the role of
passive degrees of freedom (PDOF) in aquatic robots that can act as both sensors
and controllers. The dynamics of PDOF can encode the hydrodynamic forces and
thus act as sensors. At the same time the motion of PDOF can be influenced by
the hydrodynamic forces; if such motion is harnessed by appropriately designed
PDOF, they can act as controllers. The project will improve our understanding of
how the swimming systems state in a potential well encodes information about
gaits and propulsive efficiency and how transitions between potential wells can
be triggered by environmental disturbances or inputs that lead to fast and agile
motion. The project will use machine learning methods to understand how the
kinematics of a swimmer encode hydrodynamic information and how this can be used
as part of multimodal sensory suite. Such embodied sensing and control would
greatly reduce or in some cases bypass the role of electronic information
processing and computation. The concepts of embodied sensing in aquatic robots
can be applied to existing designs of robots by augmenting existing sensors for
better sensor fusion algorithms. The modeling framework will also directly be
applicable to several classes of terrestrial mobile robotic systems, where
passive self-stabilization and agility could be improved by employing PDOF for
embodied sensing and control. The specific research goals and plans will combine
cross disciplinary modeling techniques from nonlinear dynamics, fluid mechanics,
machine learning and bioinspired robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.