* 2021161
* Research on the Impact of Inviting Early College Students to be Mathematicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Terrance Pendleton, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 264,354.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
mathematics education and career pathways. Specifically, this exploratory
research project will investigate whether mathematics research projects
conducted early in students’ college mathematical careers will spark students’
engagement and interest in mathematics. To do so, the PI will work with 12
students in two weekly mathematics seminars of six students each. The students
will pose their own questions to investigate, then develop skills in building
innovative quantitative solutions to these complex problems. The project has a
focus on students from populations that have not yet been equitably recruited
into mathematics majors. Participating students will be recruited from non-major
or pre-major mathematics courses, with an emphasis on recruiting students who
are people of color. A second goal of the project is to capture the nuances in
conducting educational research when the mathematician directing the research
project is a Black man. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to answer the
following research questions: In what ways can undergraduate students enrolled
in pre-Calculus and Calculus courses engage in developing and researching
authentic mathematical research questions? In what ways does participation in
authentic mathematics research shift how students think about themselves as
mathematicians or potential mathematicians? How does race intersect with
mathematics as the students do research with a faculty mentor? To address these
questions, the project will collect data on students’ mathematical work, weekly
student journals, and weekly surveys. The project will also collect journals
from the Principal Investigator, and video recordings of two seminar meetings.
These data will be analyzed using content analysis methods. Results of the study
will contribute to the literature about undergraduate research in mathematics,
about supporting student populations that have traditionally been excluded from
upper level mathematics courses, and about the complexity of the experience of
Black STEM faculty. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.