* 2021273
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Learning and Improving Teaching of the Physics of Fluids in Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Dawn Meredith, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 108,664.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving biology students'
mastery of physics concepts. More than 100,000 students graduate from college
each year with degrees in the biological sciences, and many of them go on to
become physicians and other health professionals. Most of these biological
sciences majors take an introductory physics course as part of their degree
program or as a prerequisite for admission to a graduate or professional school.
This course is usually the only physics course they take in college and it is
often a special introductory physics class targeted to biology majors. As a
result, this course provides their most significant opportunity to understand
how physics constrains and enables life. Although these Introductory Physics for
Life Sciences (IPLS) courses have been the target of significant national reform
efforts, more improvements are needed. This project will address a specific area
of need: the study of static and dynamic fluids. Fluids are essential to life
and understanding fluids is essential to life science students. The need for
students to understand the physics of fluids has been cited by biologists and
health professionals alike. However, these topics are not always included or
taught well in IPLS courses. To help physics instructors design more effective
approaches to teaching fluids, this project will develop and pilot-test a Fluids
Conceptual Evaluation (FCE), which will allow instructors to evaluate the
effectiveness of their teaching and measure students' understanding of the
concepts. While developing this assessment tool, the investigators will also
develop supports to help IPLS instructors teach the physics of fluids
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will pursue two complementary lines
of work in the project. First, they will develop a preliminary version of the
FCE, using a process that is novel not only in the content covered but also in
following psychometric methodologies, in gathering data from a diverse set of
students, and in producing several forms of the conceptual evaluation. The FCE
will consist entirely of two-tier test items, where the first tier consists of a
multiple-choice conceptual question and the second tier consists of a multiple-
choice question asking test-takers to explain the reason they chose the answer
they did for the first question. Using Rasch analysis, the investigators will
create several forms of the instrument that are on the same scale. These
variations are intended to address the concern that conceptual evaluations do
not function well as both a pre-test and a post-test, since some questions are
too hard for the pre-test and others are too easy for the post-test. The
availability of different forms will also address the concern that some topics
are not included in different IPLS courses. In summary, the development process
is designed to increase the rigor and flexibility of conceptual evaluations.
Second, the investigators will conduct surveys and virtual discussions with IPLS
instructors to develop insights about how they perceive the difficulty and value
of teaching fluids. With that information, the investigators aim to build
supports and dissemination activities to meet instructors' needs. Those
resources should increase the likelihood that fluids will be included in IPLS
courses, as recommended. This collaborative project involves investigators at
the University of New Hampshire (Award DUE-2021273), the American Association of
Physics Teachers (Award DUE-2021059), the University of New England (Award
DUE-2021261), and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (Award
DUE-2021224). This project is funded by the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE: EHR) program, which supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.