* 2021338
* Preparing Elementary Pre-service Teachers to Support STEM Success for English   Learners
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Nicole Glen, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving elementary STEM
teaching and learning. To this end, it will create and study a science education
program intended to better prepare elementary pre-service teachers. The project
will focus on developing the pre-service teachers’ STEM and teaching content
knowledge and teaching skills, particularly for teaching students who are
English learners. The project will do so through a strategic partnership between
the University’s Elementary and Early Childhood Education Department and the
Department of Defense STARBASE program at Hanscom Air Force Base to create and
two three-credit courses and a field experience for preservice teachers. The
first course will on teaching physical science, technology, and engineering,
with integrated mathematics, using the Department of Defense STARBASE
curriculum. STARBASE is a STEM enrichment program for school districts with
large populations of economically disadvantaged students. This specialized STEM
content course will be designed so that pre-service teachers integrate their
understanding of science concepts with teaching models advocated by science
education research. The course will be co-taught by a Bridgewater State
University science educator and STARBASE teachers, who teach the same science
concepts to elementary students throughout the year. The second course will be
designed to provide pre-service teachers with knowledge, skills, and best
practices to assist English learners' success in learning science. It will
include sheltered instruction strategies consistent with the Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education guidelines. Physical science
and technology concepts from the STARBASE curriculum will be used in teaching
the pre-service teachers about useful instructional strategies to support the
success of English learners. Both the content course and the engaging English
learners course require fieldwork. These requirements will be met by placing the
pre-service teachers as assistants at one of the one-week STARBASE for English
learners’ summer programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s research study
aims to advance understanding of connections among motivation and pedagogical
content knowledge development for pre-service teachers. It seeks to add to
research findings associated with affecting pre-service teachers’ interest,
engagement, self-efficacy, and outcome expectancy for student success in
science. It will follow design-based research methodologies in combination with
a quasi-experimental design with nonequivalent groups. The preservice teachers
in the project’s set of courses and field experience will be compared to a
sample of pre-service teaching taking the traditional on-campus physical science
content course and course on instruction for English learners. This project
intends to provide the pre-service teachers with opportunities to learn
pedagogical strategies for and work directly with English learners. A potential
outcome is enabling children who are English language learners to experience
success in learning science from an early age. Such success may offer entire
communities of learners a pathway to educational programs and careers that were
once inaccessible. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This
is an Engaged Student Learning Level 1 early stage research project focused on
undergraduate pre-service teachers. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.