* 2021035
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the impact of lead agency cross-functional authority on city sustainability outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Richard Feiock, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 08/31/2022
* USD 0.00

Local governments have traditionally been organized around function, with
agencies and departments defined by the services they produce and deliver.
Although organizational structures compartmentalized according to specific
expertise can produce efficiencies, this fragmentation becomes problematic when
governments attempt to address complex problems that transcend multiple units.
Urban sustainability is an exemplar of issues which cut across numerous
responsibilities traditionally held by distinct units within a single government
organization. This research examines the relationship between municipal
governments’ administrative arrangements, their policy adoption and
implementation choices, and sustainability outcomes. It highlights the role of
lead unit cross-functional authority—which we define as the clout that an
initiative’s administrative lead has over other relevant units in the city
government—and assesses its impact on local sustainability outcomes. In so
doing, this research contributes to an evidence-based understanding of how
public organizations function in order to enhance their design, management, and
overall effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work advances convergence
research drawing from organizational, policy, sustainable urban systems, and
network science to increase the precision and robustness of the Functional
Collective Action (FCA) framework. It provides important insight into the
determinants of lead agency cross-functional authority—which extant research has
highlighted as fundamental but inadequately operationalized—and its influence on
policy outcome. Using urban sustainability as our policy lens, we employ a
mixed-methods approach to collect and analyze data from focus groups of local
government officials, public and private archival repositories, and a nationwide
survey to: (a) develop a refined conceptualization and empirical measure of
cross-functional authority that captures its various dimensions and mechanisms
of influence; (b) develop a comprehensive national dataset of multiple
sustainability outcome measures that are comparable across cities; and (c)
create the first longitudinal database on local sustainability policies spanning
a ten year period, which is often considered the minimum amount of time
necessary for nuanced examination of policy implementation and policy change.
The collection of data will enable improved testing of local institutional and
governance theories and its analysis will facilitate advances in urban
management and sustainability outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.