* 2021761
* Statewide Conference on the Redesign of  Remedial Math Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Dennis Taylor, Baton Rouge Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2021
* USD 49,971.00

This project will serve the national need for improving college mathematics
instruction so that more students graduate and can pursue STEM fields. As a
first step, this project will organize a conference to gain insight into the
implementation of corequisite mathematics courses. Many institutions require
students who donâ€™t pass mathematics placement tests when they enter college to
take remedial, non-credit courses, thus delaying their college progress. An
alternative is to provide students with corequisite mathematics courses while
they take a college level mathematics course. Considerable research shows that
the corequisite course model can significantly increase the achievement and
retention of students who traditionally do not do well in mathematics. The
project will explore this topic by convening representatives from the
mathematics departments of all 13 member colleges in the Louisiana Community and
Technical College System. At the conference, they will learn about implementing
corequisite mathematics from experts at the Carnegie Math Pathways-West End at
Baton Rouge Community College, which will facilitate the two-day conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Conference has four specific aims: explore options and
trends in implementation of developmental and corequisite models for mathematics
instruction; support institutional team building and sharing between the
workshop participants; catalyze redesign of the remedial math curriculum at the
participating colleges; and disseminate the corequisite model within the
participating colleges' faculty and administrators. It is expected that
increasing the corequisite model in mathematics will increase the graduation
rate of students, as well as increase the number and diversity of students who
pursue STEM careers. This project is supported by the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education: EHR Program that supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This conference is
aligned with the Engaged Learning track, which supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. It is also
aligned with the Institutional and Community Transformation track, which
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.