* 2021100
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Nature and Impacts of Instructors' Communication with Students in Classroom-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jeffrey Olimpo, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 74,856.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping to define the
elements that lead to student success in STEM courses. Research has shown that
undergraduate science courses that engage students in research, called Course-
based Undergraduate Research Experiences or CUREs, improve students’ graduation
rates and retention in science. However, this research has only just begun to
yield insight into how and why CUREs are more effective for students than
traditional lab courses that do not include a research component. This project
intends to investigate whether and how the research environment of CUREs
influences how instructors talk with students. If so, it will also examine
whether different ways of talking influence students’ scientific development and
motivation. For this analysis, audio recordings will be made of instructors
teaching CURE and traditional components of the same course or pairs of
instructors teaching CURE and traditional lab courses. These recordings will be
analyzed to identify differences in the types of questions instructors ask and
the types of support instructors provide to students. The results of this
analysis will then be tested statistically to determine whether the ways
instructors communicate relates to student outcomes in the two course types. It
is anticipated that the project results will help determine features of CUREs
that make them effective for students, which could then be used to inform the
design of future CUREs and improvement of existing CUREs, thus maximizing their
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CUREs are championed for broadening access
to research opportunities and promoting students’ development as scientists,
especially among students from backgrounds historically excluded from science.
Several studies have also shown the potential for CUREs to influence the
persistence and success of all students in science, improving graduation rates
and retention of STEM majors with diverse personal characteristics. However, the
features of CUREs that influence students’ persistence and success in science
remain largely unknown. This mixed methods project will explore instructor talk
as a potential mechanism through which CUREs exert their influence. The project
will specifically investigate whether and to what extent CURE instructors ask
students more substantive questions, provide more mentoring support to students,
and use more non-content talk than traditional lab course instructors. The
project will also investigate the extent to which these forms of instructor talk
relate to several psychosocial and motivational factors that predict students’
continuation and success in science. The research analysis will be accomplished
by collecting audio recordings of instructors as they teach CUREs or traditional
lab courses; conducting content analysis of the recordings using a deductive
approach informed by research on instructor talk, classroom discourse, and
research mentoring as well as an inductive approach to identify novel types of
instructor talk; collecting pre/post data from students enrolled in the recorded
courses on their science self-efficacy, scientific identity, and perceptions of
the values and costs of continuing in science; and conducting quantitative
analysis using mixed effects regression models to explore which, if any, forms
of instructor talk are related to student outcomes. The project results are
designed to yield insight into the theoretical underpinnings of CURE
effectiveness, such as whether CUREs are effective primarily by affording
students opportunities to see the value that research can offer, by building
students’ confidence in their abilities to be successful in research, by helping
them see their potential to contribute to science and their place in the science
community, or some combination thereof. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.