* 2021900
* NRT-URoL: Synthesizing Biology Across Scales – A Convergent Synthetic Biology Training Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Susanna Calkins, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,994,994.00

Synthetic biology is an emerging discipline that is generating innovations for
synthesizing fuels, foods, and materials from sustainable sources, for building
smart medicines to cure diseases, and for enabling global environmental
stewardship. Thus, there is great potential for synthetic biology to touch
almost every aspect of our daily lives. Given the promise of synthetic biology
to benefit society, there is growing need to better understand the rules of life
by which we may engineer biology, and to develop a diverse, synthetic biology-
trained, entrepreneurial workforce. Today, synthetic biology concepts are
primarily taught within traditional disciplinary boundaries, creating barriers
to synergizing concepts across disciplines that could result in deeper
understanding of biology and increased breakthrough innovations for society.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the Center
for Synthetic Biology at Northwestern University will break down these barriers
by training graduate students using a new model for synthetic biology training,
which specifically bridges disciplinary boundaries. This project anticipates
training one hundred forty five (145) PhD students, including seventeen (17)
funded trainees, from applied mathematics, biology, biomedical engineering,
chemical engineering, civil and environmental engineering, and medicine degree
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding concepts of this training program are
focused on Understanding the Rules of Life (URoL) through a synthetic approach:
students will learn the principles of living systems across length and time
scales—from molecules, to cells, to organisms, to communities—and then
demonstrate this understanding through thesis research spanning the interfaces
between these scales. This training program is inherently convergent. By
integrating concepts across disciplines (e.g., biology, engineering,
mathematics, data science), the program will help develop a core curriculum for
synthetic biology training. The training plan consists of: (i) curricular
development that introduces core biological principles along scales; (ii) skills
workshops that give students core competencies in communication, computer
programming, and experimental design; (iii) an experiential project within
education, entrepreneurship, and policy tracks that prepares students to
translate their training to impact broader society; (iv) integration of ethical
considerations throughout each component; and (v) co-mentored thesis research
that prepares students to work at the interface of different biological scales.
The primary objectives of the project are to create a core curriculum for
synthetic biology training, train synthetic biologists to communicate scientific
ideas to diverse societal stakeholders, grow the synthetic biology workforce,
broaden participation of women, underrepresented minorities, and people with
disabilities, and build infrastructure to sustain innovative synthetic biology
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.