* 2021076
* Understanding the genomic basis and evolutionary history of lactase persistence, and the dynamics of the associated gut microbiome, in pastoralist populations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Michael Campbell, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2022
* USD 350,000.00

This project addresses fundamental questions about the underlying genetics and
evolutionary history of lactase persistence (LP), and the dynamics of the
associated gut microbiome, in milk-dependent pastoralist populations. The
findings of this study will work synergistically with previously collected
archaeological data to advance the understanding of human population history.
Moreover, the project will provide a more nuanced understanding of the factors
that govern the diversity and relative abundance of host-associated microbiomes.
In addition, the research facilitates the training of minority graduate students
in the investigators’ research laboratories, enhancing their competitiveness and
success in the STEM workforce. To further expand the impact of this research, a
small subset of the collected genomic and phenotypic data will be analyzed in
the investigators’ undergraduate courses at Howard University, introducing a
greater cross-section of students to genetics, evolution, and computational
methods through project-based activities. And beyond the classroom, this project
will provide new opportunities for faculty with different scientific backgrounds
(e.g. biological anthropology and microbiology) to explore research paths that
do not traditionally fit into a single discipline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will collect genomic and phenotypic data in pastoralist
populations, an understudied population. These data will be analyzed to: (1)
identify novel LP-associated alleles and their possible interactions; (2) infer
the evolutionary history of known and novel LP-associated loci; and (3)
investigate the influence of host genetics and environment on gut microbial
communities. Molecular data have provided some insights into the evolution of LP
in humans, but thus far these studies have focused on specific well-studied
populations This study provides information on additional populations thereby
contributing to the genetic architecture and evolution of this uniquely human
trait. With increased access to genome-wide and phenotypic data together with
advances in computational methods, researchers are now able to examine new
hypotheses about the genetic and microevolutionary factors that have influenced
LP, as well as hypotheses about the genetic and environmental variables that
have shaped the gut microbiome assemblage in milk-dependent populations. This
project is jointly supported by the SBE-BCS Biological Anthropology Program and
the SBE Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.