* 2021203
* Increasing Career Competencies in Computer Networking Courses using Simulation, Hands-On Learning, and Project-Based Learning Within a Cognitive Apprenticeship Framework
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Moayed Daneshyari, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,681.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
learning in computer networking and communications courses. To be prepared for
jobs in these fields, college graduates must be able to think critically, solve
problems, work well with others, and communicate effectively. This project will
apply a new approach for teaching computer networking that enables students to
learn technical skills and improve employability skills. The teaching approach
will combine simulation-based learning, hands-on learning, and project-based
learning within a cognitive apprenticeship framework. This framework describes a
learning environment designed to help a novice move toward expertise through
guided learning experiences that emphasize cognitive and metacognitive processes
and skills. Students in the redesigned courses will use networking and digital
communications simulation software to design real-world networks and will then
create a working physical model of the network they designed. Throughout the
process, students will practice metacognition, so that they become aware of and
can purposefully strengthen their own problem-solving strategies. It is expected
that this teaching approach will prepare graduates for careers in networking and
digital communications, and that other institutions will be able to successfully
use the approach. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to produce graduates
who have the domain knowledge, practical and career readiness skills, and
independent problem-solving capability needed for workplace success in computer
networking and communications. The research component of the project will
examine student progress in: (a) networking and digital communication concept
knowledge and practical skills; (b) self-efficacy in networking and digital
communications; (c) career readiness competencies level; and (d) higher-order
and metacognitive thinking skills. The teaching approach will be implemented in
three courses at Hampton University, an Historically Black College or
University. Existing survey instruments, including the Student Assessment of
their Learning Gains, the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory, and surveys from
the STELAR STEM Learning and Research Center, will be used to assess the
effectiveness of the approach. This work is expected to contribute to building a
highly capable, diverse workforce in the high-demand field of networking and
communications. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.