* 2021686
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating Climate Change and Kill Mechanisms Associated with the End-Cretaceous Mass Extinction: A Model-Data Comparison Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Charles Bardeen, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2024
* USD 507,650.00

Sixty-six million years ago at the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary (KPB), an
asteroid impact in the Yucatán Peninsula resulted in the loss of about 75% of
all species on Earth. As the most recent, well documented, and rapid mass
extinction in Earth’s history, study of the KPB extinction is ideal for
understanding the effects of climate change on biodiversity. However, the causes
of the KPB extinctions remain uncertain. This project will use a combination of
novel climate model simulations and geologic records to explore climate change
and kill mechanisms associated with the asteroid impact. Measuring various
geologic records from across the KPB will constrain the types and magnitudes of
emissions from the asteroid impact. These emission estimates will then be used
in climate model simulations to determine the Earth system responses to the
asteroid impact through time. Project results will provide a mechanistic
understanding of KPB extinction, which, in turn, will improve interpretation of
many records from this time period, deliver insights into ecosystem collapse and
recovery, and lead to valuable climate model development. Outreach activities
include creation of a KPB exhibit, develop of a geochemistry high school
project, recruitment of three underrepresented undergraduate interns, and
engagement of student researchers at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley,
a Hispanic majority university.&lt;br/&gt; To determine the relative importance
of various processes that could have led to the KPB extinction and subsequent
environmental recovery, the PIs will use an Earth system model to perform KPB
simulations that mimic forcings from the asteroid impact. The model contains an
explicit aerosol resolving scheme and high-top atmosphere, both essential for
capturing the processes associated with these perturbations. Further,
development and implementation of an ocean biogeochemistry module will allow for
direct comparison with paleontological, chemical, and isotopic records across
the KPB. The PIs will also collect high resolution soot, temperature, and
biomarker records to constrain and validate the KPB simulations. Samples will be
analyzed for soot and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to test the asteroid
impact fires hypothesis and provide refined soot emission data for the
simulations. New estimates of temperature change after impact will be generated
from phosphatic microfossils and biomarkers. These records will provide sub-
millennial to millennial scale constraints on temperature, and in combination
with simulations and soot estimates, a means to backout CO2 emission associated
with the impact. Finally, high resolution biomarker work will shed light on the
rate of marine planktonic recovery, which will be compared with the ocean
biogeochemistry simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.