* 2021103
* Quantitative Modeling in Undergraduate Biology Courses: Teaching Approaches and Student Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Brian Couch, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 402,926.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in excellent undergraduate
biology education that supports students’ quantitative reasoning skills. Toward
this goal, the project will examine the effects of biology instructor practices
on improving students' quantitative reasoning. As technology advances,
scientists have increasingly relied on quantitative approaches to develop models
and understandings of natural phenomena. Similarly, citizens need to be able to
interpret quantitative information in their daily lives to make important
decisions that support the health and well being of society. Several prominent
national reports and educational standards have stressed the need for
undergraduate biology education to put more emphasis on the development of
quantitative skills. However, it remains unclear how instructors design lessons
to target quantitative skills and which instructional strategies best support
student development of those skills. Thus, the major goals of this project will
be to investigate what types of practices faculty use to teach quantitative
skills and to determine the extend to which different teaching strategies
produce the intended student learning. With more information about what
instructional practices are effective, faculty could make better choices about
how to help students develop quantitative skills. This project has the potential
to produce new insights into connections between instructional practices and
student outcomes, while also cultivating and supporting a community of faculty
committed to teaching quantitative skills in the life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the development of
quantitative modeling skills in undergraduate biology students. Quantitative
modeling represents a complex process consisting of using mathematical
processes, making interpretations of quantitative information, developing models
that describe the given phenomena, and reflecting on the nature and purpose of
these models. As technological advancements propel the collection and analysis
of massive volumes of data, quantitative modeling has taken on an increasing
role in helping researchers describe the dynamics underlying complex global
problems. This project will use course observations, artifact analysis, and
faculty interviews to characterize how faculty teach quantitative modeling, with
emphasis on whether faculty tend to adopt certain groups of practices together.
Students enrolled in the courses of participating faculty will complete an
assessment, and their responses will be used to determine the interconnections
between the different aspects of quantitative modeling. Finally, by measuring
the teaching practices and students’ outcomes in biology courses across the
country, the project will conduct a large-scale analysis of whether specific
groups of teaching practices align with the development of particular aspects of
quantitative modeling knowledge and skills. Once completed, this project will
have gathered the evidence needed to identify teaching practices that can
successfuly integrate quantitative literacy and quantitative biology into
undergraduate biology courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.