* 2021886
* URoL: Epigenetics 1: Influence of environmental change on the epigenome and phenotypic plasticity in purple sea urchins
* BIO,EF
* 07/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Marie Strader, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 10/31/2022
* USD 497,138.00

This project will explore how early-life exposure to variable environments
shapes traits in later life. In marine organisms, variation in temperature or
microbial content of the water is known to perturb development and function of
the immune system during the larvae-to-adult life cycle. How this occurs is not
well understood, although evidence suggests that environmentally-induced
chemical additions to the organism’s DNA may play an important role. Such DNA
changes, referred to as ‘epigenetic’, can alter when and where specific genes
are turned on or off as larvae develop to become adults. This research will
focus on studying epigenetic changes in genes involved in development of the
immune system of the purple sea urchin, an ecologically-important ocean dweller.
The results are expected to provide better understanding of how marine organisms
adapt for survival in changing ocean environments. In addition to its scientific
impact, the project will have educational benefits by providing training for
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers, as well as opportunities
for high school students to engage in hands-on research through Auburn
University’s Summer Science Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly changing
ecosystems are challenging biologists to uncover the mechanisms used by
organisms to respond to shifting environments. Adaptive phenotypic changes may
alter population dynamics, and, in turn, community composition and ecosystem
function. The epigenome is emerging as a potential mediator between organismal
genomes and phenotypes, although this connection remains minimally understood.
The proposed research employs the purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus) to identify causal linkages between the epigenome and larval
phenotypes with an emphasis on immune function. This highly integrative work
will characterize the dynamic epigenomic landscape during development through
whole genome methylation profiling, identify epigenetic signals that are
responsive to environmental conditions using an experimental approach, and link
these changes to immunological phenotypes by monitoring the system-wide cellular
response to a specific pathogen using in vivo time-lapse microscopy. S.
purpuratus is particularly well-suited for these studies, as it occupies an
important ecological niche in Pacific kelp forests, is experiencing higher, more
prolonged seasonal temperatures, and has been used for decades as a model to
understand development, cell biology and immunology. This system offers a unique
opportunity to integrate perspectives from ecology, development, immunology,
experimental biology, and computational genomics to piece together how
epigenetics modulates phenotypes in response to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Understanding the
Rules of Life: Epigenetics Program, administered as part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas
through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences. Co-funding is provided by the Integrative Ecological Physiology
Program, Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.