* 2021330
* Analysis of a Simple, Low-cost Intervention's Impact on Retention of Women in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Bita Akram, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,938.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality STEM education
by studying an intervention designed to improve persistence of women in computer
science. Engaging all people in learning about STEM, particularly computer
science, is important for innovation, global competitiveness, and preparation
for future careers that increasingly rely on computing. Women occupy just 28% of
STEM jobs and account for only 17% of computer science majors and 21% of
engineering majors. These differences in career choices arise partially from
gender differences in self-assessment of STEM ability. This project will test
whether educational institutions can use a simple intervention to increase the
persistence of women in computer science. This intervention consists of email
messages to students in introductory computer science courses. The messages
contain contextual information about the student’s performance in class and
encouragement regarding their effort and potential. For example, a message might
reveal that the student is a top performer in the course and suggest that the
student should explore getting involved in undergraduate computer science
research. A pilot study found that changing the wording of a single email could
increase women's intentions to stay in computer science by 18%. This project
aims to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention on a larger scale, and
determine how to maximize its efficacy. If successful, the project will provide
educational institutions with a simple, easily implemented tool to increase the
number of women in computer science fields. This intervention could have
positive effects on other groups that face negative stereotypes about their
intellectual capacity and ability to succeed in computer sciences, and might be
applicable to other STEM disciplines, as well. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will use both a field experiment and an online experiment to test the
intervention. The field experiment will be conducted across all the introductory
computer science courses at a large research-based university. Multivariate
analysis will be conducted to determine both the immediate and longitudinal
effects of the intervention on self-assessed computer science ability and on
persistence in computer science. Qualitative interviews will be conducted with
some students in the field experiment to obtain nuanced data about students’
experience with the intervention. The online experiment will use short
programming activities and will explore which pieces of contextual information
are most effective. This knowledge will be critical for crafting efficient
messages that can be used at scale, and for determining methods (other than
emails) through which institutions can boost students’ self-assessment and
persistence in computer science. Mediation analyses will be used in both the
field and online experiments to illuminate the process through which the
intervention impacts self-assessed computer science ability, and in turn,
persistence. This research is expected to contribute to theoretical and
practical knowledge of how institutions can intervene to promote gender equity
and to increase knowledge about the social-psychological processes around self-
assessments of ability and career choice that reproduce existing gender
inequalities. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources Program, which supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.