* 2021874
* NRT-HDR Data Driven Decision Making to Address Complex Resource Problems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Shafiqul Islam, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,878.00

Award 2021874&lt;br/&gt;NRT-HDR Data Driven Decision Making to Address Complex
Resource Problems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;“No one ever made a decision because of a
number. They need a story,” explained Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman. Telling
stories, while remaining true to the data, is a defining challenge of this
century. Narratives are persuasive but not objective; numbers are often
objective but not persuasive. For science to provide the broadest beneficial
impact to society, its findings need to be communicated with both scientific
integrity and authentic empathy. Although a growing number of interdisciplinary
careers demand this dual fluency, current graduate curricula do not adequately
prepare students to master these skills. At many institutions, training remains
siloed, and curricular partitions separate those with skills in data science
theory, deep domain-specific knowledge, and policy analysis. These partitions do
not map well to the real world, where the most pressing social and environmental
challenges demand interdisciplinary innovation and collaboration. Effective
interdisciplinary collaboration requires a level of exposure, experience, and
practice in real-world problem-solving that combines numbers and narratives.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Tufts
University will address this need by educating Data Professionals who will
synthesize numbers and narratives to design and implement data-driven solutions
that are technically efficient and contextually appropriate. The project
anticipates training over 140 masters and doctoral trainees: 20 NRT Fellows with
stipends, 50 NRT Problem-Focused Immersion Fellows, 60 NRT Travel Awardees, and
12 NRT Module Developers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT will train two types of
data professionals. Policy-Savvy Data Experts—primarily from STEM
disciplines—will advance the frontiers of data science and will be able to (a)
identify, analyze, and solve a problem with the appropriate data-driven theory,
tools, and techniques; and (b) adapt and acquire skill sets to harness emerging
data-focused technologies, techniques, and tools. At the same time, they will
have training in policy-relevant skills and be able to collaborate with the less
technically trained decision-makers in their workplace. Data-Proficient Decision
Makers—primarily from non-STEM disciplines—will use data in policy development
and decision making. They will be able to (a) collaborate effectively on teams
that include users and producers of data, including scientists, engineers,
practitioners, and decision-makers with different backgrounds and perspectives;
and (b) provide data-informed advice in an actionable way as well as broadly
communicate those results for effective action. Trainees will have hands-on
experience with a growing portfolio of data science tools and methods that
facilitate the rapid translation of data into actionable information. Training
will be grounded in finding, defining and resolving problems from both data-rich
(i.e., big data) and data-scarce contexts common to many real-world resource
problems – including those at the intersection of Food, Energy, Water, and
Ecosystems. This NRT model will provide an interdisciplinary theory-practice
synthesis by building on two potentially transformative components: (1) Modular
Course Elements (MCEs); and (2) Problem-Focused Immersion (PFI). A unique aspect
of this NRT is the use of a common database across the MCEs, akin to the
adoption of a common book in Writing Across the Curriculum programs. The
proposed problem-focused and theory-practice synthesis strategy will foster
deeper actionable collaboration among data science experts, domain experts,
practitioners, and decision-makers. With this project’s commitment and plan to
educate Data Professionals from STEM and non-STEM disciplines, it will actively
pursue broadening participation in data science from under-represented groups.
Content-rich, modular and adaptable nature of program elements will make them
transferrable across disciplines and institutions and sustainable beyond the NRT
grant period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.