* 2021638
* 2020 Crystal Engineering GRC/GRS: Inspired Design, Assembly and Properties of Molecular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Jennifer Swift, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystalline materials play
many important roles in society ranging from medicine to energy storage, and
waste remediation to sustainability. The development of new materials to meet
21st Century needs requires the contribution of scientists with diverse
backgrounds including chemistry, physics, materials science, computer science
and engineering. The Gordon Research Conference on Crystal Engineering (GRC-CE)
will bring together leading and emerging scientists in the crystal engineering
field where the presentation and discussion of the latest research can serve to
both define and align with the materials challenges of the future. The
conference format is designed to encourage significant interactions between
established and younger participants, which is critical to facilitating the open
exchange of ideas, stimulating collaboration, and developing the next generation
of talent. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and
Condensed Matter Physics programs within the Division of Materials Research,
registration fee and/or travel support will be provided for younger
participants, including students, postdoctoral associates and junior
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge and understanding in crystal engineering
is needed to develop the advanced materials needs of the 21st century. The 2020
GRC-CE, themed “Inspired Design, Assembly and Properties of Molecular
Materials,” will highlight the breadth of the crystal engineering field as it
spans fundamental topics of crystal design and assembly to opportunities for
commercialization. The conference program includes leading experts who bring a
variety of perspectives (e.g. academia, national laboratories and industry) to
encourage new multidisciplinary ways of thinking across scientific fields. As
with past GRC-CEs, ensuring diversity will be a top priority, particularly with
respect to the inclusion of women and other underrepresented groups. The
associated Gordon Research Seminar, themed “Engineering Crystals in the Fourth
Dimension: Monitoring of Structural Changes in Crystals,” provides a forum for
graduate students, post-doctoral associates, and other scientists with
comparable levels of experience and education to present their results and
engage in meaningful scientific discussions and professional development. With
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Condensed Matter
Physics programs within the Division of Materials Research, the GRC-CE will
gather leading experts in the major and emerging areas of crystal engineering. A
high level of interaction among established scientists and the next generation
of researchers will help to enhance the exchange of ideas within the crystal
engineering community and to develop the next generation of
talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.