* 2021909
* BII-Design: Exploring the ecology and evolution of the global virome with big data and machine learning
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Colin Carlson, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 166,189.00

This Design activity will result in a proposal to create a Biology Integration
Institute that will synthesize recent advances in wildlife virology and pursue
new insights about the ecology and evolution of the global virome. The pandemic
emergence of SARS-CoV-2 is only the latest development in an accelerating trend
of dangerous viruses emerging from wildlife. Global travel, urbanization, and
increasing human-wildlife contact have all made it easier for these viruses to
emerge. In the future, climate change and land use change will reassemble the
global virome even further, forcing mammals to cross continents, meet in new
ecosystems, and exchange viruses thousands of times more, potentially unleashing
even more threats to global health. At least 10,000 of these mammal viruses
might have the potential to infect humans, but most of the global virome is
still undescribed: only about 1% of mammal viruses have been discovered, and a
much smaller fraction in other vertebrates. With so little data, it is difficult
to predict which viruses will pose a future threat, or where, when, and how they
could emerge. Predicting the next pandemic threat will require new data spanning
biological scales, from single genes up to deep evolutionary time, and new
statistical methods from the cutting edge of computer science and mathematics.
In addition, the project will host summer residencies for trainees and develope
new coursework that combines biology with hands-on computer science
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project assembles a group of virologists,
computer scientists, statisticians, and ecologists to explore cutting edge
scientific questions about methodology, inference, and impact. The project has
three aims: (1) synthesizing existing data about host-virus associations for all
vertebrate clades; (2) developing novel approaches to predict host-virus
interaction networks, using novel data streams like viral strain diversity
characterized from genomes, or receptor data from immunological studies; and (3)
developing frameworks for actionable science that will put viral ecology to use
for global health science and security. These aims will be accomplished through
collaborative workshops. In doing so it will establish a foundation for a full
Implementation proposal to develop an Emerging Virus
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.