* 2021956
* UNS:  International Research Coordination Network for Creating Transdisciplinary Nodes of Food-Energy-Water to Support Sustainable Urban Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Frank Loeffler, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

2021956 (Zhuang). Environmental change, population growth, and accelerating
consumption of food, energy, and water (FEW) resources bring grand challenges
for urban sustainability worldwide. Often lost in the challenges is the
environmental relation to the FEW nexus and the environmental consequences of
uncoordinated decision making due to lack of systems understanding of science
and technology. Despite dramatic differences in economic and political
structure, many countries share common FEW trajectories, a strong science and
technology base, and a perceived commitment to urban environmental
sustainability. Evolving global change merits the creation of a
transdisciplinary international network to develop a global research agenda that
addresses the impacts of regional and global FEW systems on urban sustainability
as the world transitions from natural ecosystems to managed ecosystems at
accelerating rates. The goal of this international Research Coordination Network
(iRCN) is to chart a new path forward in developing urban sustainability and
resiliency within the framework of the FEW nexus. This iRCN merges research
networks existing among countries of different urbanization and income levels,
including Argentina, Brazil, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic,
Guatemala, Netherlands, Tanzania, Uganda, Uruguay, and the U.S. The objectives
of this iRCN are to (1) build a comprehensive FEW-system database to support
global urban sustainability; (2) create a focused FEW network to inspire urban
outreach and engagement programs; (3) facilitate the formation of multinational
transdisciplinary research teams to address the interests of urban stakeholders;
and (4) educate and train a future FEW workforce capable of implementing
sustainable urban development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban FEW networks are
complex systems and emergent, and unpredictable properties are expected. No
single group of disciplines can generate comprehensive understanding of the
feedbacks and impacts of urban FEW manipulations and variations on the
environment. This iRCN will bridge existing international and domestic FEW-
system and relevant networks and partnerships in an effort to identify and
refine urban FEW challenges, harmonize perspectives, generate opportunities for
collaboration, and realize synergies of currently siloed and uncoordinated work
for advancing a FEW-focused global agenda of sustainable urban development. The
iRCN will facilitate transdisciplinary, multinational communications and
accelerate the development and transfer of multisectoral data, standards,
analysis tools, new technologies, and a trained workforce among differently
urbanized countries. The iRCN will tackle the challenge of communicating science
and technology to multinational stakeholders and policy-makers within a complex
urban FEW network. Feedbacks from practitioners and the public will be
incorporated into research agenda design and planning in order to converge on
potential solutions to local problems with global scale implications. The
network established through this iRCN will serve as a template for budding FEW-
urban research initiatives in Africa, Latin America, and South Asia and help the
less urbanized countries avoid traps and negative experiences during the
transition to sustainable development. The iRCN will provide unique
opportunities for international education, which include an honors student
research program on the University of Tennessee campus, multiple study abroad
programs for U.S. students, and an annual summer school in China, where U.S.
students will interact with students from more than 20 countries. These efforts
will contribute to developing a diverse, competitive, and globally engaged
workforce, which can effectively communicate FEW-system grand challenges and
solutions to the public and stakeholders and translate research innovations into
practice across international borders. The iRCN will also provide a structured
rationale for economic and environmental policy
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.