* 2021053
* Perceiving high-level relations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Chaz Firestone, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 527,767.00

The world contains not only objects and features, but also relations holding
between them. When a piece of fruit is in a bowl, and the bowl is on a table, we
appreciate not only the visual appearance of the individual objects (e.g., a red
apple, a wooden bowl), but also the relations "containment" (in) and "support"
(on). A surprising number of everyday tasks depend on these and other relational
representations, such as assembling furniture, packing a suitcase, reading a
medical chart, or navigating a scene. How does the mind represent visual
relations themselves, beyond the objects participating in them? The work
proposed here explores an exciting hypothesis about how the mind extracts
relations from images —— namely, that relations are properly *perceived*, in a
fast and automatic manner akin to the perception of more familiar visual
properties such as size, color, or shape. Across multiple case studies ——
including the perception of fit, balance, containment, support, adhesion,
enclosure, and more —— this work will take a psychophysical approach to the
perception of relations, asking whether relational perception proceeds rapidly,
automatically, reflexively, and in ways that interact with other perceptual
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here has three primary aims:
(1) To characterize the kinds of relations we perceive; (2) To understand how
such relations are extracted by the mind; and (3) To elucidate their function in
the mind at large. First, what kinds of relations can we see? Previous work has
focused mostly on basic geometric and spatial relations (such as being beside,
above, or behind); but objects in the world are related to each other in far
richer ways. Here, the investigator will catalog the kinds of relations that
appear in perception, with a special focus on “force-dynamic” relations,
including combining, containing, supporting, balancing, covering, tying,
connecting, hanging, and other relations in which objects exert physical forces
on one another. Second, do we only consider, judge, or infer the relations
between objects? Or can we also see them directly? The next aim of this proposal
is to investigate the nature of relational perception, by asking whether the
mind extracts visual relations in ways that show signatures of genuinely
perceptual processing, such as speed, automaticity, reflexiveness (or cognitive
impenetrability), and interaction with other perceptual processes. Third, why do
we perceive relations at all? Are they just curious quirks of the mind, or do
they support other kinds of knowledge? For example, once we see that two objects
are connected, do our minds automatically predict that tugging on one will bring
the other along? Once we see that two object-parts can combine into a whole, is
it easier to remember or count such objects? The final aim of this project is to
explore how relational perception supports other sophisticated kinds of mental
processing, including automatic prediction of physical contingencies between
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.