* 2021713
* NRT-NNA: Systems Approaches to Understanding and Navigating the New Arctic (SAUNNA)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Kathleen Bell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,297,155.00

The Arctic is the most rapidly changing environment in the world. People living
in the Northern Hemisphere are now experiencing the consequences of a changing
Arctic, including abrupt shifts in weather patterns, altered availability of
natural resources such as fish, minerals and water, and threats to indigenous
cultural heritage and economies. Anticipating and adapting to these changes
requires exploration and understanding across environmental and social systems
spanning from the Arctic to lower latitudes, raising the need for new approaches
to train future Arctic scientists. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship award to the University of Maine will address this demand by
training graduate students in the interdisciplinary field of Arctic systems
science. The project anticipates training 57 MS and Ph.D. students, including 20
funded trainees from Ecology, Earth Sciences, Anthropology, Economics, and
Marine Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strengthening skills and competencies to
improve integration across environmental, social, and knowledge systems are
essential to understanding and navigating the new Arctic and enhancing training
of the broader STEM workforce. The goal of this project is to train a new
generation of leaders prepared to: 1) advance understanding of Arctic changes
and their local &amp; global effects, 2) conduct solutions-driven research
focused on socio-environmental systems and their dynamics, 3) apply models and
tools to integrate across systems, 4) develop cross-cultural &amp; cross-
disciplinary perspectives on emerging environmental and economic issues, 5)
conduct interdisciplinary, collaborative research with stakeholders to foster
resilience of systems affected by Arctic change, 6) inform future Arctic policy,
7) effectively &amp; rapidly communicate results geared to different audiences.
An interdisciplinary curriculum that integrates active learning models,
professional development, faculty and peer mentoring, collaborative research,
and stakeholder engagement will be created, focused on changes in Greenland, the
Arctic-North Atlantic and Maine. The core training elements of this project
include an annual retreat, a suite of new and existing coursework, a
collaborative interdisciplinary research project, Arctic field experience, and
an internship with a partner organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award is being provided by
Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program, one of NSFâ€™s ten Big Ideas. NNA
supports projects that address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly
changing Arctic, empower new research partnerships, diversify the next
generation of Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal and informal
education, and integrate the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This
award aligns with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.