* 2021038
* Developing a comprehensive profile of attentional control strategy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrew Leber, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 548,904.00

Whether one is navigating a bustling Times Square or hiking in a peaceful
forest, their senses capture far more information than can possibly be processed
fully. Fortunately, humans are endowed with the mechanisms of attention, which
help to prioritize the sights, sounds, smells, etc., that are most behaviorally
relevant (e,g., a person approaching instead of bright flashing lights on a
billboard). While most people possess powerful abilities to use attention (e.g.,
searching for red things to find apples in a produce section), there is great
variation in how strategically people use these abilities. For example, while
most people have the ability to search for the color red to quickly find apples
in a produce aisle, research has revealed that many people do not choose to
apply this ability and, consequently, take longer to accomplish their task. The
notion that one’s attentional strategies – and not only their abilities -- can
dictate their success in everyday tasks has significant societal implications.
First, attentional strategies might explain how people perform at a number of
attentionally demanding vocations, such as baggage screening, radar monitoring,
driving, and more. Measuring strategy use could help determine suitability for
these vocations. Additionally, learning how to improve attentional strategy
could enhance job performance. Second, many disorders have an attentional
component, especially ADHD and frontal lobe damage; understanding how strategy
is used could help better characterize these disorders and open up potential
paths to treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research aims uses a wide
variety of human behavioral and eye-tracking methods to investigate and
characterize how individuals vary in their use of attentional strategy, with two
primary approaches. First, using a novel experimental paradigm recently
developed by the research team – the Adaptive Choice Visual Search (ACVS) – the
researchers will explore how strategy use on one task generalizes to strategy
use on other tasks. It will also examine the degree to which people’s subjective
sense of effort contributes to their optimal (or non-optimal) use of strategy.
That is, do some people avoid good strategies because they find these strategies
to be effortful to use? Second, the research team will measure a variety of
distinct strategy and ability metrics in a large sample of individuals to
uncover hidden predictors of attentional strategy use across the population.
This will help researchers to understand whether an individual’s attentional
strategy across many contexts can be distilled to a single measurable trait or a
more complex, heterogeneous set of traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.