* 2021880
* BII-Design: Institute for the Biogeography of Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Ashlee Rowe, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,169.00

Behavior (how animals interact with other organisms and the environment) is
critical for individual survival and reproduction, the persistence of
populations/species, and the health of ecosystems. Behavioral studies seek to
understand how and why animals act differently within and between populations,
and to identify factors that drive the evolution of new behaviors. Yet while the
current and historical distributions of species are an integral context for
understanding behavioral evolution, they are often neglected in behavioral
studies. Similarly, the field of biogeography ⎯ how and why biological
diversity, or biodiversity, varies across the Earth ⎯ seeks to understand how
biodiversity responds to natural and human-mediated change; however, such
studies often do not take the behaviors that shape population- and species-level
interactions into account. This project lays the foundation for developing an
Institute focused on the biogeography of behavior, through the development of a
shared and integrative framework for both fields that will enhance our
understanding of behavioral evolution, conservation, and ecosystem processes.
Activities undertaken by the Institute will include recruitment and training for
students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty; development of formal case
studies and activities for K-12 and undergraduate classrooms; implementation of
a Broadening Bioinformatics Workshop geared towards high school students; and
Institute planning activities and pilot projects. The Biogeography of Behavior
Institute will merge expertise in the fields of animal behavior and biogeography
to develop new empirical tests, mathematical models, and theory to enhance
understanding of when and how organisms respond to rapidly changing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavior is critical for individual fitness,
and ultimately, species’ survival, and it is often an organisms’ immediate
response to its biotic and abiotic environment. The historical and current
geographic distributions of species are integral to understanding the evolution,
development, function, and mechanisms of behavior, and behavior (dispersal,
interactions within- and across-species, etc.) is in turn critical for
understanding patterns in biogeography. Yet few studies of behavior integrate
the biogeographic context and vice versa, leaving major gaps in our ability to
interpret empirical results and develop novel hypotheses. The Biogeography of
Behavior Institute will bring together scientists from multiple disciplines to
develop a comprehensive foundation for integrating the fields of animal behavior
and biogeography. Through such integration, the Institute will span questions
from cellular to global scales, examining links between genotype and phenotype,
adaptability and resiliency across communities, and developing predictions for
shifts in populations in response to rapid environmental change. The Institute
aims to 1) foster interactions among biologists working in the evolution,
development, function, and mechanisms of animal behavior and biogeography, 2)
design experiments to explore geographical aspects of behavior and vice versa,
and 3) bring together specialists from multiple fields to directly address
questions related to large-scale geographic shifts in species distributions or
behavioral patterns resulting from climate change, urbanization, and habitat
destruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.