* 2021503
* Collaborative Research: EHR-Polar DCL: Polar Space and Place: Using GIS and interactive environments to bring polar science to the classroom
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Twila Moon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 215,497.00

Researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder, the National Snow and Ice
Data Center, the University of Montana Western and Western Washington University
will develop an innovative geoscience curriculum using Interactive Environments
(IE)or Augmented Reality (AR) technology combined with previously developed
curriculum based on Geospatial Information System (GIS) technology. Connecting
polar-focused material with innovative teaching methods presents an opportunity
to advance Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education and
increase polar knowledge. The overarching goal of the "Polar Space and Place"
project is to study the use of innovative and potentially transformative
instructional technology to enhance and enliven STEM undergraduate teaching and
learning. Within this goal, the Polar Space and Place curricular materials and
education research will address three objectives: 1) to advance spatial learning
in the geoscience curriculum, 2) to increase polar knowledge and interest in
undergraduate STEM majors, and 3) to develop and test innovative teaching tools
and methods to increase ‘sense of place’ (a primary place-based education goal)
remotely. The Polar Space and Place project will benefit society by testing,
improving, and sharing tools to enhance STEM education. Furthermore, it will
increase undergraduate spatial thinking skills, as well as students’ knowledge
of and connection to the polar environment. These in turn support gains in
overall Earth science and climate literacy. Through partnerships with the
National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) and the Science Education
Resources Center (SERC), project activities and material will reach a broad
audience. SERC website material is freely available, and curriculum will also be
linked to other popular resources including InTeGrate, GETSI, Teach the Earth,
and Cutting Edge. Many educators will also be exposed to the materials and
research findings via NAGT-sponsored webinars, Earth Educator Rendezvous
activities and small workshop activities at the conferences and meetings
attended by the diverse project team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use
the NSF InTeGrate and GETSI techniques to develop two new instructional modules
to be deployed at a total of four institutions. The two module topics are
Glacial Basin Systems and Ice sheet growth and retreat. Each module will consist
of three parts: primary course material, GIS course material, and IE/AR
material. This project is funded by the Office of Polar Programs and the
Division of Undergraduate Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.