* 2021540
* NRT-QL: Accelerating Quantum-Enabled Technologies
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

NRT: Accelerating Quantum-Enabled Technologies
(AQET)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamentally secure communication, the design and
synthesis of new materials, and sensing with single atoms are all technologies
that will be accelerated with the understanding and control of quantum
mechanical phenomena. In these early days of quantum technology development,
hardware knowledge is essential for software engineers to optimize
architectures, efficiently implement algorithms, and correct errors. The
breakthroughs needed in the materials for scalable quantum devices requires
materials and device scientists and computer architecture engineers to be
trained in quantum information. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship award to the University of Washington (UW) will address these needs
by training master’s and doctoral students in an interdisciplinary program in
quantum information science and technology (QIST). The traineeship anticipates
providing training to one hundred and ninety (190) students including twenty-two
(22) funded trainees, by combining disciplines in quantum information
(chemistry, physics, applied mathematics, materials science &amp; engineering,
electrical and computer engineering, and computer science), interactions with
national laboratories and industry partners, project-based learning on
commercially available cloud quantum computers, and hands-on research in QIST.
There is a growing national need for US quantum scientists to meet the current
workforce demands from US national laboratories and industries (including
startups and established companies). This need will be met by (1) increasing UW
graduate students’ QIST knowledge and skills, (2) increasing the participation
of women in QIST by effectively implementing targeted recruitment and retention
strategies and introduction of QIST concepts into UW’s undergraduate curricula,
and (3) developing publicly available educational materials from our most
innovative courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of the traineeship program
is the “learn, practice, apply” approach with a heavy emphasis on project-based
learning. The 15-month training program begins with one of three domain-specific
courses that provides not only a foundation in QIST concepts but are also co-
designed to provide a common technical vocabulary across disciplines. The
foundational course is followed by an interdisciplinary project-based course
that will utilize classical computer simulations of quantum devices as well as
experiments on real quantum devices, provided by industry partners. These
resources will help teach essential concepts in quantum information
implementations while solidifying student’s theoretical understanding of QIST.
An advanced-topics course and interdisciplinary team capstone project designed
to apply the newly acquired skills to real-world applications complete the
curriculum. The project-based learning curriculum also provides the opportunity
to practice and improve leadership, management, team and communication skills
through the program’s professional development workshops. Successful completion
of the program results in a transcriptable option in QIST for both MS and PhD
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.