* 2021198
* Using Augmented Reality and Integrated Social Learning to Deepen College Students' Understanding of Molecular Processes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Grant Bowman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in excellent undergraduate
education by helping students better understand processes involving biological
molecules. Biology textbooks and teaching materials use two-dimensional static
images to show complex three-dimensional molecules and molecular events that
occur over time. As a result, students often need help to understand these
processes, such as protein folding, protein-protein interactions, and DNA
replication, and RNA transcription. These processes occur on a scale that is
starkly different from everyday human experience, making understanding them even
more challenging. This project intends to use networked augmented reality (AR)
technology to make molecules and their interactions visible to students on a
human scale. AR technology will also allow multiple users to control 3D
representations of molecules, enabing students work together as a group to learn
about molecules and their interactions. The project intends to examine how the
AR experience alters students’ understanding of molecules and processes at the
molecular level, as well as test whether student learning is improved by social
interactions in a networked augmented reality environment. Once the materials
and software developed by the project are ready for classroom use, they will be
made freely available via Creative Commons licensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to advance STEM education by developing intuitive ways
for students to engage with molecular-scale phenomena. To do so, the project
will harness AR as a tool to bring molecular phenomena to life and to present
them in a social context that promotes active engagement and long-term learning.
Networked AR headsets will allow multiple users to view and control a shared 3D
simulation from multiple points of view, and pass-through visualization will
create a safe and naturally socially mediated AR environment. Each student in a
group will have a unique role and individualized access to relevant information,
ensuring a collaborative student-led effort to develop their conceptual and
quantitative understanding of molecular phenomena as they explore a series of
lessons and challenges. The 3D simulations will react in real time to student
control of relevant parameters and will include continuously updating graphs and
other mathematical representations. The research goal of this project is to
investigate best practices for incorporating head-mounted AR technology in STEM
education by testing the effects of two teaching strategies: student engagement
in collaborative social interactions and engagement with 3D instruction
environments. Project success will be measured by quantitative assessment of
four learning outcomes: accuracy of factual understanding; use of expert
language; fluency of quantitative reasoning; and tendency to communicate complex
spatial relationships using 3D examples or analogies. The long-term goal of the
research is to create freely available socially mediated AR instructional
resources that deepen students’ understanding of molecular-scale phenomena and
quantitative relationships that are integral to STEM courses across all grade
levels. Through networked interactions within these interactive environments,
socially mediated AR has the potential to increase equitable access to STEM
learning, by providing educational opportunities for students across rural
regions and in other situations that creaet accessibility challenges. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.