* 2021468
* A Multi-phase development of the Electric Circuit Concepts Diagnostic tool: Phase I
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kun Yao, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,951.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating a novel web-based
diagnostic feedback tool to enhance teaching and learning about electrical
engineering circuits. All engineering students nationwide, regardless of their
intended engineering specialization, are required to enroll in a course on
electrical circuits. Many students enter engineering classrooms with
misconceptions about engineering concepts. These misconceptions must be overcome
since the ability to learn requires the student to build upon accurate prior
knowledge. Some instructors rely on multiple choice tests called concept
inventories to identify students’ misconceptions. They hope to glean information
from students’ concept inventory scores and adjust their teaching approaches to
better meet the learning needs for that specific student cohort. However,
instructors who require students to complete concept inventories may not benefit
fully from using them. For example, instructors may lack skills to interpret
concept inventory results or may not have time to adjust their teaching to
reflect the students' learning needs. Furthermore, it can be difficult to
determine whether results from concept inventories indicate that a student does
not yet know the concept or has misconceptions about it. Such differentiation is
important because gaining new knowledge and correcting misconceptions require
different teaching and learning approaches. The goal of this project is to
overcome some concept inventory limitations by developing an augmented concept
inventory tool called the Electric Circuit Concepts Diagnostic (ECCD). The ECCD
will be a novel web-based diagnostic feedback tool that uses computer-based
testing and automated assessment to measure prior knowledge across broader
content areas. As a result, the ECCD has the potential to deliver knowledge
diagnostic capabilities beyond those of existing electric circuit concept
inventories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives include: (i) provision of
an immediate and multi-purpose feedback system for reporting about students’
prior knowledge regarding circuits and electricity; (ii) differentiation, with a
high probability of accuracy, between a lack of prior knowledge and
misconceptions; and (iii) use of a scheme of multidimensional knowledge profiles
to report on students’ prior knowledge and misconceptions. To achieve these
objectives, the project team will integrate the affordances of cognitive
diagnostic modeling, multi-tier testing frameworks, and computer-assisted
testing to realize project objectives. The inclusion of metacognition in the
proposed work is novel and could contribute to the growing literature on use of
metacognition in engineering education as well as the promotion of skills for
lifelong learning. The work may also serve as a framework for developing value-
added concept inventories in other engineering fields and STEM domains beyond
engineering. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.