* 2021332
* A Longitudinal Study of the Role of Qualitative Evidence in Creating and Sustaining Student-centered Teaching Cultures
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* AJ Richards, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,510.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in excellent undergraduate STEM
education. To this end, it intends to help higher education become more
inclusive by improving the decisions that science faculty make about their
teaching methods. Initiatives aimed at changing how science faculty teach often
rely on numerical data. However, qualitative data such as personal stories and
examples can help to sustain change. This project aims to encourage faculty to
use qualitative data through two new faculty development efforts: 1) a peer
coaching program for faculty teaching in a summer bridge program for incoming
science majors from underrepresented groups; and 2) a faculty learning community
where faculty will learn to conduct their own qualitative research projects.
After developing and implementing the faculty professional development, the
project will then study how faculty share and use the resulting qualitative data
to guide teaching decisions going forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
longitudinal research project builds on a data-in-practice framework to examine
how experience and qualitative data can be developed, shared, and integrated
into a local teaching culture to encourage inclusive, student-centered teaching
practices. The project will examine change among individual faculty through
interviews, classroom observations, and syllabus review before and after
participation. To see organization-level change, the researchers will observe
course design teams and public discussions of pedagogy to see how faculty use
the different types of data generated within the faculty development activities.
The project will produce two replicable faculty development models that can be
shared via webinars. Results of this research into the role of qualitative data
in pedagogical decision making may offer the STEM education community a new
mechanism to foster cultural change. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.