* 2021810
* Stress Neurobiology Workshop, Columbia, SC, May 12-15, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Claudia Grillo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 10/31/2022
* USD 14,400.00

The main goal of the Stress Neurobiology Workshop is to bring together
researchers from all professional levels (undergraduate student to full
professor) and from diverse disciplines to share and discuss recent findings
toward understand the physiology associated with stress responses. Based on
prior meetings, the Workshop will have a significantly broad attendance profile,
attracting members from many fields and thereby facilitating multidisciplinary
discussions related to stress research. The Workshop focuses on stress-related
effects that integrate multiple systems, including physiology, immune,
endocrine, and autonomic responses, as well as behavioral outcomes and
resilience to stress-related disorders from a preclinical perspective. The
meeting is focused on fundamental mechanisms through which organisms respond to
stress in multiple species across the lifespan. This workshop, which takes place
at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, SC, is the 6th of a biannual
workshop series that offers the only small meeting focused on the neurobiology
of stress that is open to students and PIs alike. This Workshop provides an
opportunity for extensive face-to-face interactions among researchers and
trainees with overlapping interests. The meeting also provides some historical
perspective, introducing young investigators to the iconic researchers in stress
neurobiology and their seminal work. More than half of the speakers are women at
different career stages, from diverse cultural or ethnic backgrounds, and with
different academic credentials. The research presented at this meeting will
ultimately advance the understating of how stress affects brain and behavior and
will also help train the next generation of scientists in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there have been
significant advances in understanding the neurobiology of stress, including the
neuronal circuits, neurochemistry, and genetics that mediate stress responses
and stress adaptation that will be the focus of our meeting. Many of these
advances are supported by exciting new approaches to studying the brain and
brain-body interactions such as optogenetics or chemogenetics, emerging
conceptual understanding of brain-body communication via exosomes and the
microbiome, as well as improvements in the analysis of large data sets, imaging
and bioinformatics. This workshop focuses on stress susceptibility across the
lifespan, highlighting different mechanisms contributing to resilience in stress
responses from adolescence to senescence using different stress models and
animal species. Additional sessions emphasize the range of structural,
behavioral, genomic, and physiological processes associated with stress with
sessions on the HPA axis, autonomic function, and synaptic plasticity. The
scientific program includes two keynote lectures, five plenary sessions with
five speakers each; two roundtable sessions, one of which is dedicated to
harassment/discrimination-free scientific environment; two poster sessions
(trainee presenters only); and a data blitz presentation for the travel award
recipients (Graduate student and Postdoctoral fellows). A major goal of this
this four-day workshop is to promote the professional development of trainees of
all stages, new investigators, under-represented groups, and women. The
requested funds will be used to support travel awards for trainees to attend the
meeting. The vigorous scientific exchange at these meetings also generates new
ideas and forges novel collaborations that support future
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.