* 2021595
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Sterilization-based Reusable Catheterization System
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Souvik Paul, CATHBUDDY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2021
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve the process of intermittent
urinary catheterization while decreasing the risk of associated infection For
individuals who cannot empty their bladder due to anatomic or physiologic
causes, single-use intermittent catheterization is the safest method for bladder
emptying. Despite this, typical catheterization methods produce an annual 40-60%
risk of complicated urinary tract infection, leading to over $4 billion of
avoidable healthcare costs and patient morbidity. Some catheterization tools are
safer than standard disposable catheters (e.g. no-touch catheters), but these
are more costly and rarely used. To address this cost, some individuals attempt
to sterilize their single-use catheters and reuse them in an off-label manner,
increasing the risk of urinary tract infection to 70-80% per year. This project
aims to develop a safe reusable catheter with the benefits of a no-touch
catheter, allowing for an at-home sterilization device; this innovation will
allow for a decrease in urinary tract infection risk, improvement in catheter
usability, decreased catheter spending, and a 99% reduction of catheter-
associated waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the technical sterilization abilities of
this novel purpose-built catheter sterilization device, especially when dealing
with anticipated formation of bacterial biofilms. This research will involve
exposing catheter samples to pathogen-inoculated urine, performing the
anticipated cleaning and sterilization methodologies, and utilizing previously-
validated fluorescence imaging techniques to document the presence and location
of surviving bacteria and biofilm formation. It is expected that the intended
sterilization techniques inherent in this novel device will provide adequate
sterilization assurance for safe catheter reuse. This project will also focus on
the feasibility of the laboratory-validated cleaning and sterilization protocol
for anticipated users to perform without medical supervision. This research will
examine cleaning and sterilization protocols by individual catheter users to
determine points of potential risk to inform design of the device and the
protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.