* 2021460
* Increasing Accessibility to Field-based Sciences for College Students Using Wheelchairs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Wen-Hao Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 296,426.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using virtual reality to
increase accessibility of wheelchair users to archaeology and other field
sciences. Archaeology requires first-hand field experience. However,
inaccessibility of excavation sites may make these experiences impossible for
students who use wheelchairs. The lack of access to field sites can impede
studentsâ€™ access to comprehensive training in archaeology and in other field-
based sciences such as geosciences. This project will adapt currently available
virtual reality hardware to accommodate the needs of wheelchair users,
maximizing usability and comfort. Subsequently, the project will create an
immersive, interactive archaeology class to accommodate the needs of wheelchair-
using college students. In this class, students will learn the physical methods
of archaeological excavation in virtual reality, thus gaining field work
experiences. The class will also help students learn to use a scientific
approach to problem solving by couching activities within a professional
archaeology scenario. At the same time, the project will evaluate the
effectiveness of the scenario-based learning on student motivation and
engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will adopt the goals of universal
learning to proactively create learning environments that address wheelchair-
using college students' contextual needs (i.e., movement and logistics of
classrooms and excavation sites) and functional needs (i.e., develop excavation
skills through systematic learning processes) for teaching field-based sciences.
The project will adopt iterative procedures of design-based research to
incorporate and evaluate scenario-based learning. Testing and assessment of the
virtual reality system will be guided by four development questions: 1) To what
extent are the scenario features within the virtual reality activities clearly
presented and how conducive are they to wheelchair users' interactivity with the
system? 2) How do virtual reality activities increase wheelchair users'
cognitive engagement with the designed activities? 3) To what extent do
wheelchair users receive adequate system feedback within the virtual world to
complete the assigned tasks? and 4) In what areas and to what extent do virtual
reality activities need to be modified for students who are using wheelchairs?
This project will further investigate the potential of scenario-based learning
in engaging wheelchair users in colleges with an array of field and laboratory-
based tasks guided by the following research questions: 1) What are the
relationships between scenario features, their motivational support, and
learners' engagement with the virtual reality activities? and 2) How does the
adopted design framework align the virtual reality module's features with their
motivational and cognitive support in learning archaeology? The proposed study
will advance theoretical and empirical design theories when developing virtual
learning environments for college students who are using wheelchairs and will
generate an improved way to present educational material that is geared towards
the current, digitally empowered generation that is diverse in cognitive and
physical capabilities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.