* 2021315
* Prevalence of and Barriers to the Adoption of High-Impact Teaching Practices in General Education Science, Mathematics, and Social-Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James Moore, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,276.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM education.
To do so, it will study the prevalence and barriers to using highly effective
teaching and learning practices in general education STEM courses. The proposed
analysis is designed to measure the teaching practices and attitudes of college
faculty members and high school teachers who teach courses through which
students earn college credits. The data obtained in this study is intended to
drive future action to improve recruitment and retention in the STEM talent
pipeline. Implementation of research-verified teaching practices has been shown
to improve learning outcomes, including student retention. However, higher
education leaders can have limited information about the actual teaching
practices on their campus. As a result, it can be difficult to provide support,
resources, and interventions that align with practice. This project aims to
identify how and where research-verified practices are being used in general
education courses, as well as faculty views about these practices. This analysis
has the potential to support evidence-based allocation of resources with
significant faculty input and buy in, resulting in an assessment model that can
help address local STEM learning challenges and increase outcomes. The courses
under direct study will enroll over 27,000 undergraduate students and 4,500 pre-
college students over the three-year project timeline. The methods and
instruments developed are intended to be exportable to similar institutions,
significantly increasing the projectâ€™s potential
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a Concerns-Based Adoption
Model to gather data about the use of high-impact teaching practices in general
education science, mathematics, and social science courses at the University of
Nebraska Omaha. There are three diagnostic dimensions: (1) the Model of Success,
(2) Measures of Behaviors, and (3) Measures of Attitudes. The Model of Success
is represented by the eight categories defined by the Teaching Practices
Inventory, designed to examine the use of research-based teaching practices. The
Measures of Behaviors includes faculty self-reported data, analysis of
collaboration and sharing via social networking analysis, and validation of
self-reports using the Classroom Observation Protocol for Undergraduate STEM.
The Measures of Attitudes includes the development and deployment of an
attitudinal survey based on the Stages of Concern Questionnaire. The resulting
data will be analyzed in combination with qualitative data from faculty focus
groups and interviews addressing structural barriers. The central research
questions for this project are: (1) What high-impact practices are faculty using
in their general education science, math, and social science courses, and what
is their prevalence? (2) What faculty-perceived barriers/concerns exist with
respect to adoption of high-impact practices? (3) What is the weighted effect
that the extent of high-impact practice use, density of the faculty network, and
self-identified stages of concern have on institutional effectiveness metrics
and department-reported assessments of student learning? The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.