* 2021693
* Enhancing Resiliency and Increasing Equity in the Transition to a Sustainable Energy Future
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Robert DeConto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,053,941.00

NRT: Enhancing Resiliency and Increasing Equity in the Transition to a
Sustainable Energy Future&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental transformation of our energy
system from dependence on fossil fuels to a sustainable and resilient system
supplied by renewable sources such as wind and solar is necessary if we are to
avoid harmful climate change impacts. To successfully achieve this transition
requires innovative technology and policy solutions in the electricity sector.
These solutions must reimagine the electricity sector in a way that is
simultaneously equitable in the benefits and impacts to society as well as
resilient to uncertainty in future climate trends and energy demands. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University
of Massachusetts Amherst will train graduate masterâ€™s and doctoral students to
solve the integrated technological, economic, and societal challenges in the
transition to a low carbon future. The project anticipates training 125 MS and
PhD students, including 29 funded trainees, from Civil, Industrial, Electrical
&amp; Mechanical Engineering, Computer Science, Economics, Environmental
Conservation, Geosciences, and Political Science. The students will conduct
research at the intersection of electricity technology, energy economics and
policy, climate science, and social equity. They will produce resilient and
equity-driven innovations, while developing effective leadership and
communication skills ideally suited to engaging stakeholders. Through strategic
partnerships with stakeholders at the front lines of the energy transition, the
program will develop a collaborative community, working together to find optimal
energy solutions with local to global-scale benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
key goal of the program is to integrate concepts of equity and resiliency into
research and training on the energy transition. The program will foster an
integrated understanding of how technology and policies impact communities and
how climate uncertainty necessitates resilient energy system solutions. This in
turn will impact research goals. We will use an electricity market simulator to
bring students from diverse educational and socio-economic backgrounds together.
Trainees will identify how technology and policy combine to impact equity; and
through role-play they will develop understanding and empathy for a wide range
of perspectives. The students will receive training on public engagement and
will produce events and communication platforms that will enhance communication
between researchers, policymakers, practitioners, and community leaders.
Research will focus on robust solutions to balancing the supply and demand of
electricity in a way that is equitable and resilient to climate change. The
project will develop ensembles of probabilistic estimates of energy demand and
supply across multiple time scales, develop metrics to evaluate equity impacts,
and use climate and power flow models to inform robust decision-making. The
project will produce impactful energy research outcomes where adequate knowledge
is currently lacking, while providing the trainees with an expanded
interdisciplinary tool kit applicable to regions across the US and beyond, and a
long- term competitive advantage to effect
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.