* 2021628
* NRT-FW-HTF: Socially Cognizant Robotics for a Technology Enhanced Society (SOCRATES)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Clinton Andrews, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

The popular vision of ubiquitous robot assistants that improve the quality of
life remains mostly a vision. A key challenge of the program is Robotics for
Everyday Augmented Living (REAL), semi-automated systems that focus on tasks and
work within daily life. To make this vision a reality, important considerations
include safety, adaptability to human desires, and nuanced societal impacts,
such as dignity, consent, privacy, and fairness. Traditional social sciences
often study the effects of technology on individuals and society only after it
is deployed. Given the potential impact of robotics as well as the potential for
unintended negative social consequences, technology should adapt to humans
rather than the other way around. Current robotics training does not equip
researchers with the interdisciplinary tools necessary to address this
challenge. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
Rutgers University will train a new type of professional, the socially cognizant
roboticist, with the skills—in technology, social science, and public
policy—needed to bridge this gap. This training program aims to instill an
awareness of human involvement into every phase of the design of new technology,
so that these technologies can provide positive human value wherever they are
introduced. The training program anticipates training over 35 graduate students
(MS and PhD), including 17 NRT-funded trainees, by integrating technology
domains (robotics, machine learning and computer vision) with social and
behavioral sciences (psychology, cognitive science, and urban policy
planning).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will integrate the training of
technologists, who are able to develop robots that can coordinate with people,
and social scientists, who can translate studies regarding the social effects of
robotics into actionable lessons. Robotics is defined broadly here to include
intelligent systems encompassing smart buildings and embedded infrastructure.
Program participants will be trained in 1) technology: building and controlling
robots, collecting, and learning from large datasets; 2) cognitive science:
designing socially cognizant systems; 3) policy: assessing unintended
consequences and planning for positive societal impact. The program lays the
groundwork for this training via a new curriculum for a robotics specialization
that combines existing technology and social science courses, as well as new
interdisciplinary courses. The program will emphasize experiential learning,
through the Rutgers Robotics Live Lab and interdisciplinary research projects
from the partnering graduate programs, as well as internship opportunities
through an Industry Consortium. Trainees will engage in fundamental research to
understand and model the social dimensions of robot deployments and advance the
long-term goal of dignified living and working in a technologically enhanced
society. An important program objective is the recruitment and retention of
diverse trainees through a multi-faceted strategy, including a student-led
robotics club that focuses on a novice-to-expert strategy, an annual robotics
workshop, and a Faculty Talk-it-up Robotics Series for underrepresented
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.