* 2021175
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Organic Chemistry Instruction through Faculty Workshops and a Community of Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Justin Houseknecht, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 10/31/2023
* USD 43,051.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
chemistry education. To do so, it will support a growing community of practice
that aims to improve student learning in organic chemistry. The project team’s
overall goal is to make organic chemistry more accessible to students and
transform how it is taught. It intends to achieve this goal by hosting a series
of faculty workshops and providing online access to exemplar learning materials.
The workshops are intended to increase the implementation of evidence-based
instructional practices among organic chemistry instructors. Workshop
participants will learn and practice teaching techniques that involve students
actively in constructing knowledge as opposed to traditional “sit and get”
lectures. Additional activities include efforts to sustain the effects of the
workshop, disseminate results, and broaden the faculty community of practice.
Specific activities include online faculty learning communities, mini-workshops,
symposia at national meetings, newsletters, and publishing a book with detailed
reports of classroom implementations of novel pedagogies. In addition to
improving undergraduate organic chemistry education, this project has the
potential to enhance understanding about the role of communities of practice in
promoting instructional improvements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this project is to improve student learning and outcomes in organic
chemistry. This proposal plans to achieve this goal by increasing faculty
awareness of evidence-based instructional practices through Active Learning in
Organic Chemistry workshops, assisting faculty with implementation, expanding
the community of practice, fostering the development of educational resources,
coordinating ongoing faculty learning communities, examining the effectiveness
of workshops, and revising the workshops to increase their effectiveness. The
project team and workshop participants will generate active learning materials
and post them on the Organic Education Resources website
(https://www.organicers.org/) so they can be used by anyone, including organic
chemistry instructors. The project will apply and study two theories of change:
Roger's Diffusion of Innovation Theory and the Theory of Planned Behavior. The
project’s education research component will examine (1) the process of change in
teaching practices among workshop participants, (2) how a community of practice
for organic chemistry instructors evolves, (3) factors that facilitate or impede
transformation in teaching practices, and (4) best practices for sustaining a
community of practice. Formative assessment of the workshops will be used for
continuous improvement of the workshops throughout the course of the award. This
project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources, which supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools to
understand how institutions change to better support student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.