* 2021590
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moral foundation frame effectiveness in sustainable policy introductions
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Martha Monroe, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 30,500.00

Across much of the United States, the public does not consider water policy a
divisive topic; however as the limits of regional water resources are approached
and water demands must be prioritized, there is high potential for water policy
to become politically charged with liberals and conservatives maintaining
divergent positions. The ability of water policy communicators to minimize
polarization will affect the degree to which stakeholders are willing to work
together toward water solutions. Research indicates that communicators can
reduce polarization by purposefully framing natural resources challenges with
moral positions, such as fairness, loyalty, and harm, that vary in resonance
across the political spectrum. However, such studies focus primarily on issues
such as climate change, where partisan opinions have already taken hold, not
studies in which the objective is to prevent partisanship from forming. Further,
few studies sufficiently model the competitive environment of policy
introductions, with public officials and outside interests vying to define
issues for the public, and with social cues, such as the political affiliations
of spokespeople, indicating the positions that fellow partisans are expected to
take. This project addresses these gaps, with an experimental assessment of the
use of moral frames to prevent partisanship in competitive water policy
introductions.

The study will be conducted in two parts. First, Rasch modelling will be used to
develop a water knowledge assessment. The assessment will be combined with a
survey of water beliefs and administered to a sample of potential voters. The
results will provide a detailed assessment of the public's comprehension of
basic water science and regional water issues, indicate water subtopics from
which polarization could develop, and identify the sources voters trust for
water information. Based on these findings, the second part of the study will
use an experimental design to simulate a competitive policy introduction. Two
aspects of policy frames that convey value priorities will be assessed: moral
foundations expressed through language and communicator identities that function
as partisan decision heuristics. Additionally, characteristics of message
recipients that moderate framing effects will be assessed including political
self-identity and participant water knowledge as measured using the assessment
developed in part one. From this research, a model will be created that
describes how the influence of frame stimuli and the moderating characteristics
of message recipients affect citizen-level sustainable policy decisions under
competitive conditions. The research will clarify the conditions under which
moral foundation frames restrain division on potentially divisive policy and
provide more complete understanding of the degree to which non-competitive moral
foundation framing studies set realistic expectations for frame effectiveness in
applied policy scenarios. Findings of the research will be used to frame a
series of publications about regional water challenges that increase water
science literacy and promote informed citizen-level decision making. Research
findings will also be published in a water communicator guide and shared with
regional decision makers through Water Schools to help government officials and
other community leaders guide productive water policy discourse.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.