* 2021040
* Collaborative Research: TransANdean Great Orogeny (TANGO)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2024
* USD 391,287.00

Mountain belts form Earth’s highest topography, thus affecting global
atmospheric and oceanic circulation, ocean chemistry, biological evolution and
ecology. Nevertheless, one of the outstanding scientific question remains: how
does plate tectonics produce mountains? One of the largest mountain belts on
Earth are the Andes of South America. The Andes are especially important because
they span ~70° of latitude across several global climate zones and exert first-
order controls on ocean circulation and climate. The Andes also contain some of
the highest elevations and thickest crust (upper layer of rock that we live on)
on Earth. Yet, there is not a comprehensive framework for understanding how the
Andes are formed and how they relate to the subduction zone where the oceanic
Nazca plate is descending beneath the western edge of the South America Plate.
This project will build a framework incorporating new geologic, geochemical and
seismic data to understand the present day structure of the Andes incorporating
high resolution seismic images and to evaluate through geologic studies how the
Andean Mountains formed and the conditions necessary to build large mountain
belts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce an integrated diverse
Earth subsystem (mantle-lithosphere-surface) 3D model based on the Andes and
advance our understanding of the dynamics of cordilleran-type orogenic systems
and the relative roles of the lithosphere, asthenosphere and lower mantle. The
new geologic and geophysical data collected will test existing mantle- and
lithosphere-scale models of cordillera mountain building. This research will
integrate geophysics, geodynamic modeling, structural geology, basin analysis,
petrology and geochemistry to investigate the effects of slab geometry, slab
penetration (into the lower mantle), forearc underplating, and the presence or
absence of a craton on crustal thickening and surface evolution (subsidence and
uplift). This project will evaluate different controls on mountain building,
surface uplift and paleo-environments with implications for biodiversity, ocean
circulation, climate, and geohazards. Results from this study will aid in a
deeper understanding of the interactions between deep Earth and the crustal
structure of the Central Andes and the location and behavior of active faults in
one of the most seismically active regions of South America, thereby
contributing to better seismic hazard assessment. Results from this research
will be used to build on an ongoing effort to apply artificial intelligence (AI)
to Geosciences. A new student exchange program between the UA and Argentina will
enhance international collaborations and provide a unique opportunity for
students to learn the geology of the North and South American
Cordilleras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.