* 2021822
* Sustainable bioproduction using phototrophic extracellular electron uptake
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Arpita Bose, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,029,281.00

Some bacteria are capable of using electricity and energy from light to fix
carbon dioxide and ultimately for renewable, carbon-neutral to carbon-
sequestering production of certain high value compounds. The overall goal of
this project is to better understand this bioproduction process and to engineer
bacteria to use this process for bioplastic and biofuel production. This project
will create immersive research opportunities for students at the high school,
undergraduate and graduate school levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial
reduction-oxidation reactions drive matter and energy flow in the biosphere.
Most microbes use soluble electron donors and acceptors, but some use solid-
phase conductive substances. The underlying microbial process is called
extracellular electron transfer (EET). The directionality of electron flow
during EET can be either outbound, where solid-phase conductive substances are
microbially reduced via reductive-EET; or inbound, where solid-phase conductive
substances are oxidized via extracellular electron uptake (EEU). While
reductive-EET is long studied, EEU has come to fore recently, and represents a
paradigm shift in microbial biogeochemistry. This is because EEU-capable
microbes can oxidize abundant solid-phase conductive substances such as minerals
for microbial growth. A number of microbes can perform EEU, but only a subset of
these organisms can perform phototrophic-EEU. This specialized metabolism
harnesses the energy of light and electrons from solid-conductive minerals or
their proxies (poised electrodes) to fix carbon dioxide. Accordingly,
phototrophic-EEU represents a new metabolism to engineer for sustainable,
carbon-neutral to carbon-sequestering bioproduction. To understand the
environmental prevalence of phototrophic-EEU, and realize its full
bioengineering potential, several fundamental knowledge gaps must be addressed.
These include in-depth characterization of the electron input modules and their
regulation; and the electron transfer pathways and the cellular electron sinks.
Using multi-omic and transdisciplinary approaches, this project aims to fill
these knowledge gaps to gain a systems-level understanding of phototrophic-EEU
in the freshwater microbe, Rhodopseudomonas palustris and the marine microbe
Rhodovulum sulfidophilum. The project will use synthetic biology, metabolic
engineering, and material science to improve sustainable production of
bioplastics and biofuels using phototrophic-EEU. Together, this project will
expand our understanding of phototrophic-EEU, and explore the production of
sustainable bioproducts using the phototrophic-EEU capable microbe,
Rhodopseudomonas palustris. This project will also engage students from various
educational levels in sustainability research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.