* 2021258
* Assessing Attentiveness to Student Ideas in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Leslie Atkins, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,075.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving physics education.
It will do so by developing an assessment to evaluate physics teacher
preparation programs. This assessment will measure a teacher’s ability to
accurately interpret and productively respond to students’ ideas in physics. The
proposed assessment tool is intended to address a critical need for common
measures of physics educator preparation programs. Such an assessment tool could
guide the improvement of individual physics teacher education programs. It would
also enable reliable comparisons across programs, pointing the field towards the
most promising approaches. In addition, the research required to develop the
assessment tool is expected to further refine the construct of teacher
attentiveness in physics, exploring the development and interaction of core
content knowledge and core pedagogical content knowledge among preservice
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has both a focus at the physics
teacher preparation program level, and an end-goal of preparing teachers who can
effectively analyze and respond to student thinking in practice. Therefore, the
project intends to develop a selected-response assessment, with a focus on
authenticity in the operationalization of attentiveness. Attentiveness, also
referred to as responsiveness, is a complex process characterized by the ability
of the teacher to identify the substance of students’ ideas, to recognize the
disciplinary connections in students’ ideas, and to take up and pursue the
substance of student thinking in light of disciplinary goals. The project’s
multi-phased development of assessment items for attentiveness in physics is
modeled after the Mathematical Attentiveness in Pedagogical Practice item-
development process, which gathers authentic responses from both students and
educators in the development of a selected-response assessment. The distinct
phases of item development will engage physics educators in the cognitive
processes needed for attentiveness. The three dimensions of this model include
the following: (1) Identifying the pedagogical intent and key disciplinary
concept(s) of a specific student task. (2) making evidence-based inferences
about a student’s understanding of the disciplinary concept being targeted; and
(3) deciding on an appropriate pedagogical response that builds both on an
individual student’s thinking and toward the disciplinary intent of the task.
The project intends to develop at least three tasks (3 items) for each physics
topic (motion, forces, energy, and waves) for students. There will be at least
two tasks (4-5 selected-response items for each task) for each topic for
teachers. The authentic student and educator responses used during this
development process could assist physics education programs to efficiently
measure physics teachers’ attentiveness. This work could support the
identification of successful physics educator preparation programs. It is
expected to allow for better understanding of key elements of physics teacher
preparation, as well as allow for continued theoretical work on the construct of
attentiveness in physics education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.