* 2021132
* GCR:  Laying the Scientific and Engineering Foundation for Sustainable Cultivated Meat Production
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Pablo Ross, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,169,998.00

This proposal is focused on convergent research that encompasses the science,
engineering, economics, sustainability, and consumer acceptance of cultivated
meat production. Cultivated meat production is the process of growing animal
muscle, fat, and connective tissue cells, such as beef, chicken, pork, turkey or
fish, in large-scale fermentors to produce a protein-rich meat product. It
addresses the compelling and immediate societal problem of finding new potential
routes toward feeding a rapidly growing global population with a nutritious and
satisfying diet, while protecting our environment and limited resources. It
requires the deep integration of disciplines including stem cell engineering,
tissue culture, animal and meat science, experimental process optimization and
artificial intelligence, biochemical engineering, industrial fermentation and
manufacturing, food science and engineering, materials science and biomaterials,
sensory science, techno-economic modeling, life cycle analysis, and consumer
science. The project goal is to establish the scientific and engineering
foundation for the nascent cultivated meat industry, address critical scientific
and engineering bottlenecks and knowledge gaps that inhibit commercialization,
and train the scientists and engineers that will build the industry. Doing so
will develop knowledge necessary for the creation of new sustainable protein
sources and has the potential to support the growth of a new
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to establish this scientific and
engineering foundation, the proposed convergent research will focus on four
specific aims: 1) develop an efficient strategy for stem cell amplification and
differentiation to muscle and fat that maintains cell line stability and
supports scalability, 2) establish a process for growing and differentiating
cell lines in inexpensive, plant-based, serum-free medium up to pilot scale, 3)
create biomaterials and processes that allow the creation of three-dimensional
tissue structure, and 4) complete a techno-economic analysis (TEA) and life
cycle analysis (LCA) for cultivated meat production. These advances will not
only impact the cultivated meat industry, but will also contribute more broadly
to stem cell engineering for regenerative medicine, biomaterials and tissue
engineering for organ replacement, large-scale mammalian cell culture for
biotherapeutics production, plant cell culture processes for food and
biopharmaceutical production, and techno-economic and life cycle analyses of
fermentation-based bioprocesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.