* 2021094
* Estimating the Long-term Effects of Active Learning on Undergraduate Student Learning Outcomes in Microeconomics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Douglas McKee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,324.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
STEM education. Specifically, it intends to generate new knowledge about the
impact of active learning on long term retention of knowledge. It also will
examine the impacts of active learning on student learning in economics. Two
educational conditions motivate this project. First, the field of economics lags
behind other STEM disciplines in the implementation of active learning
pedagogies in undergraduate courses and is in need of evidence about the impacts
of active learning in undergraduate economics courses. Secondly, there is
limited research on the impact of active learning on the retention of knowledge
over the long term. Building on work supported by an active learning initiative
at Cornell University, the project team will examine whether active learning
pedagogies improve the learning and long-term retention of core concepts in
economics. The investigation is designed to compare the retention of knowledge
about key economics concepts under two conditions: a lecture only format and an
active learning format. The quantitative study will examine how teaching methods
(lecture only, active learning), student characteristics, and intervening course
and work choices interact to affect post-course student learning outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, both introductory and intermediate
microeconomics courses at Cornell University will be analyzed with regard to
active learning implementation and outcomes. Four research questions guide the
study: (1) How much do students retain in the years after course completion? (2)
What role does active learning pedagogy play in students’ retention of learning?
(3) What role do demographic characteristics, student work, and educational
choice play in the retention of learning? And (4) How do active learning methods
affect outcomes (e.g., attitudes, performance in subsequent courses, career
choices) that are not directly related to the course in which the methods are
used? To assess classroom activity, faculty and student activity in classrooms
will be assessed using the Classroom Observation Protocol for Undergraduate STEM
courses instrument. Students’ knowledge will be assessed after course completion
and again one or two years later using the Principles of Economics Skills
Assessment for Microeconomics and the Intermediate Economics Skills Assessment
for Microeconomics. In addition, surveys will measure student attitudes towards
economics and career plans. Using a pre-post longitudinal design that includes
three repeated measures and regression analyses (one cohort is subject to
lecture only and subsequent cohorts to active learning), the study will test the
efficacy of active learning to improve the retention of core economic concepts
when compared to learning outcomes from a lecture only condition. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.