* 2021274
* The Evaluation of Ocean Reanalyses in Their Determining Trends in Global Ocean Heat Content with a Novel Method
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Xinfeng Liang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 168,494.00

Detecting and understanding oceanic change and variability has become
increasingly important, given the fact that they serve as major evidence for
climate change as well as the need to interpret climate variability patterns
such as the much-debated recent global surface warming slowdown. Central to this
issue is the ability to reliably represent the ocean state globally and over its
full depth. Many researchers have turned to describe and understand oceanic
change and variability from ocean reanalyses (ORA), which are the combination of
ocean models, atmospheric forcings, and ocean observations through various data
assimilation methods and potentially provide more accurate information than
observation-only or model-only based ocean estimations. Also, ORAs provide more
variables and quantities to interpret and understand the oceanic change and
variability. At present, estimates from ORAs, especially their temporal
evolutions, are still sensitive to the change of the observing system, the
errors of the dynamical model, atmospheric forcing, and the data assimilation
methods. Many of the uncertainties are often flow dependent and are hard to
identify and estimate. This research proposes a novel, yet simple way to
discover the possible systematic errors and biases in the temperature estimates
from ORAs and then utilizes the most physically consistent ORAs to perform
analysis on the changes in global and regional OHC. The proposed study can
potentially provide a unified view for the recently much-debated global surface
warming hiatus, and will advance understanding of the decadal variability of
ocean heat uptake as well as provide useful implications about the imbalance of
radiation at the top of the atmosphere. The project will support an early career
scientist and a graduate student contributing to building the next generation of
scientists. In addition, it will contribute to the development of k-12
educational material explaining the role of the oceans in regulating climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a simple but rarely used method
will be used to evaluate a large set of the existing ORA products and determine
if they are suitable for examining climatic-scale changes in global and regional
ocean heat content (OHC). This evaluation is based on examining the changes of
the thermal-steric and halo-steric contributions to the global steric height
over time. To first order, the size of the global halo-steric component should
be very small, as it is controlled by changes in freshwater input into the
global ocean. After evaluating existing ORAs, the ones selected as having the
smallest potential errors in long-term OHC will be analyzed with a goal to
better understand the processes that determine the observed OHC change and
variability. The team will assess whether the decadal-scale slight reduction in
surface temperature was real and whether it reflected transport of extra heat to
deeper layers of the ocean. Researchers will also carry out the analyses with a
focus to separate the contributions of isopycnal movement (heave) and change in
water mass properties along isopycnals (spiciness). If available in the selected
ORAs, the vertical heat flux and the associated dynamical variables will also be
examined.