* 2021532
* Capacity-Building for Transforming STEM Education Through Faculty Engagement in Data Analysis and Learning Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shelly Blunt, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 149,952.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
STEM education by expanding the number of STEM faculty members who are both
motivated and prepared to improve student success in STEM. To this end, it seeks
to strengthen academic data infrastructure and cultivate faculty engagement in
STEM education transformation. The project team recognizes that just giving
faculty access to data will not inspire them to improve their teaching
strategies. Therefore, the project intends to motivate faculty to use evidence-
based teaching strategies by including them as co-designers of data analytics
tools, narratives about the data, and community building. The project team
brings expertise and experience across STEM, STEM education, and social sciences
and includes faculty members and university leaders. The expected long-term
outcome is increased retention and graduation rates of STEM students, including
first-generation, low-income, women, and other underserved student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to: 1)
expand academic data analytics tools that are relevant and actionable for
faculty; 2) engage 24 STEM faculty members in learning communities that connect
academic data with individual perspectives to motivate interest in STEM
education improvements; 3) build community across STEM educators; and 4) refine
theories of change and the framework for a future project to implement
institutional STEM education transformation. Creating data analytical tools is
an emerging approach to prompting STEM faculty motivation to implement evidence-
based teaching practices. These tools, together with narratives about how data
can be used to motivate change, will be disseminated broadly through conferences
and publications focused on STEM education and faculty development. Through the
results of formative and summative project evaluation, this project will provide
insights about effective strategies to engage STEM faculty in scientific inquiry
into how to support student success at a public, regional, primarily
undergraduate institution. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities, including
capacity-building projects such as this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.