* 2021002
* Collaborative proposal: GCR: In Search for the Interactions that Create Consciousness
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2025
* USD 775,537.00

This project focuses on the physical footprints of consciousness. A convergent
team of engineers, neurosurgeons and neuroscientists will focus on the
fundamental problem of understanding what causes the emergence of consciousness.
Using techniques from systems neuroscience, neurosurgery, signal processing and
machine learning, and data collected with humans and non-human primates, the
research aims to develop models of the brain circuit interactions supporting
consciousness. Improved understanding of the mechanism of consciousness will
facilitate the advancement of new therapeutic approaches for disorders of
consciousness and cognitive problems (among other broader impacts). The project
includes interdisciplinary research training, will integrate research findings
into teaching, and includes outreach to high-school and middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory that the thalamus supports the
flexible formation/activation of cortical neural ensembles required for the
content of consciousness will be refined, and methods that will restore
consciousness in non-human primates will be developed. These advances will be
enabled by building novel models, advancing machine learning methods, and
researching their theoretical and practical underpinnings. The new methods will
be scalable and it is anticipated that they will able to identify causal
interactions between brain regions, i.e., whether activity in one area causes
activity in another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.