* 2021221
* Undergraduate Research in a Fully Online Engineering Program: Effects on Retention, Persistence, Performance, STEM attitudes and Identity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Robert Deters, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2023
* USD 295,966.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a framework for
providing undergraduate research opportunities to students enrolled in online
STEM programs. Specifically, the research team will design and test the impact
of undergraduate research experiences for students in an online engineering
program at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. The acute, longstanding need
for increased numbers of well-prepared STEM graduates has driven the
proliferation of online degree programs in undergraduate engineering and
technology. These distance-learning programs have the potential to increase
accessibility of STEM programs to diverse students, and thus support the growing
demand for graduates with STEM skills. However, many online programs have low
retention and graduation rates. The value of undergraduate research experiences
for supporting student persistence and success is well documented for in-person
learners. The goal of this project is to provide online students with
undergraduate research experiences, anticipating that the experiences will have
similar effects for online learners. To do so, it will develop a tailored
framework that features broad research topics, increases student disciplinary
knowledge and skills, and provides key supports to improve students’ academic
performance, persistence, and graduation. It is expected that these outcomes
will correlate with positive impacts of research experiences on the students’
attitudes toward STEM and STEM identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
design, implement, and test an undergraduate research pilot program within an
online engineering program at the University. Project activities include the
creation of a research-oriented workshop series, addition of an elective
research track, and specialized mentoring of the research students. The project
will conduct a mixed-methods research study to investigate the effectiveness of
the framework, the impact of the framework on students’ STEM identity and
attitude toward STEM, and other research questions. The key deliverable will be
a sharable, customizable, scalable framework for providing research experiences
in online courses and degree programs. It is expected that the work will produce
insights about online student participation, a key area of research given the
COVID-19-induced pivot to online learning. It is possible that this project can
debunk stereotypes about the feasibility of incorporating undergraduate research
and supporting development of a strong STEM identity in distance learning
environments. This project is supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.