* 2021149
* SyPhon: A Framework for Automated Phonological Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Leon Bergen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 402,572.00

This project develops new tools for the study of phonology, the sound patterns
in human languages. For example, phonology is concerned with explaining why the
past tense suffix of different English verbs is pronounced differently: “begg
ed” is pronounced [beg d], while “zipp ed” is pronounced [zip t]. The
explanation in this case is a phonological process that turns the past tense
suffix /d/ into its voiceless counterpart [t] in [zip t] because it occurs after
a voiceless consonant /p/. Phonological inference is the problem of discovering
a formal description of a phonological process that explains given data (e.g.
examples of English verb form pronunciations). Inference is an error-prone and
time-consuming task for a phonologist, especially given that inference results
depend on the formalism used to describe processes, and there is no single
formalism universally accepted in the community. On the contrary, phonologists
continuously propose new and refine existing formalisms in order to explain more
and more observed language data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to build a software framework, SyPhon, that automates the process of
phonological inference. SyPhon takes as input datasets that illustrate
phonological processes, as well as a specification of the formal language for
describing processes. The framework produces as output the optimal explanation
(according to some cost function) of the given data in a given formal language.
SyPhon enables phonologists to rapidly explore different theories, by varying
the formal language and the cost function, and observing the inference results
on a dataset. The core technical challenge of this project is the extreme
computational cost of phonological inference, which requires searching a large
space of possible formal descriptions. To make such inference feasible, the
investigators leverage state-of-the-art techniques from an area of computer
science called program synthesis; these techniques allow SyPhon to reduce the
search problem to a constrained optimization problem that is efficiently
solvable in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.