* 2021512
* Undergraduate Service Learning Experiences with Data: Mathematics in the Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Betty Love, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,985.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by transforming how
undergraduate students engage with and learn mathematics in a new first-year
general education (GenEd) course. In this course students will analyze and
create visualizations of data in order to answer authentic questions from non-
profit community partners. By developing data literacy and visualization skills
critical in an information-dense society, students will meet general education
requirements in quantitative literacy. Researchers expect that students will
increase in confidence and interest in mathematics and data science. Meaningful
interactions with community partners will enable students to develop an
increased commitment to community engagement and enhanced workforce skills, such
as: leadership, communication, and critical thinking skills. The course is also
expected to engage students who may have lower interest and self-efficacy in
mathematics, thus broadening participation in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase understanding of the
effectiveness and feasibility of service learning as a context to improve
student outcomes in GenEd mathematics courses. Service learning is a method of
engaged teaching and learning that emphasizes critical thinking and problem
solving by connecting course content with real-world experiences. Through
inquiry-based learning the project will engage students in authentic inquiry,
solving real-world problems and documenting learning through regular reflection.
The project will investigate the educational impact of the GenEd course in terms
of students’ interest and engagement in mathematics and other STEM disciplines.
Retention in the university and future course-taking behavior will also be
examined. A within-subject design will be used to measure how the course changes
student attitudes towards STEM by having students complete a pre-course survey
and a corresponding post-course survey using validated measures of self-
efficacy, interest, and STEM attitudes. In addition, the research team will work
with instructors of other GenEd mathematics courses to implement a between-
subject design to compare courses. Comparisons will look both at absolute
outcomes (e.g. comparing interest in future STEM-course taking at the end of the
semester between each course) and also at changes from the beginning to the end
of the semester (e.g. gains in mathematical self-efficacy). The team will apply
a mixed-methods approach that uses quantitative data to measure progress towards
participation targets and qualitative data that provides insights into the
research questions as well as insights into the successes and challenges of the
overall project. Data collection will consist of semi-structured interviews and
focus groups, project documents, reflections, classroom observations, surveys,
and university enrollment data. Project results and deliverables will be shared
with other institutions through a public website as well as publications. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.