* 2021317
* Service Learning Projects to Improve Engineering Students' Civic Engagement and Capacity for Innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Tiffany-Rose Sikorski, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
students’ learning. To do so, it will engage students in an interdisciplinary
engineering service-learning model focused on civic engagement. The project will
seek to develop students’ capacity for innovation while they use their
engineering skills and knowledge to decrease suffering, marginalization, or
exclusion of particular groups. Many engineering programs emphasize the economic
opportunities that engineering degrees will open to graduates, such as working
for the private sector. However, engineering students are increasingly
interested in ways to use their engineering education to pursue careers in which
they can see the human impact of their work. The premise of this project is that
opportunities for civic engagement can improve student engagement in engineering
education. These opportunities require students to learn new approaches and
skills that are not typically taught in the engineering curriculum, such as
human centered design and problem solving with empathy. By helping students
develop these skills, students will be better positioned to use their
engineering knowledge in the future to benefit society. The project will test
the hypothesis that mentoring, oriented towards civic engagement and addressing
societal challenges, will enhance the engagement of undergraduate engineering
students in STEM learning. This project expects to enhance students’ learning
experiences and provide opportunities to strengthen communities, while
simultaneously encouraging students’ development of civic
responsibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of improving engineering
education through the cultivation of innovative civic engagement, this project
will: (i) develop, implement, and evaluate a pedagogical intervention that
engages students in service learning projects; (ii) assess the effectiveness of
the intervention in supporting student learning with respect to engagement in
their engineering program and capacity for innovation; and (iii) refine a
theoretical model of how the intervention helps students develop civic
responsibility. This project will contribute to constructs of learning by
combining theories on social learning into an “engagement by innovation and
situated cognition” theory. The intervention will include two one-credit seminar
courses designed to promote students’ innovation and civic engagement. The
courses will use case-based learning based on cases drawn from local studies in
the DC-metro region. Students will learn problem-solving based on principles of
systems thinking, human-centered design, and ethnographic field research. In
this study, quantitative and qualitative data will be collected through regular
surveys, interviews, and video diaries to assess student engagement, development
of civic responsibility, and capacity for innovation. The service-learning
projects will benefit the region by generating engineering solutions that
address community challenges. The problem-solving experiences will help prepare
engineering students for success in the engineering workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.