* 2021081
* GCR: Programmable Nanorobots Integration with Magnetically-Driven Neuron and Brain Tissue Regeneration
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Ying Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2025
* USD 912,192.00

In this convergent project, mechanical and biomedical engineers, a
nanoscientist, and neuroscientists develop new understanding of how to program
magnetic nanorobots to effectively communicate and interact inside networks of
neurons. If successful, this may provide a possible approach for non-invasive
brain therapeutics. The fundamental analysis of the cellular interaction
behavior of magnetic nanorobots may lay a foundation for novel and translatable
approaches to treat intractable disorders such as neurodegeneration, epilepsy,
chronic pain, and spinal cord injury. Additionally, the research promotes
disciplinary integration across nanoscience, mechanical engineering, biomedical
engineering, neuroscience and experimental therapeutics. The project provides
research experiences for high school teacher and students, undergraduate and
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generated by the
convergent effort will form novel frameworks to catalyze scientific discovery
and innovation in brain tissue regeneration and repair, and will provide a
powerful, scalable and controllable technology of self-driving nanorobots
transporting and functioning inside the brain environment. It will also enhance
fundamental understanding of long-term changes in the activity of specific
neural circuits with degenerative neurons. An explainable artificial
intelligence framework provides additional quantitative assays to complement a
biologically plausible, continuously remodeling, analytical, microvascular
network model. Furthermore, combined with recent advances in power electronics,
this project holds a high potential for contributing to the development of a new
machine learning model that improves researchersâ€™ capacity for studying the
growth behavior of neurons inside a 3D extracellular
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.