* 2021241
* Community Drivers Influencing the Effectiveness of Transitional Justice
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mythri Jegathesan, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 140,000.00

This research examines how migrant and formerly displaced communities evaluate
the effectiveness of transitional justice. Transitional justice programs help
communities rebuild, reform, and repair legal and non-legal relationships and
systems. This research investigates if and how land attachments and work
relations are critical to local community evaluations of transitional justice.
This research is important because transitional justice is an integral feature
of community development and critical to maintaining effective community
relations and local government infrastructures. This project uses the plantation
as site of agricultural land and labor production to investigate why land
attachment and work relations are critical to community evaluations of
transitional justice. In doing so, it complements available data on the
effectiveness of transitional justice within the development sector in order to
improve the capacities of these programs to provide justice. Research findings
will interest development actors, donors, lawmakers, and policymakers who aim to
understand transitional justice programming's long-term effects. The project
also provides training for graduate and undergraduate students in methods of
rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will examine land use, labor practices, and life relations among
linguistic and ethnic minorities and will gather data using qualitative research
methods, including participant observation, ethnographic interviews, archival
research, and community mapping. Interviews will be conducted with local
communities to study if and how prior experiences with agricultural labor and
residence influence transitional justice programming outcomes. Participant
observation will provide data on how local communities use and value land and
what kinds of work they perform to feel socially and economically secure after
transitional justice programming concludes. Community mapping and archival
research will provide material evidence of transitional justice programming's
effectiveness and what outcomes, if any, benefitted local communities. The
broader research findings will support studies of transitional justice, the
agricultural economic sector, land use, and work
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.