* 2021548
* Advancing Scholars in Successful Undergraduate Research Experiences (ASSURE)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Marcos Alvarez, Los Angeles City College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,092.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the
relationships between community college students' participation in scientific
research and their academic success and degree completion. Specifically, the
project will evaluate the impacts of new research-oriented curricula, together
with hands-on research experiences for community college students in the
chemical sciences. These changes are expected to increase student engagement,
retention, degree completion, and rate of transfer from community college.
Specific aims are to (1) increase successful completion rates in General
Chemistry and Organic Chemistry, (2) increase the representation of Latinx STEM
students transferring to four-year universities, and (3) facilitate post-
transfer success of students through supports including authentic research
experiences, transfer workshops, and e-mentoring. The project will focus on
students from underrepresented groups or socioeconomically disadvantaged
backgrounds. The project will test a scalable model of research practice at the
community college that has the potential to improve undergraduate STEM education
and promote the development of a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Los Angeles City College (LACC) and the
University of Southern California (USC) will investigate how exposure to
authentic research experiences, characterized by the application of the process
of science and the scientific method, correlates with increased academic success
and degree completion for community college STEM students. To that end, the
project will test two related assumptions: (1) the integration of authentic
research experiences into community college classroom and laboratory coursework
will correlate with improved academic performance, persistence, and degree
completion; and (2) participation in authentic research experiences at the
community college level will correlate with improved academic performance,
persistence, degree completion, and transfer to four-year universities. Project
activities include redesign of laboratory curricula in General Chemistry II and
Organic Chemistry I and II courses, providing research experiences for students
who have completed an organic chemistry course; and assessing LACC’s
institutional and departmental capacity with regard to STEM education. USC will
provide 10-week summer research experiences for LACC students at USC and measure
the impact of the project’s pedagogical changes and research exposure on student
success and degree completion to evaluate the validity of the project’s theory
of change. This project is supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools to understand how institutions
change to better support student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.