* 2021347
* Improving Undergraduate Scientific Explanations: Exploring the Role of Data Literacy Skills in Scientific Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kathleen Browne, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating how teaching
undergraduate students to interpret data and apply scientific reasoning can
improve their scientific explanations. To this end, the project aims to develop
strategic, easy-to-implement approaches to enhance students’ data literacy
skills. Students will be guided through a sequence of steps to help them
recognize and describe patterns in data. Additional steps will guide them to use
such data patterns as evidence for making conclusions about the phenomena under
investigation. These teaching strategies will be tested in introductory
oceanography courses, using data sets from the NSF-funded Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OII). By leveraging the community of educators associated with OII,
the results of this work will be directly shared with people who teach similar
oceanography courses. As a result, the project anticipates wide adoption of the
strategies it finds to be most effective for undergraduate oceanography
students. The results of the project are also expected to be applicable across
science disciplines and might be used to enhance a broad range of undergraduate
courses. Consequently, the project plans to provide online access to the
materials and data sets it develops, so that they can be easily adopted or
adapted by other educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on
improving undergraduate STEM education by building students’ data literacy and
reasoning skills and, ultimately, enhancing their ability to construct
scientifically accurate explanations. The project aims to investigate how a
modified explanation framework could influence the development of undergraduate
students' scientific explanation skills and seeks to identify the specific
challenges undergraduate students experience when constructing scientific
explanations. Specifically, this project will link two cognitive realms,
scientific reasoning and data literacy, to develop more effective instructional
strategies for improving undergraduate students’ science literacy. The project
will follow a convergent, multiphase mixed methods research approach, which will
include a pilot study to collect both quantitative and qualitative data that
will inform the later stages of the project. Guided by their instructors,
students will use pedagogically appropriate and adjustable data visualizations
from the OOI Data Explorations project, together with complementary static
(e.g., paper) graphical representations. The design and implementation of
instructional strategies used in this project will be evaluated to consider the
professional development needs of future instructors seeking to implement the
interventions. Dissemination plans have been designed to ensure that effective
strategies are shared broadly with science instructors, learning scientists, and
other educational researchers. This proposal was submitted in response to the
“Dear Colleague Letter: Stimulating Participation from Institutions New to the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources Program"
(NSF 20-034). The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.