* 2021608
* IUSE/PFE:RED A&amp;I - Sustainable TRansformation of Environmental engineering Education for Modern society (STREEM)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Ellen Lauchnor, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2025
* USD 995,828.00

Montana State University STREEM Project &lt;br/&gt;Public Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today’s environmental challenges, such as access to clean
water and energy, climate change, and treatment of pollution and waste, have an
acute sense of urgency. There is broad recognition that solutions to these
complex challenges will require environmental engineers to integrate concepts
from engineering as well as the natural and physical sciences, social sciences,
business, and communications to address the pressing challenges facing society
at the individual, community, national, and global levels—across many sectors of
the economy. The existing environmental engineering undergraduate curriculum
common today in the US fails to provide graduates with sufficient real-world
skills to meet these modern environmental challenges. The Department of Civil
Engineering in the Norm Asbjornson College of Engineering at Montana State
University (MSU) proposes to transform environmental engineering education by
replacing current topic-focused course model with a four-year thematic thread
curriculum that integrates technical, social, and economic competencies and
provides students with repeated opportunities to address ill-defined, complex
problems like those they will face as professionals. The project is aligned with
the NSF’s Revolutionizing Engineering Departments (RED) program mission to
catalyze revolutionary approaches to engineering education. As an Adaptation and
Implementation (A&amp;I) project, it builds off evidence-based organizational
change strategies employed at other institutions, applies ground-breaking
pedagogical methods in the project's local context, and propagates the
transformation of engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop an environmental engineering program around thematic threads of
technical, social, and economic knowledge while developing a culture that
rewards the use of best pedagogical practices for continuous professional
formation throughout the undergraduate program. Faculty will facilitate the
transfer of knowledge from basic math, science, and humanities courses into the
integrated project-based curriculum using a variety of proven, high-impact
education practices and pedagogies, such as inquiry- and project-based learning.
First, faculty will apply a collaborative process to replace approximately 32
credits of topic-focused environmental engineering coursework, which would have
been taken primarily in the final two years of the undergraduate program, with
32 credits of integrated courses distributed across the curriculum starting in
the freshman year. These new courses will serve as the mechanism to integrate
the concepts covered in the remaining topic-focused courses that still comprise
most of the undergraduate curriculum. Second, faculty will develop appropriate
problem-based learning activities for each year of the curriculum to provide
students with practice solving a variety of open-ended and complex problems and
gain experience in communication and teamwork. Each project will build the
knowledge and values necessary to allow for continuous professional development.
Finally, faculty will develop systems and procedures that institutionalize
faculty coordination, knowledge sharing, and training in best teaching
practices. Through this approach, the student experience will be transformed to
one that develops an early, strong, and authentic engineering identity and
provides the context and practice necessary for effective and continued
independent learning. Improved student retention, diversity, and professional
competencies will result. This project will furthermore provide a curriculum map
for other environmental engineering programs that includes discipline-specific
threads within integrated courses, assessment plans, and strategies for
implementing collaborative teaching methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.