* 2021587
* Equitably Consequential Making among Youth from Historically Marginalized Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Angela Calabrese Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,033,967.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. There are few
empirical studies of sustained youth engagement in STEM-oriented making over
time, how youth are supported in working towards more robust STEM related
projects, on the outcomes of such making experiences among youth from
historically marginalized communities, or on the design features of making
experiences which support these goals. The project plans to conduct a set of
research studies to develop: a theory-based and data-driven framework for
equitably consequential making; a set of related individual-level and program-
level cases with exemplars (and the associated challenges) that can be used by
researchers and practitioners for guiding the field; and an initial set of
guiding principles (with indicators) for identifying equitably consequential
making in practice. The project will result in a framework for equitably
consequential making with guiding principles for implementation that will
contribute to the infrastructure for fostering increased opportunities to learn
among all youth, especially those historically underrepresented in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through research, the project seeks to build capacity
among STEM-oriented maker practitioners, researchers and youth in the maker
movement around equitably consequential making to expand the prevailing norms of
making towards more transformative outcomes for youth. Project research will be
guided by several questions. What do youth learn and do (in-the-moment and over
time) in making spaces that work to support equity in making? What maker space
design features support (or work against) youth in making in equitably
consequential ways? What are the individual and community outcomes youth
experience in STEM-making across settings and time scales? What are the most
salient indicators of equitably consequential making, how do they take shape,
how can these indicators be identified in practice? The project will research
these questions using interview studies and critical longitudinal ethnography
with embedded youth participatory case study methodologies. The research will be
conducted in research-practice partnerships involving Michigan State University,
the University of North Carolina at Greensboro and 4 local, STEM- and youth-
oriented making spaces in Lansing and Greensboro that serve historically
underrepresented groups in STEM, with a specific focus on youth from lower-
income and African American backgrounds.