* 2021755
* BPC-A: Institute for African-American Mentoring in Computing Sciences (iAAMCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Juan Gilbert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Florida will document and demonstrate the impact of the
Institute for African-American Mentoring in Computing Sciences (iAAMCS,
pronounced ‘I am CS’) on broadening participation in computing. iAAMCS is
intended to serve as a national resource to students, faculty, and industry
professionals. A major goal of iAAMCS is to significantly increase the number of
Black/African Americans pursuing and completing the Ph.D. in computing fields
through a national mentoring model. The programs and activities implemented as a
part of this model focus on leveraging and developing evidence-based strategies
to encourage African American’s participation in computing, specifically at the
Ph.D. level and beyond. Although representation in attainment of computer
science degrees at the bachelor's level is on par with representation in the
country (African Americans represent 13.4% of the U.S. population), African
Americans represent approximately 0.8% and 1.2% of the master's and Ph.D.
recipients, respectively. Furthermore, African Americans represent 1.4% of the
tenure-track faculty at Ph.D. granting institutions. The fact that there is a
larger number of African Americans at the bachelor's degree level provides
evidence that there is a sufficient pool of talent to pursue graduate education
in computing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project involves the extensive
assessment and dissemination of new and existing iAAMCS data, while continuing
key programmatic interventions that support student mentoring. Over this award
period, the collective impact of iAAMCS on the field and profession of computing
will be documented, along with the experiences and impact of iAAMCS on its
participants. This effort involves re-analyzing existing qualitative and
quantitative longitudinal data, in addition to collecting new survey responses
and interview data. Further documentation of the impact and usefulness of iAAMCS
resources will be provided. New educational research will be pursued related to
the concepts of cascade mentoring, self-efficacy, intersectionality, and
computer science identity development. The results of this comprehensive
analysis of iAAMCS will address several gaps in the literature related to
African Americans in Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.