* 2021465
* Improving Student Learning in Power Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Valentina Cecchi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 179,964.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
in power engineering to include the new technologies being used in the power
industry. Power engineering is a field of electrical engineering that focuses on
the structures and processes needed to generate, transmit, and use electric
power. Today’s power engineers require multi-disciplinary engineering knowledge
to manage an increasingly complex power grid. For example, the power grid
includes a growing amount of renewable energy resources, as well as more digital
devices, information technology tools, and sensors. To address the need to align
power engineering education with the power industry’s needs, the project team
will develop and assess a set of active learning modules. These modules will be
integrated into existing power engineering courses and focus on Smart Energy
Management Systems. The modules will include hands-on laboratory experiences,
case studies, and interactive simulations. The modules will help students learn
how to model power systems, solve forecasting problems for power systems, and
use data analytics to characterize power systems. The electric power industry is
a critical part of the nation’s infrastructure and touches the lives of
everyone. Improving students’ understanding of modern electric power systems
will help ensure the integrity and performance of the nation’s electric power
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve
power engineering education by (i) developing active learning experiences that
incorporate real world problems in modern power systems, and (ii) integrating
issues, solutions, and emerging trends in the area of Smart Energy Management
Systems, specifically targeting power distribution systems, renewable energy
sources, and intelligent energy forecasting. The design of the active learning
modules will be guided by a situated learning framework, using case-based
evaluations of simulated data from real-world power system problems to engage
students in authentic forecasting and data analytics. This project will address
the following research questions: 1) Do students exposed to situated learning
develop a more comprehensive understanding of energy management, integrated
power system analysis, and data analytics that is relevant for emerging
challenges in power systems? and 2) Do they take greater account of context and
community? To answer these questions, student learning will be measured using
pre- and post-tests for the modules. Formative assessment using a situated
learning survey and student interviews will be used to improve the modules. A
workshop will be held to disseminate project results to the power engineering
education community. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.