* 2021585
* NRT-HDR: Graduate Traineeship in Data Science Technologies and Applications
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Borko Furht, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,400,000.00

Data science and analytics is an emerging transdisciplinary area comprising
computing, statistics, and various application domains including medicine,
nursing, industry and business applications among others. A significant
shortcoming of the current graduate curricula in the U.S. is that scientists and
engineers are well trained in their own areas of specialty but lack the
integrative knowledge needed for new scientific discoveries and industry
applications made possible by data science and analytics. The National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship award to Florida Atlantic University (FAU) will
address these shortcomings by proposing a new model of convergent education
through experiential learning. Transdisciplinary education brings integration of
different disciplines in a harmonious manner to construct new knowledge and
uplift the student to higher domains of cognitive abilities and sustained
knowledge and skills. The traineeship anticipates providing a unique and
comprehensive training opportunity for approximately one hundred sixty graduate
students (160), including thirty five (35) funded trainees. Thirty faculty
members from five colleges and ten departments will participate in the program.
The program has the potential to have a significant impact on training practices
for future data science professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary training
elements of the curriculum will include the development of normalization
courses, the creation of different testbeds for the various application domains,
boot-camps, in-depth elective courses, and professional workshops. Normalization
courses will be used to address various background of students entering the
program. The convergent research themes will focus on three data science and
analytics areas: (i) medical and healthcare applications, (ii) industry
applications, and (iii) data science and AI technologies. To address these, the
goal is to create a curriculum for graduate students in data science and
analytics, where each course will be developed by at least two faculty members
from two different disciplines. In order to integrate research and training,
multiple testbeds for different application domains will be developed in a newly
created Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Each testbed, which
relates to a research project, will include a computer platform, software tools,
and a set of learning modules. Research projects will be formulated jointly with
industry partners who are members of the NSF Industry/University Cooperative
Research CAKE (Center for Advanced Knowledge Enablement) at FAU. The program
will produce graduates with technical depth and understanding of data science
technologies and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.