* 2021147
* GCR: Coevolution of Social and Physical Infrastructure and Improved Access to Clean Water in Informal Water Sharing Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,150,000.00

In the United States more than 2 million people live without household access to
clean water. Much of this household water insecurity occurs in small rural and
impoverished communities. This is the “Water Access Gap” and the purpose of this
project is to develop a better, more convergent, science approach that informs
the path towards closing this gap. A convergent team of investigators — from the
fields of anthropology, engineering, computer science, hydrology, law, economics
and education — will evaluate how stronger connections between social and
physical water infrastructure can close the US water access gap. Social
infrastructure includes institutional capacity— norms and standards, technical
capacity and an effective business model for delivering water that meets public
health standards. Physical infrastructure includes technology — water treatment
technology, information technology for sharing information about water
availability and quality, and a learning platform for training and sustaining a
local workforce to operate water treatment technology. This project will
evaluate how improving the connection between social and physical infrastructure
can transform informal water systems into formalized, financially sound systems
that enable better community development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
thesis of the proposed work is that to transition from informal water sharing
systems to greater household water security, there is a need for intervention
(“disruption”) in one or more aspects of infrastructure in a way that catalyzes
better integration of the social and physical components of this infrastructure.
The investigators further posit that the most appropriate disruption (cause) and
the rate of coevolution (effect) are context dependent, varying with starting
conditions, or the robustness of the informal water sharing system. The research
plan consists of two work packages (WP) that allow the investigators to test
these hypotheses with depth and breadth. In WP1, the state of existing social
and physical infrastructure, and its relationship to household water security in
colonias (or informal settlements) from Texas to California, will be measured.
Here, the goal is not only to test the research hypotheses (disruption, and
context dependence) but also to understand regional variation in the
relationship between social and physical infrastructure and water security as a
function of climate (extremes) and state law. In WP2, interventions will be made
in both social and physical infrastructure to four colonias in Arizona in a
participatory experimental framework. The research hypotheses will be tested by
varying the timing of social and physical infrastructure disruption (when social
infrastructure leads by two years, vs. when implemented the same year as
physical infrastructure) and by applying these interventions to colonias with
different antecedent social capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.