* 2021606
* BII-Design: Developing a Tree-Focused Biological Integration Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sean Hoban, Morton Arboretum
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 192,991.00

This award will enable the Morton Arboretum to design a Biology Integration
Institute that will take a multidisciplinary approach to understanding and
predicting whole tree responses to rapid environmental changes, including
emerging climates, biotic invasions, and urbanization, across organizational
(i.e., from molecules to ecosystems) and temporal scales (i.e., from moments to
generations). Trees shape terrestrial environments, both in natural and built
environments, creating forests and woodlands and play a major role in global
water, carbon, nutrient, and energy cycles. With their extensive root systems
and expansive leaf canopies, they integrate above and below ground conditions,
linking the soil and sky through a dynamic biotic system. Tree responses to
these emerging novel environments - be it an urban parkway or an increasingly
dry woodland - also alter the environment they live in and generate biological
innovations in traits, genes, behavior, community composition, and clades. A
synthetic approach is necessary to understand these complex and contingent
systems and tease apart questions of nature versus nurture and how we might best
manage trees in the future. During the Design phase, the project will enhance
the current undergraduate research and public outreach activities of the
institution, especially with regard to individuals who are underrepresented in
the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trees, as a growth form, are a great model
system for integrative biology and the study of biotic response to environmental
change. Not only do they dominate terrestrial ecosystems and form the
fundamental ecological and evolutionary basis for many ecosystems, they possess
numerous compelling biological characteristics making them particularly good
integrators of environmental change. The researchers will design a Biological
Integration Institute focused on the theme of “how trees respond to and shape
novel environments.” They will leverage the unique research and training
resources of a large public botanic garden encompassing urban, managed,
restored, and remnant ecosystems. In the Design phase, the researchers in the
Center for Tree Science will work with internal and external experts to: 1)
Clarify a core overarching question, identify opportunities for synergy in
existing projects, and prioritize new cross-disciplinary collaborative research
teams and projects; 2) Create a management plan and strategies for data
integration and collaboration that allow for interdisciplinary cross-talk,
including designing an integrative database that builds on lessons from prior
NSF investments; and 3) how to leverage the Arboretum’s existing integrated
training and mentorship program in tree science, which prepares students and
early career scientists for interdisciplinary, collaborative careers across a
range of fields and agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.