* 2021402
* Developing Optical Devices and Project-based Learning to Improve Undergraduate Students' Scientific Research and Engineering Design Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Heather Lewandowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2023
* USD 26,629.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
education in engineering and in physics. The Physics Department at Bethel
University has a substantial history of teaching physics using open-ended labs
and inquiry-based student research. The department has recently expanded to
become a Physics and Engineering Department that also offers four-year
engineering degrees. One of the challenges of supporting both the physics and
engineering degree programs is teaching scientific research and engineering
design using shared equipment, lab spaces, and faculty. As a unifying
interdisciplinary theme that builds on the department’s strengths, the project
will focus on optical measurements. New measurement devices will be designed and
built that primarily use light as a precise tool to observe mechanical, thermal,
and electronic processes. These devices will be used in project-based learning
activities, so that students can learn physics topics and engineering design in
the same laboratory facilities. Student learning outcomes will be assessed to
determine the impact of the project-based learning experiences on students’
understanding of physics and their engineering design skills. The study will
also examine how interdisciplinary teams of students interact and engage with
research and design projects. The project will help prepare the next generation
of engineers and scientists to address technical and teamwork challenges they
will encounter in the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to help students learn physics principles and the engineering design
process through project-based learning. Techniques from advanced optical physics
labs will be adapted for use in the undergraduate engineering curriculum. A
suite of low-cost, compact, infrastructure-free optical techniques will be
developed for project-based learning activities. These include a schlieren
device compatible with a cell phone camera for imaging fluid flows and heat
transfer; compact digital holography for measurements of thermal expansion and
Young's modulus; and a laser power servo controller for stabilizing and
modulating a laser's output. These devices will be used in undergraduate
engineering courses for guided lab activities and student-led projects. Learning
assessments accompanying each device will quantify students' progress in
learning course content and developing skills in experimental techniques.
Additionally, optical techniques will be expanded to include more sophisticated
apparatus, providing opportunities for students to engage in open-ended projects
and learn aspects of engineering design. Three labs will be designed to
accompany three interdisciplinary, upper-level courses, namely, fluid mechanics,
a materials and devices course, and an optical science and engineering course.
While teaching interdisciplinary upper-level courses with these open-ended
projects, the project team will study the effectiveness of this teaching
approach, including whether the projects are effective for teaching engineering
design and experimental techniques as well as the ways in which students develop
ownership and enthusiasm for their projects. Results of the project will be
disseminated through professional conferences and journals that focus on physics
and engineering education. The documentation for the devices will be
disseminated through online repositories so that other institutions can adopt
the technologies in their curricula. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.