* 2021389
* Improving the Problem Solving Skills of Engineering Undergraduate Students by Infusing Engineering Design in Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* N. Sanjay Rebello, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,992.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
students’ problem-solving skills in the context of an introductory calculus-
based physics course. Problem solving skills are critical in the 21st Century
workforce. For example, engineers and scientists often must solve complex, ill-
defined problems. In contrast, most introductory undergraduate science courses
focus on simple, well-defined problems. This project addresses the need to
improve students’ problem-solving skills so that their skills will better align
with the challenges and demands in the STEM workforce. The introductory physics
course for future engineers and scientists will be transformed by integrating
complex and ill-defined engineering design problems into laboratory experiences.
The project will provide teaching assistants in the new course with ongoing
professional development so they can effectively implement this new approach. In
addition to developing instructional materials, tools, and resources for
integrating engineering design in an introductory calculus-based physics course,
the project will establish a set of design principles for developing similar
experiences in other undergraduate STEM courses. By improving students’ problem-
solving skills, the project is expected to contribute to a STEM workforce that
is better prepared to meet professional problem solving expectations, and
ultimately lead to better engineering solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a collaborative effort between faculty in physics and engineering
education. An engineering design process model that students use in their first-
year engineering course will also be used in a physics course that students take
concurrently. Thus, the project will provide reinforcing learning experiences
for students in their first-year engineering and physics courses to promote
transfer of knowledge between contexts. The goals of this project are to (a)
Develop three multi-week modules that integrate engineering design and learning
of foundational principles of mechanics, (b) Deploy these modules in the weekly
laboratory section of a first-semester calculus-based physics course for future
engineers and scientists, (c) Prepare graduate and undergraduate teaching
assistants to facilitate learning physics using engineering design, (d) Assess
the impact of these interventions on students’ problem-solving expertise,
metacognitive ability, and conceptual knowledge in physics. The project’s
research study will investigate the extent to which the process of engineering
design enhances or impedes student learning of physics, compared to more
structured learning experiences, as well as how to scaffold the learning to meet
different levels of prior knowledge, the extent of students’ transfer of
learning to other contexts, impact on metacognition and learning, and the extent
of physics teaching assistants’ knowledge about engineering design and how it
changes during the project. The revised calculus-based physics course for
engineers at a large public university will serve about 2400 students annually,
of which about 40% will be women or students from groups that are not equitably
represented in STEM. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.