* 2021499
* Foundational Research and Data-driven Tool Development to Enhance Learning of Database Programming
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Geoffrey Herman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
computer science education. It will do so by performing foundational research to
increase understanding about how people learn to program database systems.
Database systems are widely used to manage data for scientific inquiry, business
decision-making, maintaining public safety and security, public health and
healthcare, and many other fields. In fact, most modern computing applications
rely on a database system to manage the applicationâ€™s data. Therefore, it is
vital that software developers understand how to program a database system so
they can build applications that securely and efficiently manage data. The
Structured Query Language (SQL) is the de facto standard for programming
database systems. SQL uses a different approach from commonly used imperative
programming languages such as Python, Java, or C. Consequently, the knowledge
that has been generated about how people learn imperative programming languages
does not translate well, if at all, to how people learn to program in SQL. This
project intends to provide a foundation for making data-driven decisions to
improve student learning about SQL and relational
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student written SQL statements will be analyzed
using machine learning and clustering techniques. The clustering system will use
relational algebra trees compiled from student written SQL statements to filter
out syntax structures that might vary from student to student, while preserving
the original meaning of what the student submitted. Together with qualitative
student interviews, these data will be used to identify common misunderstandings
that occur when learning how to program in SQL. This information will then be
used to explore the development of a data-driven open-source web application
that can be used by instructors, in real-time, to facilitate just-in-time SQL
instruction and active learning in the classroom. This project is supported by
the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.