* 2021012
* A Multidimensional Reconstruction of the Order of Composition of Historical Manuscripts from Textual and Material Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* William Newman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 492,552.00

This project aims to use Isaac Newton’s very large manuscript Nachlass
(collection of unpublished manuscripts left behind after his death) as a
platform for exploring and assessing the combined use of multiple techniques for
dating those manuscripts. The project focuses on his alchemical writings, which
includes laboratory notebooks, indices of alchemical substances, and
transcriptions from other sources. The research team will develop an integrative
approach to assessing the data generated in using these techniques on the
manuscripts. The project will use network graph analysis to determine a relative
chronology of the parts within the large body of manuscripts. A solution to the
chronology of Newton's alchemical manuscripts will serve to promote a better
understanding of his place in the field at particular periods, since his
involvement in this research extended over four decades and involved numerous
contacts and collaborators, some of whom were important in their own right. A
solution to the problem of dating large manuscript collections will benefit
researchers in many areas of scholarship in addition to history of science, not
to mention librarians and museum workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will develop a method for integrating the data generated from the use of
multiple techniques to generate a chronology of Newton’s Nachlass. Those
techniques include computational methods for text analysis (e.g. Latent Semantic
Analysis and Topic Modeling), spectrometric analysis of inks and papers by XRF
spectrosopy, comparison of watermarks by means of the latest imaging
technologies, tracking Newton’s handwriting practices and evolving use of
alchemical symbols, and the systematic study of his citations. In addition to
applying these multiple techniques, the project will follow an integrative
approach to assessing the data generated by them. In order to achieve this
result, the project will use network graph analysis with tensors to visualize
and to identify clusters of manuscripts and passages whose respective
chronological markers should correlate and distinguish one another in time and
place of use across several dimensions of evidence based on different standards,
for example, watermarks, inks, and citations. Even where a clean overlay of
graphs does not result, the nature of the poor 'fit' would be clearly outlined
in more than one dimension where solutions may be found. Metrical techniques
will also be developed for determining the degree of agreement that constitutes
good versus poor fit. The result will be a model for determining relative
chronology of the parts within large textual corpora that will be transportable
to other projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.