* 2021281
* Institutionalizing Undergraduate Research throughout the Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Eric Helms, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,549.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the impact of
multi-year course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) in an
undergraduate chemistry laboratory curriculum. Developing opportunities to
engage students in discovery-based science experiences is a national priority.
CUREs achieve this goal by replacing traditional “cook-book” laboratory
activities with authentic research experiences. Although CUREs have been
developed in a variety of contexts, most research on their effectiveness
examines individual courses. This project intends to advance knowledge about
CUREs by investigating how a multi-year, sequenced CURE curriculum affects
student learning. This project will transform the entire laboratory curriculum
to center on undergraduate research. It is expected that this transformation
will improve student recruitment, retention, and subsequent participation in
other research experiences, especially for students from groups that are not yet
equitably represented in STEM. These efforts will also provide a case study of
evidence-based change to the chemistry laboratory curriculum that is designed to
complement efforts to reform the chemistry lecture
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CURE curricula will be developed in four
chemistry laboratory courses at the State University of New York College (SUNY)
at Geneseo, a primarily undergraduate institution. The CUREs will be introduced
in participants’ first-year laboratory courses and be scaffolded in a multi-year
sequence spanning a four year laboratory curriculum including general, organic,
and inorganic chemistry, plus a senior capstone course. This project differs
from previous CURE examples in that it will engage students in learning research
skills during all four years of the undergraduate chemistry program, instead of
just a single experience. The specific STEM education research questions will
explore the impacts of a multi-year, sequenced CURE curriculum on student
learning outcomes, student understanding of the research process, and students’
ability to carry out a meaningful research project. These outcomes will be
investigated in collaboration with an external project evaluator using both
indirect assessments of student perceptions of their learning gains from a
nationally validated CURE survey and direct assessment through comparison of
students’ course grades, laboratory assignments and exams, and participation in
other research experiences before and after the curriculum change. Expected
outcomes of the project include a better prepared STEM work force, greater
persistence in pursuing post-baccalaureate education, a more diverse STEM
community, and improved STEM educational practices. Results from this project
will be disseminated locally in professional development workshops for STEM
instructors, via a SUNY-wide online platform, and through presentations at
regional conferences and publications in STEM education journals. This project
was submitted in response to the "Dear Colleague Letter: Stimulating
Participation from Institutions New to the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Education and Human Resources Program: (NSF 20-034)" and is funded by
the NSF IUSE: EHR program, which supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.