* 2021453
* Collaborative Research: Building Capacity to Improve STEM Education through Citizen Science by Scaling Up University-Community Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Caren Cooper, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 37,337.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing STEM education
outcomes for all students, including women and underrepresented minorities.
Research suggests that increased persistence in STEM fields could be achieved by
better connecting STEM content to broader issues in students’ communities. A
feasible way to make these connections is through citizen science. Citizen
science projects create opportunities for anyone to participate in collecting
and analyzing data to support a scientific project. Such projects have the
potential to link scientific content and process to real world problems that are
relevant to students’ communities. Furthermore, these projects require students
to engage in active learning, which is also known to improve student learning
outcomes in STEM fields. This project is a collaboration between North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University and North Carolina State University.
It is designed to lay the foundation for establishing University-community
partnerships to establish citizen science communities that connect undergraduate
STEM learning to underserved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capacity building
efforts focus on three domains: 1) needs assessment for scaling up the project;
2) knowledge and relationship building; and 3) information technology
infrastructure. Capacity building efforts will target barriers and identify
bridges needed at social, organizational, and individual levels. This change
effort will focus on further developing inclusive learning environments.
Specifically the project aims to enable undergraduates to more highly value
their educational experiences through increased awareness of the relationship
between STEM course content (i.e., knowledge, skills, and perspectives) and the
issues impacting underserved communities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.