* 2021139
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Preparation of College Mathematics Instructors to Implement Student-centered, Inclusive Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shandy Hauk, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 120,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving college
mathematics instruction. To do so, it will develop and disseminate a guide for
designing professional development programs to help college mathematics
instructors become more effective teachers. To create this guide, the project
will draw from existing mathematics instructor preparation programs and
resources. The resulting Instructor Preparation Design Tool will be adaptable so
that departments can use to it meet the needs of their specific students,
instructors, courses, and department. For example, the Instructor Preparation
Design Tool can be tailored to the type of institution and types of novice
mathematics instructors in the department. To identify the contents of the
Instructor Preparation Design Tool, the project team will identify key topics
and associated resources to include, survey departments at institutions with
existing preparation programs about those topics, and pilot test versions of the
Instructor Preparation Design Tool with departments that are creating or
revising their college mathematics instructor programs. Through this process of
consultation and design, the project aims to generate and test resources
demonstrating how to put into action best-practice recommendations about
mathematics teaching. The Instructor Preparation Design Tool is expected to
support undergraduate mathematics departments in making transformative changes
to deliver more student-centered and inclusive
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Instructor Preparation Design Tool is
intended to provide the “recipe” for how a mathematics department can support
their instructors to enact new evidence-based strategies that have been curated
by the Mathematical Association of America and other organizations. To support
creation of the Instructor Preparation Design Tool, the project team includes
Expert Providers of preparation for each type of novice instructional role
(e.g., teaching assistants). Expert Providers come from diverse institutional
types and have made significant improvements to instructional preparation at
their institution. The team will collect, analyze, and categorize information
about existing programs. In developing the Instructor Preparation Design Tool,
the project team will determine critical topics of value to each type of
instructional assignment and type of institution, with a timeline and
recommended order for discussion, revision, and decision-making about
professional development program topics. The Instructor Preparation Design Tool
will also address challenges inherent in acknowledging, deciding on actions, and
being accountable for addressing inequities with each type of instructional role
and institution. Finally, the Instructor Preparation Design Tool will begin to
develop ways to evaluate the effectiveness of professional development programs
for mathematics instructors, including measures of accountability and ways to
institutionalize necessary changes. The literature reviews that will be
developed for each of these results will provide a synthesis of research for the
field, and thus provide value apart from the Instructor Preparation Design Tool.
The results of this project have the potential to create the foundation for
improving the structure and curricula for mathematics instructor preparation,
thus leading to improvements in undergraduate mathematics education. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.