* 2021256
* Stable Isotope Insights into Shellfish Consumption and Transport
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jelmer Eerkens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 198,410.00

In partnership with several tribal organizations in California, this research
examines the role of shellfish in the diets of pre-contact Native Californians,
and by extension, the maintenance and evolution of social networks and
organizations. Shellfish is common in archaeological sites on San Francisco Bay,
and judging by the huge shellmounds that formed up to several millenia ago, was
a major dietary staple for people living in this region. Somewhat surprising,
however, are large amounts of shellfish at inland archaeological sites that are
up to dozens of kilometers from the bay. These food resources would have been
carried on the backs of people, without means of refrigeration, prompting the
question, what role did shellfish play in inland subsistence economies? Were
they staples in the diet, important but minor sources of nutrients such as
iodine, fallback/starvation foods, or part of ritual or feasting events? The
project will provide information on human ecological adaptation and organization
of trade networking. It will also create and enhance educational and training
opportunities for students, develop a museum display open to the public, and
enhance collaboration between archaeologists and particular descendant groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human skeleton is synthesized from the foods we eat.
Relative to terrestrial foods, marine resources contain distinctive chemical and
stable isotopic signatures. These become embedded in growing skeletal tissues,
including teeth. The research team will take advantage of advances in mass
spectrometry that facilitate analysis of small micro-samples of dentinal
collagen and shell carbonate. Micro-sampling of teeth and shells will allow them
to trace the transportation and consumption of shellfish across different
people, different seasons, and across different time scales within a person’s
life. The new data will allow the team to test particular models about the role
that shellfish played in human diets, across a range of distances from San
Francisco Bay. Together, the research will provide new insights into the
diversity of human ecological adaptations within a complex environment, the
nature of inter-annual and inter-individual variation in ancient human diets,
the role of micro- and macro-nutrients in diets, and the development of social
networks in providing access to estuarine resources in more inland
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.