* 2021267
* Assessing the Use of Virtual Reality to Support Additive Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving additive
manufacturing education. The global additive manufacturing market is expected to
reach a value over $40 billion by the end of 2025. As a result, demand is
increasing for additive manufacturing workforce development, and universities
are developing new courses and programs to meet this demand. Unfortunately,
hands-on laboratory experiences with additive manufacturing tools and
technologies are not always easily available. For example, due to their cost and
complexity of maintenance, high-end industrial machines are rarely found in a
classroom setting. Virtual reality offers a potential engaging way to expose
students effectively and at low cost to these industrial additive manufacturing
machines. Focusing on three engineering design and manufacturing courses, this
proposal will replace traditional computer-aided design activities with virtual
reality-based educational approaches. The project team will conduct a research
study to analyze how the virtual reality approaches affect students’ ability to
interpret intricate designs and complex additive manufacturing processes. It
will also examine how the virtual reality approach affects students’ ability to
apply process-specific design considerations in different engineering contexts.
It is expected that the virtual reality approaches will improve students’
learning and better prepare them for success in the additive manufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to determine
how an immersive virtual build environment affects a student’s cognitive load
when learning design- and process-centric additive manufacturing concepts. The
intellectual deliverables will be (i) identification of learning differences
when using virtual reality to understand different additive manufacturing
process types (e.g., desktop material extrusion; industrial powder-bed fusion),
(ii) quantitative evidence of the impact of virtual reality on student cognitive
load during additive manufacturing design evaluation, and (iii) understanding
the viability of integrating virtual reality into a student’s engineering design
process to support process-specific advanced manufacturing education. These
deliverables will be produced through empirical studies conducted with more than
600 upper-level undergraduate engineering design and manufacturing students. To
ensure robustness of the educational findings, formative and summative feedback
will be provided throughout the project in partnership with the Pennsylvania
State Leonhard Center for Enhancement of Engineering Education. The educational
findings will be disseminated nationally through partnership with America Makes
along with Penn State’s 24 campuses located throughout the commonwealth. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.