* 2021575
* I-Corps:  Effective software tool for reducing recreational boating accidents and  fatalities
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Ernest Marshburn, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a mobile software application (mobile app) for recreational boat
operators mobile phones intended to reduce recreational boating accidents and
fatalities. Such accidents result from three interrelated factors: the boat
operator, the vessel, and the environment. This mobile app uses crowdsourcing
data (directly from recreational boat operators) to provide boat operators with
enhanced situational awareness when on the water; e.g., access to high
resolution National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) charts, social
connectivity, integrated tide/current data, automated float plan/tracking
monitored by trusted friends or relatives, rapid access to emergency services,
etc. The commercial pathway of this app is focused on providing the basic mobile
app and related safety tools to the recreational boating public for free but
offering more advanced (customer requested) features such as social connectivity
and group tracking for an additional fee. A second commercial pathway for this
application is focused on (de-identified) data gathering of recreational boater
on-the-water patterns and behavior. These data have particular significance
within the marine insurance industry for actuarial reasons and also have
commercial potential within the commercial boating industry as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
current, sustainable, comprehensive, authoritative, non-accident based
recreational boater data that is critical to the geospatial analytics needed to
refine and better understand the nature and causality of recreational boat
accidents. The proposed mobile app is based on a formula where the space-time
array of accidents relates to a space-time function of human, technological, and
environmental factors. The primary technical hurdle is to develop a mobile app
in a way that will be adopted broadly by recreational boaters and will thus
facilitate the effective collection of real-time, crowdsourced data. This mobile
app is intended to bridge the data gap between the scarcity of data currently
available and the boating accident formula and in so doing more closely address
the challenge of state and federal boating regulatory agencies; i.e., to reduce
recreational boating accidents and fatalities. To accomplish this, a more
optimal means of recreational boating data collection is required to better
understand the underlying nature of accident causality. This mobile application
is designed to enable that data collection, to enhance recreational boat
operator safety (situational awareness), to reduce recreational boating
accidents, and to save lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.