* 2021151
* RCN: Accelerating development and expansion of a diverse environmental data science community and research agenda
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Benjamin Halpern, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2026
* USD 499,871.00

Environmental science is becoming increasingly complex, requiring trans-
disciplinary, data-driven approaches to address pressing research questions. New
approaches to environmental science are needed, ones that rely on open,
transparent, and reproducible data science methodologies and that prioritize
diverse ways of problem solving. As the data science community continues to grow
and develop more advanced, user-friendly methodologies for creating reproducible
science, synergies are emerging between the data science and environmental
science communities. While these synergies have developed organically within
specific projects and institutions, there has yet to be a concerted, trans-
disciplinary effort to create a shared space and research agenda to unite this
burgeoning Environmental Data Science (EDS) community and accelerate their work
together. This Research Coordination Network will lay a foundation for a more
cohesive and collaborative EDS community that reaches beyond disciplinary
boundaries and establishes a common set of research principles and practices to
lead this field into the future. Annual Summits provide an excellent forum to
bring this nascent research community together to discuss current challenges and
opportunities, share cutting edge methodologies, and coalesce on new research
directions. These Summits will be a hub for the EDS community and an incubator
for new ideas and breakthroughs for years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS) communication team
will work to reach a broad and diverse audience with social media, blog posts,
and webinars. Any data and publications associated with the network will be made
freely available through open-access portals, following a long commitment at
NCEAS to open science. To allow for the greatest possible audience engagement
with the annual summits, virtual attendance during keynote presentations,
plenary presentations, and plenary discussions will be available and encouraged
via live stream, and recordings of all keynote addresses will be made available
on a dedicated EDS Community YouTube Channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.