* 2021110
* Understanding the Impacts of Departmental Action Teams on Sustainable Departmental Culture Change and on Undergraduate Student Experiences, Success, and Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joel Corbo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,986.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by extending the analysis of a
model of cultural and curricular improvements in STEM departments, with a
particular focus on sustaining change. Efforts to transform undergraduate
education often fail to have lasting impacts. These change efforts have been
criticized by organizational change researchers for ignoring the influence of
culture. The Departmental Action Team (DAT) model provides processes for
effecting change in undergraduate education by supporting departmental teams
through external facilitation. These teams include students, staff, and faculty
who collaborate to improve their undergraduate program and develop their skills
as change agents. This DAT model is guided by six Core Principles that describe
an ideal departmental culture that supports long-term sustainable change. The
principles include diversity and inclusion, involving students as partners,
collaboration, data-driven decisions, and continuous change. The DAT project has
supported 17 DATs across two campuses, which have initiated positive, sustained
improvements in undergraduate education. More than half of these groups carried
on after DAT project facilitation concluded. This project will examine the long-
term impacts of these DATs and how departmental members sustain them.
Additionally, the impacts on students in DAT departments will be investigated
for potential correlations between cultural change that impacts students over
the short term and later changes in student success measures. Studies of
cultural change require a considerable time frame to research fully. This
research is especially timely because it is now possible to study the long-term
impacts on student success (eg., time to degree) of DATs that were formed in
2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods approach will be used for data
collection and analysis. Data will include responses to the existing
Departmental Education and Leadership Transformation Assessment (DELTA) Survey,
interviews with department members, artifacts from the DATs and their
departments (e.g., meeting minutes, department policy statements), and
institutional data. These data will be used to identify outcomes that are
necessary for a department to develop a culture that supports sustained
improvements in undergraduate education. Hypotheses about these outcomes
comprise the third stage of the DAT theory of change. (The first two stages were
refined as part of a previous study). Qualitative data analyses will allow
testing and refinement of this stage. This work will contribute a detailed
theory-based resource for enacting departmental change in undergraduate
education. Three different approaches will be used to focus specifically on
impacts DATs have on students. A student version of the DELTA Survey will be
developed to collect studentsâ€™ perceptions of departmental culture and change.
Additionally, the Civitas Impact tool will be used to quantitatively test
hypotheses about potential long-term impacts of DATs on student persistence.
Lastly, by triangulating among data sources, correlations between DAT activities
and changes that strongly impact and are sustained in departments will be
examined. This mixed methods analysis is designed to relate short-term measures
of student experiences with the specific cultural changes that are predictive of
increased student success. Such information could be beneficial since it does
not require long term student metrics such as time to degree. Overall, this work
aims to contribute ways to measure cultural change among students in a
department, examine the relationships between short-term change impacts and
long-term student success, and yield better understanding of how change can be
sustained and catalyzed long after a grant-funded initiative has ended. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.