* 2021307
* Collaborative Research:  A Study of Socio-metacognition, Emotions, and Power Dynamics When Undergraduate Physics Students Engage in Collaborative Activities that Elicit Confusion
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Carolina Alvarado, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 202,827.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing understanding
about how students manage confusion during collaborative learning. Nationwide,
many research-based student-centered undergraduate physics courses use an
instructional framework of elicit, confront, resolve (ECR). In this framework,
students are presented with scenarios known to elicit confusion and are expected
to work together to resolve it. Some student groups successfully manage
confusion and sustain productive learning. However, other groups often become
derailed by the emotions that can accompany persistent confusion. To understand
how to better support students during collaborative learning, this study will
investigate how students work together to resolve confusion that arises while
engaging in ECR-based activities. This project will center on a physics course
for K-8 preservice teachers at two primarily undergraduate institutions, a
Predominantly White Institution and a Hispanic Serving Institution. Preservice
K-8 teachers are mostly female and have been overlooked and are underrepresented
in physics education research. Indeed, the dominant culture of physics is rooted
in whiteness and masculinity. This project will explore how the dominant culture
of a discipline, physics in this case, is perceived and negotiated when the
majority of the student population does not identify as the dominant group. By
linking socio-metacognition (planning, monitoring, and regulating to optimize
collaboration), emotions, and power dynamics, the project intends to identify
pathways by which students are either excluded or included in physics learning
communities. Knowledge developed through this project has the potential to
improve the efficacy and equity of collaborative, student-centered teaching
practices across STEM disciplines. The focus on future educators will increase
the potential impact, as these students will become teachers and shape the early
science experiences of young students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
adopt a theoretical framework in socio-metacognition developed by Borge and
colleagues. This framework will be refined by this project through incorporation
of power dynamics and emotions, noncognitive factors that play subsidiary roles
in the Borge framework. The specific research objectives of this project are to:
1) identify the socio-metacognitive patterns that emerge when students work
together on explicitly confusing physics learning tasks; 2) investigate how
students enact and negotiate power dynamics in such learning environments; and
3) assess the extent to which emotions impact student engagement in the presence
of persistent confusion. This project uses a mixed-methods approach to generate
rich case studies based on classroom observations, studentsâ€™ reported subjective
experiences, written reflections, and interviews. The case studies will link
socio-metacognition, emotions, and power dynamics to illuminate various pathways
through which students are either excluded or included in physics learning
communities. The project seeks to advance understanding of the social-emotional
processes that accompany collaborative activities that purposely elicit specific
learning difficulties. Project findings have the potential to inform the design
of instruction that supports maintained engagement in group-learning activities
in the presence of persistent confusion. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.