* 2021204
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Implementation of Proven Inclusivity Practices in Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* April Dukes, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 186,501.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping undergraduate
engineering faculty create more inclusive classrooms. It is a collaboration
between the University of Pittsburgh, Arizona State University, and Colorado
School of Mines. Inclusive teaching practices are known to support increases in
student learning and academic performance. However, faculty often struggle to
understand how to improve their curriculum, assessment, and instruction to be
more inclusive of all learners. This project aims to provide faculty with
specific, proven inclusive practices that they can adapt and implement in their
classrooms. It will also develop faculty learning communities to support them as
they make changes in their teaching. Finally, it will evaluate the impacts of
the newly implemented inclusive classroom practices on students and faculty.
Results of this project could be transformative for developing undergraduate
engineering students' STEM identities, particularly student from groups that are
not yet equitably represented in engineering. The project expects to ultimately
produce positive outcomes for engineering students, including higher graduation
rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supports the claim that inclusive
classrooms improve students' learning and academic performance, especially for
students from populations that are not equitably represented in STEM. This
project seeks to create a professional development initiative that will catalog
and encourage implementation of actionable practices for engineering faculty who
desire to create more inclusive classrooms. The project team will address two
research questions: (1) What are the most effective practices to promote an
inclusive engineering classroom? and (2) How do different learning communities
foster and support inclusive engineering classrooms? The research team will
develop a menu of inclusive classroom practices and a decision matrix to support
faculty prioritization of practices to implement in their classes. The team
intends to recruit faculty and develop and pilot inclusive classroom learning
communities, who will deploy inclusive classroom practices. The project
evaluation plan includes assessment of the effectiveness of the inclusive
classroom practices based on student and faculty feedback and other assessments.
The project will be disseminated through a curated online warehouse of
inclusivity practices for multiple engineering disciplines that will be shared
across the three universities and at other institutions, including across
diversity, equity, and inclusion networks. The implementation of inclusive
learning communities in different contexts will be examined to improve
understanding of the most effective ways to catalyze and support development of
inclusive classrooms. The results of the assessment will inform the academic
community and increase the research findings about effective modes of change.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional
and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform
and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.