* 2021625
* Accurate Linearization and Control of Non-linear Physical Systems using Increased Variables
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Haruhiko Asada, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 478,947.00

Advanced control systems, such as self-driving cars, autonomous robots, and bio-
reactors, exhibit complex behaviors, which do not follow simple proportional
rules and linear relationships. Control of those non-linear systems remains a
challenge for engineers in many industrial sectors. This research aims to reduce
a complex, nonlinear system to a linear system while retaining the original
nonlinear behaviors. Once converted to a linear system, control design becomes
easier and computational complexity significantly reduces. This advantageous
result is made possible by representing the system with more variables than we
usually use. While a traditional description using a limited number of variables
leads to non-linearity, this new method using more variables allows one to deal
with non-linearity in a linear domain. With this new method, challenging non-
linear control problems can be made tractable, and simple, and practical
solutions may be created for a broad class of control systems and
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to Koopman, an autonomous, nonlinear
dynamical system can be represented as a linear system in an infinite
dimensional space. The theory guarantees the exact linearization, but it is not
applicable to systems with active control inputs, and the number of variables
must be truncated to a finite dimensional system for practical use. Furthermore,
the original theory does not state how to find additional variables, called
observables, to represent a nonlinear system in the lifted space, where the
system behaves linearly. Here, we will establish a systematic way of finding
effective observables based on physical modeling theory, namely, Bond Graphs
modeling. Given the physical connectivity of system elements, a special class of
observables, called auxiliary variables, are defined. Two linear state
equations, one for state variables and the other for auxiliary variables,
represent the nonlinear dynamics in the lifted space. This is known as Dual-
Faceted (DF) Linearization. These auxiliary variables possess clear physical
meanings, and use of these auxiliary variables for linear feedback can better
inform the controller and outperforms its counterpart. If the auxiliary
variables, or part of them, are physically measurable, the linear model can be
identified through a data-driven sub-space method. The DF Linearization is
particularly useful for nonlinear Model Predictive Control (MPC), where the
linear model in the lifted space provides an accurate approximation over a
finite time horizon and reduces the original nonlinear MPC to a linear MPC. The
optimization problem becomes convex and the computation time drastically
reduces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.