* 2021207
* Collaborative Research: Co-evolution of Earth and life across the Proterozoic-Phanerozoic transition: Integrated perspectives from outcrop and drill core
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2025
* USD 328,321.00

The Ediacaran–Cambrian transition (~580–530 million years ago) represents one of
the most profound events in the history of life on Earth, marking the sudden
appearance and subsequent proliferation of all major animal groups in the fossil
record. This time interval also records significant environmental change in the
Earth system, including fluctuations in atmospheric oxygen concentrations and
rapid motion of the continents. A number of hypotheses have been proposed to
link the interactions between biotic and environmental change; however, a
detailed temporal record of this time period is currently underdeveloped, and
the interrelationships among changes to the marine, terrestrial, tectonic,
geodynamic, and biotic systems require integration of disparate datasets from a
wide spectrum of disciplines. This project assembles a diverse team of
scientists to test fundamental hypotheses regarding the Earth system at the dawn
of animal life by using a combination of outcrop and drill core studies to study
six key Ediacaran–Cambrian regions worldwide. Field and analytical results will
be combined with modelling studies to elucidate the co-evolution of life and
environment across the most iconic boundary in the geologic record. The proposed
study will integrate directly with established K-12 and university outreach
programs both domestically and internationally, and it will contribute a variety
of new educational materials to international online programs, museums, and
field displays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By generating a new temporal and
stratigraphic framework for the Ediacaran–Cambrian transition, this project will
test hypotheses related to the co-evolution of life and environment across the
most iconic boundary in the geologic record. The investigators propose to
generate collaborative field- and lab-based activities to integrate
sedimentological, geochemical, paleontological, geochronological, and
paleomagnetic records from six key Ediacaran–Cambrian sedimentary successions
worldwide. This project will also provide support to the ICDP-funded “Geological
Research through Integrated Neoproterozoic Drilling: The Ediacaran–Cambrian
Transition” (GRIND-ECT) project, which represents a one-time, community-wide
effort for Earth scientists to obtain unique Ediacaran–early Cambrian core
material. The extensive, continuous sampling throughout the Ediacaran and lower
Cambrian provided by the GRIND-ECT project, coupled with the proposed field
campaigns and modeling components, will provide a unique opportunity to advance
Ediacaran–Cambrian chronology and set the stage for a new generation of research
opportunities. Established K-12 and university outreach programs both
domestically and internationally will be supported, and new educational
materials to international online programs, museums, and field displays will be
prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.