* 2021419
* I-Corps:  Multi-Dimensional Electromagnetic Energy Convertor
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a three-dimensional electromagnetic energy convertor (EMEC) to
address the unmet need of many applications for high power output per occupied
area. EMEC reaches significantly higher power output than existing commercial
solar panels making the EMEC modules particularly suitable for transportation
applications. The reliance of the transportation industry on fossil fuels
contributes to ~15% of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. Electric vehicles
(EV) are emission-free, but usually rely on energy generated by fossil fuels for
charging. EV’s limited power storage capability and, therefore, limited
operational range, remains one of the main challenges to adoption. Solar
charging of EVs can increase the vehicles’ operational range while reducing
reliance on fossil fuels. Unfortunately, commercial solar panels do not meet the
transportation industry requirements because of their low power density and
prohibitively large form factor, but EMEC is likely suitable for this
application. EMEC has the potential to empower a more sustainable emissions-free
transportation industry. The I-Corps project will allow us to test these
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a three-dimensional electromagnetic energy convertor (EMEC) ideal
for applications that require high power output such as mobile transportation
systems and off-grid power generation. According to the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL), the overall cost of commercial solar panels has
declined steadily over the past decade thanks to manufacturing automation and
broad adoption. Since the power output of commercial solar panels is directly
proportional to their effective light collection area, current commercial solar
panels consist of large thin sheets of photovoltaic cells. This solution has
been accepted widely, particularly for installation in solar farms and single
home rooftops. However, these bulky solar panels have failed generally to
deliver enough energy for applications where space is limited, such as in urban
environments and transportation vehicles. Flexible solar panels are better for
mobile applications, but they also require large areas for energy collection.
The proposed technology uses a three-dimensional system whose power density is
significantly larger than that of existing commercial solar panels. The compact
and modular architecture of this system has the potential to increase the power
output and decrease the upfront costs associated with solar panel
installations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.