* 2021384
* Collaborative Research: Improving Undergraduate Education in Civil &amp; Building Engineering through Student-centric Cyber-Physical Systems and Real-world Problems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kook (Kevin) Han, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
engineering education. It will do so by integrating smartphone-based digital
visualization technology into Civil and Building Engineering curricula. The
project predicts that this addition will improve student engagement in the
engineering classroom. Education research shows that active learning increases
student motivation and learning . However, active learning experiences are
challenging to incorporate into civil and building engineering, because these
fields address problems that are large-scale or not available locally.
Additionally, students often view civil and building engineering negatively as
“low-tech,” making it more challenging to interest potential majors. This
project proposes a novel approach to increase enrollment, retention, and success
in civil and building engineering degree programs: the use of low-cost
technologies to enhance the student-learning experience. Specifically, real-
world problems in civil and building engineering will be brought into
undergraduate classrooms through interactive digital visualizations of civil and
building engineering systems. Students will be able to control the systems
through affordable sensing technologies, such as smartphones, cameras, and
Internet of Things sensors. The resulting educational tools, which the project
calls student-centric cyber-physical systems, are expected to promote active
learning as students interact with these systems in real-time. These tools will
also introduce students to innovative sensors for smart infrastructure, which
may stimulate additional interest and increase student recruitment and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through design-based implementation research,
this exploratory project will develop student-centric cyber-physical systems for
building science and structural analysis, and address the following questions:
1) How do students’ interest, motivation, and engagement vary? 2) How does
student-centric cyber-physical systems affect student ability to sense and
predict solutions to problems? 3) How does exposure to sensing technology and
data science aspects of student-centric cyber-physical systems affect students’
perceptions of civil and building engineering, particularly the low/high tech
nature of the field? The developed student-centric cyber-physical systems tools
will be tested and assessed at two large public research universities. The
project plans to generate theory to guide the transition for next-generation
student-centric cyber-physical systems tools across multiple STEM fields.
Lessons learned in the context of civil and building engineering can be shared
with other fields, potentially leading to a broad national impact. The student-
centric cyber-physical systems tools will also be used in outreach efforts at
K-12 public schools. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.