* 2021209
* Normalizing Computational Methods in the Undergraduate Physics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Gautam Vemuri, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2023
* USD 295,647.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by strengthening undergraduate
students' use of computational skills to solve problems. The traditional physics
curriculum trains students to think of using mathematical methods as the normal
way to solve physics problems. However, the proliferation of and advances in
computer hardware and software suggest that students who are trained to use
computers to solve problems may be able to tackle more difficult and
sophisticated problems than they can with mathematical methods alone. Ideally,
students should think of mathematical and computational methods as complementary
and make judicious use of both to solve problems. Since the traditional physics
curriculum already emphasizes mathematical methods, the goal of this project is
to train physics majors to use computers to solve physics problems and to think
of computational problem-solving as a normal way to approach problems, in the
same way students have traditionally been trained to view mathematical methods.
The field of physics should benefit from having students who see computation as
a natural way to solve problems, because these students will be confident about
tackling a wider range of problems. In addition, students who are trained to use
computers to solve scientific problems bring additional tools and understanding
to bear on tasks. As a result, they should find themselves well-prepared for
employment in business and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim
to get physics students to see computational methods as a normal way to approach
physics problems, instead of an unusual technique limited to narrowly defined
problems. By modifying physics courses to embed computational methods, the
investigators hypothesize that students will gain the confidence to use
computation routinely and will develop judgment as to which problems may be
solved analytically, which problems require numerical methods, and how the
interplay between these complementary techniques can be fruitful. To achieve
this vision, the investigators will infuse every course in the undergraduate
physics curriculum with computational methods. The primary work will include:
(1) developing, testing, and refining curricular materials used to incorporate
computational techniques throughout the curriculum; (2) developing, refining,
and validating assessment instruments used to measure students' affective and
cognitive development with respect to computational methods; and (3) conducting
research on students' development of self-efficacy in problem-solving as they
progress through the curriculum. The project will address the following research
questions: At what points in the curriculum do students gain self-efficacy with
respect to various computational skills? Do they gain confidence in their
analytical and computational skills at the same points, or independently? How
strongly is self-efficacy tied to grades and other external factors? This
project is funded by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR)
program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.