* 2021190
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Effectiveness of Practice Exams in Large Introductory Physics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jason Morphew, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2023
* USD 38,339.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students' success
in introductory STEM courses. For many college and university students,
"gateway" courses, such as introductory physics, present a roadblock to further
study in STEM fields. Every semester approximately 4,000 students take
introductory courses in the Department of Physics at the University of Illinois.
Most of the students are engineering majors, because physics is a required
course for all programs in the College of Engineering. Despite instructors' use
of evidence-based instructional methods such as online pre-lectures, active-
learning lectures, "just-in-time teaching," peer instruction, and collaborative
problem-solving in recitation sections, nearly 15 percent of students do not
pass the introductory courses. Most of these failing students actively
participate in class and exert substantial effort, but nevertheless receive low
grades on exams. When surveyed about the resources that they find most helpful
in learning the material, students cite practice exams with video solutions as
the highest-rated component of the course. Although considerable research shows
that practice exams can be an effective form of studying, the degree of
effectiveness depends on how the students engage with the exams. Indeed, simply
reviewing problems and solutions develops familiarity with the material to be
tested, but it does not often support the needed problem-solving ability.
Consequently, lower-performing students become overconfident in their problem-
solving ability and believe they are prepared to do well on exams, but instead
they receive failing grades. This project will investigate whether changing the
format of students' interactions with the practice exams, to encourage earlier
use and to provide a more accurate assessment of understanding, will result in
more effective studying behavior. If so, it may enable students to make a better
self-assessment of their readiness and increase performance on
exams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance knowledge in three
areas that are critical for improving the effectiveness of practice exams as a
learning resource, especially for underperforming students. First, it will
explore students' difficulty in assessing their level of understanding, also
known as the Dunning Kroeger effect, in STEM gateway courses. Although this
effect has been verified in a variety of situations, the investigators will not
only measure the size of the effect but also develop insights about whether
improving students' ability to assess their level of understanding improves
their performance (i.e., Is the correlation causal?). Second, the project will
explore the role that implementation has on how students interact with practice
exams and their effectiveness in helping students learn. In particular, the
investigators will attempt to measure the impact that providing students a more
realistic score on their practice exam has on the accuracy of their own
understanding of how well they know the material. Third, the project will
explore the impact that encouraging distributed practice can have on student
performance, as well as the effectiveness of a relatively simple approach to
encouraging that practice. In addition to guiding future education research, the
knowledge gained from this project should maximize the effectiveness of practice
exams for the at-risk students who need them most. At the University of Illinois
alone, the results of the research should improve learning for thousands of
students every year who hope to become engineers. However, the results should
transfer to introductory physics courses at other institutions and introductory
courses in other disciplines, thus magnifying the potential impact of this work.
This collaborative project involves investigators at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign (Award DUE-2021099) and Purdue University (Award
DUE-2021190). This project is funded by the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE: EHR) program, which supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.