* 2021299
* NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: Coupling Erosion, Weathering, and Hydrologic Function in an Active Orogenic System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Dimitrios Zekkos, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 425,195.00

Mountain ranges are some of the most spectacular features of the Earth’s
surface, but their importance extends far beyond their photogenic nature.
Mountains play critical roles in sustaining key natural resources, such as
supplying fresh water to large human populations. Mountainous regions are the
site of many destructive natural hazards, such as landslides and floods. In
addition, mountains are where fresh rocks are exposed to water and the
atmosphere, resulting in chemical reactions that can modify carbon dioxide and
climate over geologic time. These processes are all closely interconnected, yet
they have been largely studied in isolation. This project will examine the
physical and chemical transformation of rock together with the flow of water and
Earth materials within the scope of one integrated research endeavor. The
project will examine these processes in a valley in the Himalaya Mountains of
Nepal where topography changes from more subdued in the south to high mountains
in the north. Cutting-edge techniques for documenting the nature and rate of
landscape change will be applied to determine the role of mountains in the Earth
system. Models that illustrate how all these processes interact and the effects
they produce will be developed to forecast future changes and apply the results
to other regions. The research will involve training of multiple graduate and
undergraduate researchers and will involve collaboration among researchers from
four countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collisional boundaries between Earth’s
tectonic plates produce dramatic mountain ranges that generate destructive
natural hazards as well as chemical and physical exchanges that control the
surface environment. This project will comprise a multi-disciplinary
investigation of four interrelated problems: (1) how rock is transformed
physically and chemically during exhumation in tectonically-active mountains;
(2) how the steep mountainous topography of active orogens develops, and
particularly what the role is for landslides; (3) how water makes its way from
precipitation, through the subsurface, and into streams and rivers draining
active orogens; and (4) how chemical weathering depends on tectonic and climatic
conditions in these settings. The project will investigate the Melamchi Khola
valley in central Nepal, where a pronounced south-to-north gradient in
exhumation rate offers an ideal opportunity to document system-level
relationships among tectonics, topographic evolution, erosion, hydrology, and
chemical weathering in an archetypal setting of collisional tectonics. The
research will (1) characterize rock mass across scales from the micron to
kilometer, including via geophysical imaging, borehole drilling, and rock
testing; (2) quantify water transit times and chemical weathering reactions and
fluxes, via groundwater dating, stream and spring monitoring, and reactive
transport modeling; and (3) develop models of landscape evolution that account
for the interconnected processes that regulate landslides, which are the primary
vehicles for hillslope erosion in these settings. The project includes diverse
opportunities for student education, development of international collaboration.
A summer school for early-career researchers will expand the educational reach,
and a short course on active source seismology will be held in Kathmandu to
broaden the training opportunities for Nepali
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.