* 2022709
* International Conference on Quantitative Ethnography
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Eric Hamilton, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This project was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 19-508. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. ECR supports projects that help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference, to be held at the Pepperdine University
campus, will build the capacity of NSF-supported communities to benefit from the
highly promising research methodology of quantitative ethnography (QE). This
training workshop for young scholars, embedded in conference, supports the goals
of the ECR program by developing a community of early career researchers to
carefully use quantitative ethnography in the conduct of basic STEM education
research. These scholars will be prepared to examine and empirically test new
theory consistent with the central goals of the ECR program. The funding will
support: a) attendance and training at an international conference on QE for
doctoral and early career researchers to be held in the U.S., b) a technical
immersion preconference workshop that several of participating researchers would
lead for these young scholars, and c) a broader slate of symposium speakers who
represent NSF supported disciplines that QE methods can benefit
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the conference
arises both from the appeal or promise of QE across numerous fields. The
proposed activities are organized around broadening the impact of QEâ€™s
intellectual merit across new disciplines. The project maintains a consistent
emphasis on furnishing next-generation researchers with conceptual and software
tools and methodology to address important current and future questions across
the spectrum of fields NSF supports in social sciences, basic STEM education
research, and the learning sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.