* 2022492
* Element Partitioning in Earth's Deep Magma Ocean
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 538,463.00

Energetic giant impacts such as the Moon-forming impact would lead to a global
magma ocean on Earth in its early history. The heavy metallic materials would
separate from the molten silicate mantle in the Earth’s deep magma ocean to form
the metallic core. The process leaves a distinct mantle chemical signature and
defines the core chemical composition. With development of high-temperature and
high-pressure techniques combined with analytical tools, the team will simulate
the conditions of the deep magma ocean in the laboratory and determine the
distribution of elements during the metal-silicate separation. The project will
produce unprecedented high-quality metal-silicate element partitioning data that
are necessary for understanding the chemistry and evolution of our planet and
lead to new frontiers for cutting-edge research. The program provides training
for young scientists in interdisciplinary research areas and develops new
experimental techniques that will benefit a broad Solid Earth community. The
results will be disseminated broadly to advance science in geochemistry and
promote general understanding of Earth science in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is aimed at determining the element
partitioning between liquid silicate and metal by using the newly developed
large sintered-diamond cube assembly in the multi-anvil press and improved
laser-heated diamond-anvil-cell sample configuration combined with state-of-the-
art sample recovery and analytical tools. Specific projects include (1)
determining potassium partitioning between liquid metal and silicate to quantify
the radioactive energy contribution to the core in the deep magma ocean
scenario, and (2) establishing the effect of pressure, temperature, and
composition on the silicon and oxygen partition coefficients. The experiments
will provide new partitioning data for potassium, silicon, and oxygen to be used
to quantify the heat budget and the amounts of light elements sequestered into
the core. The proposed work will significantly advance our knowledge of Earth’s
deep processes and experimental techniques to investigate the composition of the
Earth’s deep interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.