* 2022398
* Collaborative Research: A Stacked Plasmonic Nanopore for Tether-Free Stretching and Label-Free Sensing of hSTf Dynamics and Complex Formation at Ultra-Low Concentrations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Georgios Alexandrakis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 263,599.00

Fundamental knowledge of protein structures and their dynamic responses to
stimuli or other molecules is important for many applications, including medical
diagnosis and therapy. This research aims to develop a highly sensitive approach
for studying the human serum transferrin protein (hSTf), which is a vital iron
carrier in blood and of clinical importance. The sensing technique would allow
differentiation of the free hSTf protein from the iron-bound protein and
evaluation of iron deficiency or iron overload from very small blood samples.
Successful development of this sensor would also enable profiling of a wide
range of other proteins and biological molecules, e.g., DNA. This project offers
excellent opportunities for interdisciplinary research training as it combines
biochemistry, nanoengineering, photonics, and electrical engineering. The
outreach efforts to K-12 schools through various programs at the Southern
Methodist University and the University of Texas at Arlington help to inspire
more students to pursue science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stacked plasmonic nanosensor is based on the
self-induced back-action (SIBA) actuated nanopore electrophoresis (SANE) sensing
concept. The stacked nanopores are uniquely designed to enable 1) controlled
trapping, releasing, and recapturing of proteins or the substrate-bound protein
complexes, 2) transient deformation of the biological molecules, which can be
induced by thermal effect or a combination of optical and electrical techniques,
and 3) study of their deformation dynamics. The SANE concept implemented in the
stacked nanopore sensor allows investigation of protein interactions at
concentrations 1000-fold below the equilibrium dissociation constant in bulk
solution, making this technique ultra-sensitive. An important aim of this
research is the study of the properties of free-hSTf protein and the iron-bound
protein complex using the SANE sensor. Optical signature profiles are
established for each of the species to enable selective admission of bound
complexes over unbound proteins in a mixed solution to the underlying pore. It
uses symmetric (VCapture = VRecapture), followed by asymmetric (VCapture â‰ 
VRecapture) voltage conditions to facilitate the investigation of the strength
and kinetic parameters associated with protein-substrate binding, protein
relaxation times, and whether voltage-induced protein unfolding is reversible or
not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.