* 2022572
* Neural dynamics underlying working memory maintenance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Shomstein, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 723,275.00

Working memory, the ability to maintain information in mind even when that
information is no longer perceptually available, is a fundamental cognitive
ability. The mechanism allows us to efficiently apply prior knowledge to the
processing of the current context; enabling complex decision-making and guiding
attention towards the most relevant features of the environment. While the link
between visual working memory (VWM) and attention is well studied, its direct
relation to perceptual processing is relatively less clear. This project will
leverage the known properties of the neural substrate that supports VWM, to
investigate the interaction between what is held in mind and how the mind
interprets visual stimuli. The project will identify the time course of this
interaction, to understand how content maintained in VWM decays over time.
Neural stimulation will then characterize the causal contribution, of cortical
areas which support perception, to the maintenance of information in working
memory. A better understanding of the mechanisms underlying VWM can inform the
design of interactive displays (car dashboards and air traffic controls, for
example), and can improve training for numerous professions (such as airport
baggage screeners and radiologists).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
neurophysiological findings, showing that VWM recruits sensorimotor cortical
areas, afford a unique opportunity to generate behavioral predictions about this
complex and critical cognitive process. This proposal leverages the known
neurophysiological properties of sensorimotor areas (such as tuning curves and
retinotopy) to generate behavioral predictions about VWM maintenance. First, if
the same circuits are utilized by VWM and perception, then each process should
interfere with the other. Further, the strength of these effects should scale
with the similarity between the maintained and current stimulus, dependent on
known visual tuning properties (such as orientation, motion direction, and face
spaces). Second, maintained information should decay over time, having less of
an effect on perception and becoming more prone to interference, which
challenges some models of VWM. Third, initiation and maintenance of VWM depends
on dynamics between prefrontal and perceptual cortices. Transcranial magnetic
stimulation will be used to investigate the causal interaction between
prefrontal and perceptual areas. The proposed research will provide novel,
causal, and fundamental insights into how the brain enables and constrains
VWM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.