* 2022065
* URoL: Epigenetics 2: Profiling and functional dissection of the epitranscriptome in archaeal extremophiles
* BIO,EF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Todd Lowe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

Chemical modifications to RNA molecules, which produce the so-called
epitranscriptome, are prevalent in all forms of life. The functions of RNA
modifications are yet unclear, although some modifications are thought to
control the stability of the RNA. The goal of this project is to establish the
patterns and functions of chemical modifications to protein-coding messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) in the Archaea. This is especially important for Archaea, which
thrive under extreme conditions - temperature, salinity, pressure, or pH - that
are destabilizing for RNAs of most life forms. By studying mRNA modifications
from Archaea in comparison to other organisms, this research is expected to
establish Rules of mRNA Modification that will contribute to better
understanding of the functional importance of this evolutionarily conserved
process. The research results will be documented in a new web-based platform,
called the mRNA Modification Database. This database will serve the broader RNA
research community, STEM researchers, and the public. This research will be
conducted by an interdisciplinary team involving researchers from academic,
government, and industry labs, which will offer students the opportunity to
engage in collaborative research across different professional settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to expand understanding of the rules
for establishment and function of the epitranscriptome in Archaea. A combination
of unbiased techniques and genome-scale mapping methods will be used to
identify, map, and compare the totality of ribonucleoside modifications present
in a diverse range of extremophilic Archaea. Changes to the epitranscriptome due
to environmental insults and specific genetic alterations will be determined. In
parallel, experiments will be conducted to identify and characterize a suite of
archaeal enzymes responsible for generating the archaeal epitranscriptome. A key
aim is to establish the targeting sequences that result in site- and
modification-specific alterations of select mRNAs. The rules of mRNA selection
and targeting by each enzyme will be iteratively tested in vitro and then in
vivo. Datasets, together with mapping techniques, mass spectrometry standards,
and chemical and enzymatic characterizations of RNA modification enzymes, will
be catalogued in a web-based mRNA Modification Database, which will be serve as
a research and public resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
the Understanding the Rules of Life: Epigenetics Program, administered as part
of NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences. Co-funding is provided by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Directorate
for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.