* 2022184
* RUI: Collaborative: Cycling of ethanol and acetaldehyde in coastal waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Catherine Clark, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 151,339.00

Ethanol is added to gasoline to increase octane levels and lower the
concentrations of carbon monoxide and surface ozone in the atmosphere. As a
renewable fuel, ethanol may also help decrease our dependence on gasoline.
Increased use of ethanol in the United States and globally as a fossil fuel
substitute and additive is expected to increase ethanol levels in the
atmosphere. Atmospheric ethanol is converted to acetaldehyde which is a
hazardous pollutant. To understand the impact of increasing ethanol usage, it is
important to understand the cycling of ethanol and acetaldehyde in the
environment--how they are produced, consumed, and interconverted. Because these
compounds can cross from air into water, this requires understanding what
happens to these compounds in both the atmosphere and in seawater and other
surface waters. This proposal focuses on improving our understanding of
processes that produce and consume ethanol and acetaldehyde in coastal seawater
and other coastal surface waters like estuaries and salt marshes. This project
will measure the rates of photochemical production of ethanol and acetaldehyde,
as well as their chemical and biological degradation rates. The project will
also measure the rate and efficiency of the biological production of
acetaldehyde from ethanol by microbial organisms in these waters. The scientists
have an excellent track record of involving undergraduate students, including
underrepresented minorities, in their research and as co-authors on
publications, a trend they plan to continue with this project. These students
would be trained in analytical chemistry and environmental research and would
present their research findings at local and national conferences. Lastly, the
PIs also plan outreach activities with high school STEM programs to improve
student diversity in environmental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
sink for ethanol in the troposphere is reaction with OH to produce acetaldehyde.
Acetaldehyde levels in the troposphere are also expected to increase with
increased use of ethanol. Changes in the atmospheric concentrations of these
species are expected to have a significant impact on the oxidative capacity of
the troposphere. To understand future impacts, it is important to understand
current tropospheric budgets which have significant uncertainties for both
species. One of the largest sources of uncertainty is the role of the oceans and
surface waters in cycling these species into and out of the troposphere. The
current understanding is limited by the very small database of ambient
concentration measurements in both air and water and an incomplete insight into
the processes that control concentrations in seawater and surface waters; these
processes represent a complex interplay between biological and photochemical
sources and sinks, and air-water exchange. To improve the current understanding
of the cycling of ethanol and acetaldehyde in coastal seawater and surface
waters, this project will measure: 1) chemical and biological degradation rates
of ethanol and acetaldehyde in coastal waters; 2) the rate and efficiency of the
biological production of acetaldehyde from ethanol by microbial organisms; 3)
ethanol and acetaldehyde concentrations in air and surface waters; 4) the
ethanol and acetaldehyde source strength of estuary and saltmarsh sediments; and
5) ethanol and acetaldehyde photochemical production rates in surface
waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.