* 2022918
* CSBR: Transfer of Ownership: Proposal to salvage, integrate and house the LFCC herbarium at George Mason University.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* James Lawrey, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 209,071.00

This research will salvage and restore a biological research collection critical
to understanding the southeastern US flora, make data of this collection widely
accessible to researchers, and engage the next-generation of biodiversity
scientists. The 20,000 specimen collection, the Lord Fairfax Community College
herbarium (LFCC), deeply documents vascular plant species from a historically
under-collected US region, the Blue Ridge physiographic province of northwestern
Virginia. In 2019, Lord Fairfax Community College donated LFCC to the George
Mason University herbarium (GMUF) to safeguard the collection for posterity.
LFCC contains numerous high-quality specimens that represent newly discovered
county- and state records that expand the Atlas of the Virginia Flora and the
Flora of Virginia. Such information is essential for understanding the ecology
and evolution of the southeastern US flora and for managing natural resources in
one of the nation’s biodiversity hotspots, which is under increasing strain from
human modification. This research will ensure that LFCC receives the repair and
modern curation it desperately needs in order to be fully utilized as research
infrastructure. The combination of LFCC and GMUF will create the third-largest
herbarium in Virginia. The co-location of these significant research materials
will increase their impact on biodiversity and ecological studies in Virginia
and the southeastern US for the foreseeable future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will use an efficient workflow to salvage LFCC and its detailed
collection notebooks, digitize these data to share with the scientific community
and the public at large, and educate students about the importance of natural
history collections in scientific research. LFCC specimens will be repaired,
annotated, and physically filed with those of GMUF under archival conditions.
High-resolution images of LFCC specimens and their label metadata will be
disseminated publicly through the SERNEC TCN Symbiota LFCC portal and iDigBio.
In order to extend the impact of this research resource, the LFCC collection
notebooks will also be digitized and linked to specimen records. Undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups and one graduate student will be trained
as curatorial assistants over the two-year project period. Project personnel
will develop an educational module using LFCC specimens, whose goals are to
develop undergraduate students’ awareness of collections’-based research and the
extended specimen concept. Multiple outreach events are planned that will engage
the broader university community and the public through the Notes from Nature
online community science platform using the established Plants of Virginia
herbarium label transcription project. A series of public presentations and
articles about the results of the project are planned for academic and non-
academic audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.