* 2022461
* Modeling the Ocean Distribution of Neodymium Isotopes: Testing the Bottom-Up Hypothesis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 599,881.00

Neodymium (Nd) isotopes have been proposed as a tracer of past ocean
circulation; however, the processes that determine the distribution of Nd
isotopes in the modern ocean are still not well understood. Previous work has
assumed Nd is exchanged between the water column and sediments in shallow parts
of the ocean near continents, but models applying this process have difficulties
reproducing observed distributions of Nd isotopes. This study will use a
computer model to test a new idea: the bottom-up hypothesis, which suggests
input of Nd from deep sea sediments to the water column everywhere in the ocean,
including the deep abyssal plains far away from continents. Simulations of the
ocean during the last ice age will be performed to explore the physical and
chemical impacts from changes in ocean circulation at this time. This study may
transform our ability to reconstruct deep circulation in past oceans, which is
important to better understand cycling of carbon and other biologically and
climatically important elements. The PIs plan to publish a paper with the model
description, user manual, and code, as well as hold webinars for existing user
of the model and potentially new users from the GEOTRACES community. The project
would include the participation of Dr. Du, an international collaborator. One
graduate student and one undergraduate student would be supported and trained as
part of this project. The students would be trained in analytical techniques and
modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neodymium (Nd) isotopes will be implemented in
an established global three-dimensional model of ocean circulation and
biogeochemistry. Structurally different model versions will be generated to
explore the roles of scavenging, boundary exchange and benthic flux on dissolved
and particulate Nd isotope distributions. New measurements of surface sediment
Nd isotopes will fill gaps in the existing database, which will be used to model
the isotopic composition of the benthic flux. Models will be comprehensively
evaluated with GEOTRACES observations to test the hypothesis that a ubiquitous
flux of Nd along the sea floor is the dominant source of Nd in the water column.
Previous studies assume exchange only along upper ocean margins and conservative
behavior in the interior, which suggests Nd isotopes are a water mass tracer
without rate information. In contrast, the benthic flux hypothesis implies
abyssal flow rate to be an important influence on Nd isotopes. This suggests
that Nd isotope measurements from sediments could be used to infer rates of
bottom water flow and the abyssal overturning circulation rate. Simulations of
the Last Glacial Maximum (~20,000 years ago) ocean will test this idea and
evaluate the ability to use Nd isotopes to reconstruct abyssal
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.