* 2022289
* NNA Track 2: Exploring the potential of digital education frameworks to build understanding of socioecological impacts of Alaskan environmental change
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Bill Shribman, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2023
* USD 248,225.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment and social systems, addresses
important societal challenges, builds significant educational opportunities, and
engages local and Indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Arctic
warms, social and environmental changes threaten the Arctic, its inhabitants,
and their ways of life. Mitigating the effects of these changes must include
educating young people about the complex interactions involved since their
generation will experience the growing impacts over time. Many science concepts,
such as rising temperatures and carbon dioxide levels, are challenging to teach
and understand because they are literally invisible, while their effects, such
as salmon killed by the heat stress of warming water, are all too visible. This
project is exploring effective ways to teach challenging issues of social and
environmental change, and potential mitigation solutions, through interactive
educational game play with embedded assessments that are evidence-based and
culturally responsive, rooted in Alaska Indigenous knowledge and values. The
ultimate goal of the project is to use the findings from this exploratory
research to develop and assess the educational potential of an interactive STEM
simulation framework for students in Alaska, the Arctic, and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WGBH Educational Foundation, in partnership with the
University of Fairbanks Alaska; National Center for Research on Evaluation,
Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST) at UCLA; and Raven’s Group, a
consultancy; will lead an inclusive and meaningful research process towards
designing an engaging and effective educational STEM simulation framework. The
team will join together educators, game designers, researchers, Alaskan
Indigenous and non-Indigenous families, and community centers in brainstorming
sessions, interviews, focus groups, mechanics testing, and culturally responsive
assessment development. Through this formative work, the team will develop the
framework’s content, learning goals, and standards-aligned curriculum along with
embedded assessments designed to scaffold students’ progress and demonstrate how
well the students have reached the learning goals of the
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.