* 2022652
* Probing the Electrochemical Interface with Operando Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Juchen Guo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,712.00

Next generation Li-ion batteries with higher energy densities, better safety
characteristics, lower cost and longer cycle life holds enormous potential for
electric transportation, renewable energy storage and emerging techniques such
as the Internet of Things (IoT). One technical barrier to the continued
improvement of battery performance is the insufficient understanding of the
electrolyte decomposition and deposition on the electrode surface. This stems
from a lack of chemical analysis tools to monitor the molecular interactions at
the electrolyte/electrode interface during the reaction. In this project, the
investigators will develop a high-performance platform to probe in real-time the
evolution of chemical signatures at electrolyte/electrode interface. The new
technology will be used to investigate the interface reaction mechanism of
promising new electrode materials for safer, lighter and higher capacity Li-ion
batteries. It will also benefit other chemical and electrochemical systems where
real-time chemical analysis is crucial in elucidating reaction mechanisms and
improving performance. Furthermore, the project team will engage the
historically underrepresented Inland Empire community in educational and
outreach activities aiming at increasing diversity in science and engineering
higher education, which accompanies NSF Strategic Plan for 2018-2022 by
preparing and engaging a diverse U.S. STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goal of this project is to develop a stable and high-performance
electrochemical operando surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) technique to
study the electrochemical interfaces in next-generation lithium-ion (Li-ion)
rechargeable batteries. The proposed technique will address the critical needs
for operando spectroscopic tools to understand the interfacial reactions at the
electrolyte/electrode interface and the formation mechanism of interfacial
species. The PIs will employ a unique design of large-area close-packed films of
(electro)chemically-robust Ag@Au epitaxial core-shell nanocubes (NC) as the SERS
substrate, that offers for high, homogeneous and stable signal enhancement for
operando chemical analysis of electrochemical interfaces. Two major task are
planned: (1) synthesize and assemble the Ag@Au epitaxial core-shell nanocubes
for large-area high-enhancement SERS substrates, and validate/optimize the
operando SERS platform by investigating the carbon/electrolyte interface with
known interfacial compounds; and (2) apply the optimized operando SERS platform
to study the electrode/electrolyte interfaces of two novel electrode materials
including sulfur and silicon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.