* 2022964
* GP-IN:  SOARING: Sharing Opportunities, Approaches, and Resources in New Geo-teaching
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Shawn Keshmiri, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 339,573.00

The Rural Education Center (REC) at Kansas State University and the Center for
Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS) at the University of Kansas will develop
project SOARING: Sharing Opportunities, Approaches, and Resources in New Geo-
teaching. The primary goal of Project SOARING is to provide training for
secondary (middle and high school) teachers and students on the latest
geotechnology for the purpose of increasing students’ desire to pursue
geoscience degrees and careers. Specifically, the PIs target geotechnology
applications of airborne remote sensing for geological applications. The PIs
have partnered with nine school districts in which they have ongoing
partnerships and that represent a diverse group of rural schools across central
and western Kansas. Most of these schools have significant underrepresented
populations, particularly Hispanic/Latinx populations. The KSU REC will be the
lead organization, facilitating most of the grant, recruiting the teachers and
students to participate in the project activities, providing support to teachers
when they are in their classrooms and connecting teachers with the KSU Summer
STEM Institute (SSI). The CReSIS at KU will provide content in the geosciences,
resources, and instruction regarding the geoscience technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented groups in rural communities face multiple
barriers to geoscience careers in comparison to their classmates in urban and
suburban schools. With these purposes in mind, the objectives of Project SOARING
are to: 1) train rural teachers to engage rural secondary students in
geosciences activities and geotechnology; 2) to expose diverse rural secondary
students to meaningful geoscience learning experiences; 3) build students’
skills and competency for geoscience degrees and careers; 4) increase the
students’ desire to pursue degrees and geoscience-related careers. Rural
teachers and their diverse rural students were chosen for this grant because: 1)
many rural schools face teacher vacancies in all STEM related fields; 2) rural
students typically score lower on STEM assessments; 3) few Earth Science classes
are taught in secondary schools, especially in rural schools. The proposal
outlines a series of approaches to engage twenty-seven secondary school teachers
(9 per year) and potentially over four thousand students with geotechnology and
resources. Additionally, the project will seek to recruit participation by
female students, Hispanic/Latinx and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.