* 2022843
* An Embedded Cytometer for Autonomous Platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,229,955.00

The photosynthetic microbes – the phytoplankton – generate about 50% of the
oxygen and organic matter produced on Earth each year and serve as the base of
marine food webs. Flow cytometers are essential oceanographic instruments that
rapidly and accurately measure the abundance, size and fluorescent
characteristics of individual phytoplankton cells. For example, flow cytometry
led to the discovery of Prochloroccocus, the most abundant photosynthetic
organism on Earth. However, thirty-seven years after the first description of a
flow cytometer designed specifically for the measurement of phytoplankton in the
field, the complexity of flow cytometry, and the multi-parametric data it
produces continues to be an obstacle to its evolution towards common use as an
oceanographic field instrument. PipeCyte is a miniature, low-power flow
cytometer instrument that was designed to perform autonomous measurements of
0.5-10 µm diameter phytoplankton while deployed on autonomous oceanographic
measurement platforms. In this first deployment project, the PipeCyte instrument
will be immersed at depths of up to 100 meters while tethered to a surface buoy.
A surface buoy is a low-cost platform that is simple to deploy from a research
vessel. In this project, several buoy deployed PipeCyte instruments will be
released in the open ocean to perform measurements of the phytoplankton
community at multiple depths. These measurements will provide an unprecedented
view of the relation between environmental features and phytoplankton
communities along the water column. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A previously developed
PipeCyte prototype will be iterated to reduce both size and power requirement
through a redesign and repackaging of the custom acquisition and control
circuitry. This new sub-20 watt PipeCyte V2 will be housed within a commercially
available pressure housing. After instrument calibration in the lab using
calibration microspheres and cultured phytoplankton, initial field testing of a
float-tethered instrument will be performed in the Puget Sound. Automated data
analysis methods previously developed in R for analysis of SeaFlow flow
cytometer data will be ported to the PipeCyte Labview based control software so
that the multi-parameter flow cytometer data can be reduced to phytoplankton
population counts in realtime. This reduced data set along with GPS fix will be
transmitted back to ship and shore by satellite modem. The proposed buoy-
deployed instrument will be powered by four 100 W-hr lithium batteries to yield
instrument on-time of approximately 50 hours per deployment. Final field testing
to demonstrate proof-of-concept will occur in the sub-tropic Pacific Ocean where
real-time counts of Prochlorococcus, Synechococcus and small eukaryotic
phytoplankton will be broadcast to the ship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.