* 2022495
* Isoprene emission from plants: An evolutionary balancing act
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Thomas Sharkey, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 11/30/2024
* USD 684,570.00

Many plants, especially trees, make a hydrocarbon called isoprene which is the
single biggest source of hydrocarbon emitted to the atmosphere. Atmospheric
hydrocarbons can have a significant effect on atmospheric pollution. On the
other hand, isoprene appears to give plants the ability to resist some stresses
such as rapid increases in temperature and ozone. Because only some trees make
isoprene it is believed that there is a fine balance between the advantages and
costs to plants to making it. This research specifically tests the benefits and
costs of isoprene emission from plants. This will provide information about the
utility of isoprene emission and help determine whether breeding and engineering
programs should target increasing or decreasing isoprene emission from crops.
Summer research internships for undergraduate students will train students in
modern plant research, help them identify their academic goals and prepare them
to join a future workforce that is diverse and globally competitive. Public
scientific literacy will be promoted by participation in “Fascination of Plants
Day” and the Michigan State University Science Festival, annual events organized
to inform the general public about science and its uses in everyday life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isoprene emission from plants is the biggest source of
volatile hydrocarbon in the atmosphere. It breaks down rapidly and, when there
are nitrogen oxides present, it can contribute to ozone, particulates, and
formaldehyde in the atmosphere. A comprehensive understanding of the role of
isoprene in plant function has not yet emerged. The evolution of the capacity
for isoprene emission is enigmatic, it appears to have evolved multiple times
and the capacity for isoprene emission also seems to have been lost many times.
The proposed work will systematically evaluate the evolution of the capacity for
isoprene emission in plants. The relatively frequent gain and loss of isoprene
emission and its scattered distribution among land plants indicate that the
trait is constantly in an evolutionary balancing act, enhancing plant resilience
and fitness but at some cost, thereby responding to varying evolutionary
constraints. Isoprene appears to help plants tolerate some types of high
temperature stress and oxidative damage. Temperature and oxidative stress
effects in the presence and absence of isoprene emission will be studied in
three species, Arabidopsis engineered to make isoprene, tobacco engineered to
make isoprene, and poplar engineered to stop making isoprene. In addition to
temperature and oxidative stress, salt stress, water stress, jasmonic acid
signaling, and necrotrophic pathogen resistance will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.