* 2022641
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Current and future Arctic community vulnerabilities to sea-ice change and economic expansion
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Laura Landrum, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Liam Frink
* 10/31/2023
* USD 49,687.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment and social systems, addresses
important societal challenges, and engages internationally and with local and
Indigenous communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic communities are
experiencing unprecedented transformation due to environmental changes and
expanding and intensifying economic development. For example, as the climate
warms, sea ice becomes thinner and less extensive, which enables the expansion
of global trade and more shipping traffic with larger ships. This project is
investigating the impacts of rapidly changing sea ice conditions on Arctic
communities, how these changes interact with social and economic threats, and
how the socio-economic and other contexts of the communities affect their
vulnerabilities to both. The perspective and concerns of Artic peoples are at
the core of this project, which brings together leaders of Indigenous
communities from across the Arctic region with Western scientists to explore
these issues at multiple scales. This project is identifying ways that
scientific products can better serve communal needs, and thus narrow the gap
between scientific projects and adaptation and resilience of Arctic communities.
An anticipated outcome is the consolidation of a research team of community
members, organizations, and academics to co-produce a research design to address
community needs in a rapidly changing Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
brings together the frameworks of Double Exposure and Contextual Vulnerability
to develop an analytical framework for understanding how the synergic effects of
rapidly changing climatic and non-climatic processes on Arctic communities are
mediated by socio-economic, biophysical, and political contexts. This research
is co-producing knowledge with coastal Indigenous communities in Alaska,
Greenland, and other regions on the current and future Arctic vulnerabilities to
sea-ice change to identify gaps and providing options by context as interpreted
and framed by community members. The work is generating analytical frameworks
and research designs for understanding the effects on and vulnerabilities of
communities to climatic and non-climatic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.