* 2022768
* Building Entrepreneurship and Economic Development at EPSCoR's Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Teresa Orok, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,512.00

This workshop grant by Alabama Agricultural &amp; Mechanical University and its
Center for Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Economic Development is aimed at
providing strategies and best practices to enhance research competitiveness and
economic development at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) by
strengthening STEM innovation capacity and capability. While HBCUs play an
important role in training black professionals, few are research-focused and
thus, few are engaged in innovation and entrepreneurial development. To address
this low level of entrepreneurship and innovation at HBCUs, the project aims to
engage 44 HBCUs across eight EPSCoR jurisdictions, along with the broader
academic and industry community working on STEM innovation entrepreneurship. The
project anticipates that employing HBCUs as a source of diverse entrepreneurial
innovators will provide a wider network of valuable resources, thereby enhancing
scientific and technological knowledge and increasing the national pipeline of
enabled, well-trained technology entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this workshop is to engage the current 44 HBCUs in eight EPSCOR
jurisdictions working on STEM innovation and entrepreneurship as well as the
broader academic and industry-related STEM community, to provide a platform for
discussion of best approaches, activities, and implementation strategies to
develop these campuses into high-performing resources of STEM innovation and
entrepreneurship. The focus of the workshop is to (1) create a platform for
building approaches for broadening participation, grounded in learning and
social science research, to develop and advance participation of HBCUs in the
nation's science and engineering innovation enterprise; (2) inform and engage
various stakeholders, including HBCUs, government, and industry, in building
diverse STEM communities of innovation and lead to promising strategies, models,
and technologies for broadening participation of HBCUs in the current innovation
and entrepreneurship space; and (3) deliver sustainable learning activities
designed to expand the development of entrepreneurship and social
entrepreneurship programs and courses at HBCUs that encourage innovation and
complement current EPSCoR investments and interest in broadening participation.
The intent of the workshop is to demonstrate novel and effective strategic
approaches for inclusiveness in science and engineering innovation that can be
adapted and replicated nationally by HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.