* 2022395
* Inequality in Global Scientific Research: Implications for Novelty and Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Charles Gomez, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 253,898.00

Researchers collaborate across national borders, scientists move abroad to
further their careers, and new discoveries are widely disseminated via journals
and conferences that are increasingly international in scope and locale. The
presumption held by policy makers and scientists is that globalization benefits
research and enhances knowledge production, especially for researchers in
countries with fewer resources. There is extensive research to suggest that
diversity of experiences and perspectives in scientists, specifically in
multidisciplinary collaborations, tends to yield better solutions in openly
collaborative problem-solving ventures. However, researchers may prematurely
coalesce on readily available, but perhaps suboptimal, solutions to their work,
as scientific knowledge—whether embodied by peer-reviewed journals or global
interpersonal networks—is more readily accessible in high volume and on demand.
Amplifying the influence of readily available knowledge is that only a few
countries are able to garner the resources needed to sustain cutting-edge
scientific research. Those countries that do may increasingly influence what is
topically important and implicitly set the agenda for scientific fields,
potentially homogenizing scientific discourse and stifling innovation. This
project aims to improve the rate of socially beneficial scientific discovery by
developing methods, indicators, and analytic approaches that identify fields
that may be less novel over time due to homogenization, as well as countries
that lag behind their peers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will model
scientific influence and novelty on a global level using innovative analysis
tools that integrate natural language processing and social network analysis.
Natural language processing uncovers influence and knowledge contained in the
medium of science at scale (i.e., the text found in academic publications),
while social network analysis structurally traces this influence between
countries and over time. The project has five key objectives: to 1) create
international networks of influence across diverse fields using the abstracts of
scientific publications, 2) apply network-based measures of inequality to these
networks to demonstrate trends over time in different fields and countries, 3)
apply novelty scores to countries in each of these fields, 4) relate measures of
growing inequality in international influence networks to novelty scores, and 5)
identify the fields and countries where this inequality in influence and the
rising or waning novelty is the most and least severe. The project’s guiding
hypothesis is that across a range of scientific fields, influence increasingly
originates from a smaller sect of highly developed countries. Their unequal
influence on science performed in other countries results in a homogenization of
what is researched around the world in many fields. As influence in a field is
increasingly concentrated and research topics become increasingly similar across
borders, the global novelty of ideas declines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.