* 2022842
* Collaborative Research:  Midlatitude Marine Heatwaves in a Changing Climate: Variability, Predictability, and Projections
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Frank Bryan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 75,709.00

Marine heatwaves (MHWs) are devastating periods of extreme sea surface
temperatures (SST) that disrupt marine ecosystems and the fishing industries
that rely on them. Their effects include increased economic tension between
nations and an unprecedented harmful algal bloom that threatened public health.
These events have been observed throughout the global ocean, with several large
scale persistent events occurring in the mid-latitudes over the last decade.
Climate model simulations suggest that under continued global warming we can
expect MHWs to become longer lasting, more frequent and intense, pushing
ecological systems beyond their thermal coping limit, leading to irreversible
impacts to the environment. While the satellite record of SST over the last 40
years allows characterization of past MHWs, the number of these devastating
midlatitude events is limited, making it difficult to assess how unusual the
events are. Event based analysis of the causes and consequences of individual
events has given insight into important processes that control these particular
events, but whether these processes remain important in the future is unclear.
This research will make use of an extensive set of existing model simulations,
including both different model configurations and ensembles or multiple
realizations of similar runs for better statistical convergence. The analysis
will yield insights into both the fidelity of the simulations in critical parts
of the ocean and the predictability of heat waves. The impacts of MHWs are
profound to both human and natural systems, and quantifying both the impact of
climate change on their properties as well as an examination of the
predictability of these events will ultimately help to mitigate and prepare for
potential impacts in the future. Two graduate students will be trained to use
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) analysis tools, as well as
work with NCAR scientists in developing new tools in Python for use in future
analyses of extreme ocean events. The research team will also work with the
Northwest Association of the Networked Ocean Observing Systems (NANOOS), hosted
at the University of Washington, and the North Carolina Nature Conservancy
office to write short articles about the results of this research. Results of
this research will also be incorporated into undergraduate courses in coastal
oceanography and climate at the University of Washington and the University of
Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of a suite of
model simulations performed using the CESM (Community Earth System Model)
including forced and coupled simulations at both low and high resolutions. An
assessment of statistics of MHWs will be performed using a 40-member large
ensemble of the climate from 1920 to 2100 allowing statistical robustness of
event characteristics. Additional analysis of high resolution forced and coupled
simulations will allow assessment of the fidelity of the representation of MHWs
in boundary current regions where large biases are known to exist in low
resolution simulation. In addition, a decadal prediction system using the same
model version as the large ensemble will allow exploration of the role of ocean
initialization in the predictability of these dangerous events. Typical analysis
of MHW properties has used pointwise metrics, or metrics defined as area
averages over fixed boxes. New integrated metrics for MHW characterization will
be created that allow for MHWs that change shape and position over time, and
will take into account heat stored below the surface. The role of climate
variability in controlling MHWs will be assessed using the large ensemble, while
comparison of high and low resolution models will allow for assessment of the
robustness of the results from low resolution models. The focus on midlatitude
events will include assessment of how ocean heat storage and re-emergence affect
properties of MHWs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.