* 2022129
* BII-Design:  Reintegrating Biology as a Key Component of Bioinspired Design
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Andrew Suarez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Imagine using microbe-killing materials, structurally similar to insect wings,
on hospital and kitchen surfaces. Or generating cheetah-level speeds and power
in robots as small as ants. Finding ways to apply natural principles to real-
world problems is the goal of bioinspired design. The objectives of this
proposal are to develop research, teaching and public engagement activities that
will form the basis for creating a future Institute for Bioinspired Design.
Specific goals include: 1. Describe and apply mechanical and material properties
seen in nature to engineering principles for real-world problems; 2. Develop an
educational model aimed at training interdisciplinary teams of scientists; and
3. Actively engage the public in all aspects of this work through public
seminars, videos, and the development of K-12 curricula. The field of
bioinspired design is highly interdisciplinary, and requires integrating
distinct expertise in engineering, materials science, chemistry and biology.
However, current training and educational models are often insufficient to
prepare the next generation of scientists to work seamlessly across disciplines.
This future Institute will serve as a home for interdisciplinary teams to come
together quickly and solve societal problems and grand challenges by using best
practices of bioinspired design while training the next generation of scientists
active in bioinspired design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioinspired design
involves using nature as a guide to inform technological innovation.
Successfully applying biological principles to innovative design requires
integrating across all biological scales: from molecular and cellular processes,
to whole organisms, and even ecosystems. The objective of this Design Proposal
is to develop research, teaching and outreach activities that will form the
basis for a future Implementation Proposal for creating an Institute for
Bioinspired Design. The creativity required to identify real-world applications
of biological analogs, or to recognize which problems can be successfully
tackled with biologically inspired solutions, necessitates meaningful
interdisciplinary exchange between those working across different disciplines
including biology, chemistry, physics, art, design, engineering and business.
For bioinspired design to be successful, we also need a novel educational model
to train diverse teams of researchers to work together effectively, and to
collaborate on creating original projects from discovery to design. The planned
future institute can address not only improvements and advances in bioinspired
design but can serve as a model of integrated biological research that moves
beyond biology to integrate with other disciplines facilitating both scientific
and societal advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.