* 2022994
* Collaborative Research FSML: PhytoChop: An estuarine phytoplankton observatory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Matthew Gray, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 228,316.00

Phytoplankton form the base of aquatic foodwebs and play a fundamental role in
the transformation of energy, carbon, and nutrients in aquatic ecosystems.
Phytoplankton biomass and species composition can fluctuate rapidly, with
ecological and even toxicological consequences, yet the factors that govern
these dynamics in coastal and estuarine environments remains poorly constrained.
This project establishes the PhytoChop Coastal Observatory, an autonomous
instrument array designed to continuously monitor the composition and
photosynthetic activity of the phytoplankton community. The observatory, located
at Horn Point Laboratory’s research pier situated on a tidal sub-estuary of
Chesapeake Bay, the Choptank River, will provide images and quantitative data
describing phytoplankton composition and activity on a public-facing data
portal. The project will provide data that will enable a deeper understanding of
the factors that govern phytoplankton dynamics at time scales ranging from
cellular division to seasonal succession and eventually to interannual scales.
Engagement with end-users will take several forms, including the development of
computer scripts for scientists, course modules for students, image libraries
for everyone including the general public, and an internship to specifically
engage with the oyster aquaculture community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to establish a state-of-the-art coastal observatory, PhytoChop,
to support research and education on the community composition and ecophysiology
of phytoplankton, including photosynthetic and mixotrophic protists and
cyanobacteria. The PhytoChop Coastal Observatory will be housed at Horn Point
Laboratory’s research pier drawing water from a mesohaline tidal sub-estuary of
Chesapeake Bay, the Choptank River. The observatory will provide high frequency
taxonomic and physiological data by combining an Imaging FlowCytobot (IFCB), a
Fast-Repetition Rate Fluorometer (FRRF), and instrumentation to measure
environmental parameters that constrain phytoplankton growth (temperature,
light, nutrients). Data collection frequency will enable examination of the
phytoplankton community from time scales spanning from cell division to seasonal
succession, and eventually to interannual scales. The data stream resulting from
the PhytoChop Coastal Observatory will be made publicly available in near-real
time to be readily available to the scientific community at
(https://hplmonitoring.umces.edu/). To help streamline data analysis in the
classroom and beyond, we will deposit scripts (R, Python) that import and query
PhytoChop Coastal Observatory data into a GitHub repository. Data resulting from
this project is anticipated to benefit a broad scientific audience including
phytoplankton ecologists and physiologists and coastal and estuarine ecosystem
ecologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.