* 2022471
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Hybrid Random Fiber Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ioannis Chasiotis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 351,368.00

This grant will support research and education on the mechanics of random
networks of polymeric filaments, which are reinforced with hard particles. Fiber
networks are the main structural component of many synthetic and natural
materials: polymeric or biological fibers and nanofibers with rigid inclusions
are omnipresent in biological tissues, tissue scaffolds, biomedical implants,
electrospun air filtration systems, cellulose products, etc. Most of these
fibrous systems form composites with embedded non-fibrous entities. While
continuum matrix composites have been studied extensively, the mechanics of
hybrid networks with a discrete matrix has received no attention to date,
despite the plethora of applications. The results of this research will
influence the design of a wide range of applications of fibrous networks, such
as non-wovens, gels, rubber, tissue scaffolds, cellulose products, etc. as well
as our understanding of the mechanical behavior of a wealth of biological
systems which are comprised of heterogeneous random networks. On the educational
front, a program geared towards high school, undergraduate and graduate students
with computational activities and hands on laboratory experiments will include
several aspects of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will (i)
establish structure-property relations of hybrid fiber networks, (ii) extend the
theory of composites with continuum matrices to composites in which the matrix
is a discrete fiber network, (iii) establish new methods to experimentally
investigate fibrous materials and their composites. The theory of continuum
matrix composites will be extended to hybrid materials in which the matrix is a
fiber network reinforced with particles or fibers of different properties from
those of the main network (matrix). Thereby, effective ways will be identified
to reinforce networks with small volume fractions of fillers, and concomitantly
improve dramatically on the composite stiffness and strength. First, experiments
and computational modeling will evaluate the perturbation introduced by an
isolated filler to the deformation fields of stochastic networks in order to
establish an equivalent Eshelby solution for networks. Then, the effect of
filler concentration on the small and large strain mechanical response and
network strength will be explored to establish effective homogenization methods
for hybrid networks. Data from controlled experiments performed with the
aforementioned systems will be used to validate the numerical models, which will
be then used to broadly explore the design space defined by the network and
filler parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.