* 2022788
* I-Corps:  A Technology for Converting Agricultural Byproducts into Probiotic Culturing Media
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Salam Ibrahim, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a process for the probiotics industry to reduce production costs
and increase the selection of products derived from natural and/or non-dairy
ingredients. In addition, this innovation may positively impact agricultural
industries by creating a new market for the waste byproducts generated during
storage, transportation, and processing of agricultural products. These
byproducts represent a large proportion of the agricultural biomaterials and
include eels, trimmings, stems, shells, bran, and seeds. Agricultural byproducts
often end up in landfills, increasing the costs of disposal and creating
environmental challenges. By creating a new market for these byproducts, this
innovation may simultaneously reduce probiotic production costs, increase the
income from agricultural production, reduce agricultural waste, and help protect
the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores translation
of a technology to convert agricultural byproducts into probiotic culturing
media. To date, adoption of byproduct-based media has been limited by nutrient
extraction processes that have relied on expensive chemical or enzymatic
processes. The proposed technology reduces extraction cost by relying on a
series of mechanical steps that requires only energy input. Reducing nutrient
extraction costs enables adoption of probiotic culturing media. Small- and
medium-scale studies have demonstrated that probiotic strains may be cultivated
at lower cost and with higher yield in this fashion. In addition, experiments
with several commercially available probiotic species have shown similarly
positive results in terms of cost, yield, and quality of the cultured
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.