* 2022070
* BII-Implementation: The EMERGE Institute: Identifying EMergent Ecosystem Responses through Genes-to-Ecosystems Integration
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Scott Saleska, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2025
* USD 11,158,322.00

Understanding how biological systems interact with and influence one another
over time is a Grand Challenge of Biology. Resolving this challenge is essential
to predicting ecosystem responses to changing conditions to inform human action
and policy. Yet understanding has been hampered because the Biological research
community spans many sub-fields, each with its own perspectives, approaches, and
focus, and with little exposure to one another. The EMergent Ecosystem Responses
to ChanGE Biology Integration Institute (EMERGE BII) will integrate insights
across Biochemistry, Genetics, Molecular Biology, Physiology, Ecology,
Evolution, and Ecosystem Science to develop a comprehensive framework for these
dynamic interactions. Leveraging the power of 14 organizations and 15 scientific
subdisciplines, EMERGE integrates research and training, field observations and
laboratory experiments, and novel measurements at unprecedented resolution, to
understand a climate-critical case study: how a rapidly warming Arctic is
transforming permafrost into wetlands, accelerating cycling of carbon, and
further affecting earth's climate. EMERGE will train a new generation of
integrative biologists through a program of research exchanges, a Summer
Institute and an undergraduate research program. To further extend its impact,
EMERGE will communicate its work to the public and the scientific community
through such activities as a TEDx-style event and development of high school
Integrative Biology Workshops. Collectively, the EMERGE BII’s discoveries,
tools, and cutting-edge trainees will help society to respond to, and manage,
changing biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMERGE BII leverages a
decade of integrated system characterization of a thawing permafrost peatland to
produce a framework for evaluating multi-level responses to changes in natural
and engineered ecosystems. This framework integrates and expands upon genes-to-
ecosystems understanding via new measurements to increase phylogenetic breadth
and resolution of microbes (strain-resolved metagenomics and
metatranscriptomics), viruses (dsDNA, ssDNA, RNA), and mobile elements
(plasmids, introns, and diversity generating retro-elements), to study
interactions among them and with the ecosystem. The study then completes the
loop to assess how changing ecosystems in turn impact communities, populations,
and genes, via processes of acclimation, assembly and adaptation. A decade of
field observations of microbial populations and communities at different thaw
stages will be complemented by newly-enabled strain-resolved analyses of
adaptation signatures, while perturbation experiments will characterize how
microbes in complex communities acclimate to change. These genes-to-ecosystems-
to-genes measurements, many of which will be firsts for natural communities,
will be coupled to extensive biogeochemical and ecosystem measurements to assess
their influence on system outputs, and to develop predictive models of
community- (BioCrunch) and landscape- (ecosys) scale processes. This project
will improve understanding of how thawing permafrost systems respond to and
cause changes, with a focus on carbon cycling. The resultant framework will
provide a foundation for assessing microbial change in other systems, like the
National Science Foundation’s Long-term Ecological Research sites and National
Ecological Observatory Network, where such highly resolved systems-level data
are increasingly being collected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.