* 2022824
* Model-driven bacterial engineering for complex spheroid environments
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lev Tsimring, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Rapid advances in the forward engineering of complex gene circuits in living
cells has established the transformative potential of synthetic biology for
uncovering the rules of life and controlling biotechnological processes. This
project aims to harness and further develop the ability of different strains and
species of bacteria to communicate and respond synchronously to changing
environments. Our multi-disciplinary approach combines advances in genetic
engineering, microfluidic technologies, and computational methods to design
novel gene networks that can orchestrate bacterial population dynamics in the
complex environment using relevant environmental cues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to model, engineer, and characterize bacterial
circuit dynamics in the complex environments. Two new bacterial gene circuit
systems will be designed. The first is a long-range coupling platform for
synchronizing colony behavior through hydrogen peroxide. The second is a system
of lysis-mediated gene circuits that can be used to regulate the co-culture of
multi- strain ecologies. The investigators will develop computational modeling
and quantitative measurement technology that will lead to both informed
development and quantitative characterization of newly engineered circuits in
spheroid environments derived from animal tumors. Using this knowledge, the
researchers will combine developed circuits with therapeutic delivery or
biosensing strains to create relevant and functional synthetic systems for
application to complex environments. An Elementary School Science Partnership
program, which was initiated in 2011 with NSF support, will be expanded. The
program currently serves two Title I elementary schools in the San Diego area,
Ocean Knoll and Lafayette, and includes the District’s Deaf and Hard of Hearing
program. The program is led and run by UC San Diego students under supervision
from the investigators. This project will provide ample opportunities for cross-
disciplinary training of the next generation of quantitative biologists. In a
broader context, it will bridge the methodological gap between the study of
bacteria in a lab setting and their deployment in complex real-world
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.