* 2022750
* Simultaneous Remote Measurement of Skin and Sub-skin Temperature for USVs &amp; Buoys
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 699,330.00

Climate change research requires knowledge of the temperature of the ocean right
at the surface to estimate the transfer of heat between the air and the water.
This temperature, known as the skin temperature, can be up to a half degree
Celsius (about one degree Fahrenheit) cooler than the temperature immediately
below, known as the sub-skin temperature. In practice, models rather than
measurements of the skin temperature are used since current technology to
measure the skin temperature is expensive and complicated. This technology uses
a non-contact sensor known as an infrared radiometer that remotely measures the
thermal radiation coming from the ocean. The skin temperature model needs a
measure of the temperature just below the surface (known as the sub-skin
temperature) in order to accurately predict the skin temperature. When a ship is
used, the sub-skin temperature can be measured by towing a thermometer along the
surface. In the future, measurements will be made from drones, where towing a
thermometer is impractical. This research will use technology improvements and
insight from new research to develop an instrument that can measure both the
skin and sub-skin temperature from drones, as well as from
buoys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models for the cool skin effect provide
adequate skin temperature accuracy for ocean surface fluxes required for climate
research. However, this level of performance is achieved only when the cool skin
model is initialized with a contact measurement of very near surface temperature
using a towed sensor known as a sea snake. The advent of reliable unmanned
surface vehicles (USVs) has fostered a growing community consensus for the need
to make accurate flux measurements autonomously. Since deployment of a sea snake
from USVs is impractical, an alternative means of obtaining very near surface
temperature (sub-skin) and/or the skin temperature itself is required to ensure
the necessary flux accuracy. Recent results indicates that accurate infrared
(IR) measurements of skin temperature from USVs should now be practical.
Furthermore, these results show that combining an IR camera with a calibrated
radiometer system can provide the sub-skin temperature remotely. This project
will develop and test IRISS (InfraRed In situ Skin and Subskin), an innovative
IR-based sensor system to remotely and simultaneously measure skin and sub-skin
temperature under all weather conditions for routine deployment on USVs and
buoys. IRISS will be compact, low-power, and cost effective by exploiting the
increased stability of commercially-available sensors and will provide
measurements with accuracy comparable to current systems. The project will
include side-by-side comparisons with an existing ship-based system for each
intended platform. Widespread use on USVs and buoys will greatly increase the
number and coverage of skin and sub-skin temperature measurements. The resulting
improvements to models for the cool skin and near surface temperature
stratification will enhance topical oceanographic research such as gas transfer,
address current operational forecast priorities, and improve satellite SST
algorithm development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.