* 2022589
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Seismic Resilience and Adaptation of Infrastructure and Social Systems to Changing Arctic Environments
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Majid Ghayoomi, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 217,615.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems to address important societal challenges at this intersection, and
engages internationally and with local and Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaska experiences thousands of earthquakes
every year, including historical major events that have disrupted and severely
damaged infrastructure and lifeline networks. Given the accelerating
environmental, ecological, and social changes as the Arctic climate warms,
including changes in soil properties, it is critical to understand how
infrastructure and society respond to seismic events. Seismic assessments of
infrastructure, post-earthquake recovery, and future planning must
simultaneously consider natural environment, built infrastructure, and social
systems. This project addresses an urgent need for Arctic residents to develop
strategies to respond to seismic events. Resilient infrastructure linked with
social systems is crucial to the state of Alaska and beyond, which will impact
the state’s economic competitiveness, national security, and residents’ safety
and health. The project engages Indigenous communities through surveys, local
tribal conferences, and public forums as an important way to increase public
awareness and involvement in the decision-making process. In addition, the
project involves education and outreach efforts including graduate student
training in interdisciplinary research, curriculum enhancement and communicating
with Indigenous communities to build foundations for future collaboration and
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the development of a diverse and
convergent research team, builds technical and community capacity, and enables
planning for an integrated cross-disciplinary and well-defined research strategy
to address seismic resilience of Arctic infrastructure and social systems
influenced by changes in climate. An initial survey from the University of
Alaska at Fairbanks (UAF) students, governmental agencies, and industry along
with a discussion session at an Alaska Tribal Conference on Environmental
Management informs the planned workshop designed to assess the state-of-the-art
and practice and determine research needs, challenges, and priorities. An
international workshop is being organized where subject experts from different
disciplines and perspectives will collectively envision future research needs
and action items to enhance seismic resiliency of Arctic at the intersection of
natural, built, and social environments. The workshop brings a group of
researchers, stakeholders, and decision makers from the U.S., internationally,
and from Alaskan Indigenous communities to exchange knowledge, experience,
expectations. The project scope engages Arctic residents through town-hall
forums in three local communities, which is a necessary step to build the
relationships needed for future co-production of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.