* 2022000
* EAGER: Novel Bio-inspired 3D Materials for Surface-Active Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Sharmila Mukhopadhyay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 17,325.00

This research project involves studying a new class of materials that can
significantly improve the performance of currently available devices used in the
energy, environmental, and biotech sectors of the economy. In recent decades,
population growth, higher life expectancy and rapid industrialization have
increased needs for water, energy, food, sanitation, and health care. For
instance, the United States National Intelligence Council (USNIC) estimates that
by 2030, societal demand in these areas will increase by 40-50%. Many of these
increased demands can be addressed by advanced sensors, catalysts, membranes,
and biomaterials that can, for instance, make it easier to remove chemical
pollutants from water, detect and destroy pathogens, and carry out faster
chemical and biological tests with improved precision and lower cost.
Nanomaterials show great potential for such game-changing applications, but
their use in actual devices has been rare, since they can easily escape into the
surroundings posing high risk of material loss and environmental toxicity. This
research project addresses this dilemma with a novel materials architecture that
combines the power and efficiency of nanomaterials with the safety, durability
and reusability of conventional solids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal
of the project is to investigate bioinspired three-dimensional surfaces that
combine the functional advantages of nanomaterials with the structural
advantages of conventional solids. Such materials can provide a novel
multifunctional platform for custom-tailored catalysts, antimicrobial agents,
sensors and/or bio-scaffolds. The design concept is to enrich the surface of
porous solid substrates with carpet-like arrays of carbon nanotubes (CNT) that
can be further customized with nanoscale catalysts, sensors and biomolecules for
tailoring their interaction with surrounding fluids. This architecture mimics
natural biological materials such as microvilli and capillaries, where the
larger membrane supports progressively smaller specialized attachments. This
approach can offer exceptionally high levels of solid-fluid interaction in very
compact space. Moreover, different regions of the same substrate can
concurrently provide multiple simultaneous benefits in a single filter, reactor,
or bio-engineering platform. Currently available devices do not use this
architecture, due to the complexities of bonding dissimilar components that
create multiple unknown interfaces. This project addresses these complex issues,
and explores the possibility of synthesizing such materials for solid-fluid
interactions involving catalysis, signal detection and cell scaffolding through
the following research tasks: (1) investigation of nano-carpets on porous
solids, and their affinity for different fluids; (2) study of chemical &amp;
catalytic reactions at hierarchical surfaces; and (3) understanding biological
interaction of nano-carpets with peptides and living cells. In parallel with the
research, education and outreach components are being developed for
undergraduates, science teachers, community leaders as well as governmental
policy personnel.