* 2022271
* IUSE/PFE: RED Innovation: Enabling Convergence in Undergraduate Engineering through Structural Change
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Robert Nickel, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,998,283.00

Today’s world faces emerging economic and environmental challenges. From a
historical perspective one of the most effective ways the nation has addressed
such challenges is through investing in the development of new technologies.
Such investment is not just in machines and methods, but also includes investing
in people through educating engineers who can both understand complex challenges
and develop effective technological solutions. Yet as challenges grow in
complexity so do the technologies needed to address them and the demands on
education to prepare the next generation of engineers. This project seeks to
better prepare engineering students to address “convergent” problems whose
solution requires expertise from many different areas. Examples of such problems
include many of the latest medical breakthroughs as well as infrastructure like
advances communication networks that change how citizens go about their day-to-
day affairs. To better prepare the next generation of engineers to address such
problems, this project will integrate convergent problems into undergraduate
courses, expand students’ technical and professional skillset, and change
grading practices to develop the abilities students will need to face tomorrow’s
challenges. The project brings together experts from multiple disciplines to
help faculty develop the skills needed to better integrate societally important
problems in classes. By educating students to address societal-scale convergent
challenges students will be better prepared for, and attracted to, engineering
careers and able to capitalize on emerging career opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key hypothesis of this project is that by addressing
convergent problems in their undergraduate degree program students will be
better prepared to address these problems later in their career and more likely
to choose careers aligned with societally important challenges. Since convergent
problems draw from multiple domains of expertise, the project fosters skill
development in communication across disciplinary boundaries and students’
ability to consider diverse stakeholder perspectives. To build the needed
breadth of perspective, the project adopts Sen’s development as freedom
framework to draw from students’ own experiences. To support development of
personally relevant functionings and capabilities, the project will expand
student pathways through the engineering curriculum by modifying grading
practices and introducing learning opportunities that develop student agency and
intrinsic motivation. The project will examine barriers to student autonomy and
seek to change structural elements of the curriculum and institution including
grading practices, curation of student work, and the uses of technology in the
classroom. Changes to students’ experiences and learning are analyzed through
phenomenographic and social cognitive career theory lenses. Faculty development
is supported through communities of transformation which cut broadly across
disciplinary boundaries. To stimulate more wide-spread change in the engineering
education ecosystem case studies of the project effects are targeted to
administrative, faculty, and policy audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.