* 2022299
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Breaking Boundaries: An Organized Revolution for the Professional Formation of Electrical Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Paul Spector, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

The typical engineering department operates on the basis of the traditional
pillars of (1) Research, (2) Teaching, and (3) Service. With research focusing
mostly on graduate students, and service comprising primarily of research-
related activities, the professional formation of engineering students relies
heavily on traditional classroom instruction. The complex nature of engineering
disciplines has led to the development of curricula that focus on the technical
content of each discipline. As a result, engineering students have limited
exposure to critical professional competencies, that are often incorporated into
a single course or project experience, and lack the rigor required of today’s
engineering graduates. The proposed Organized Revolution will focus on the
holistic Professional Formation of Engineering students via a three-prong
strategy: (1) replacing the Research-Teaching-Service model with one based on
Research-Students-Practice with industry and community outreach at every step,
(2) linking the freshman to senior engineering design experiences via
Professional Formation of Engineers courses, that are founded on professional
engineering competencies identified by industry, and (3) empowering students
through the concept of Taking Responsibility to Understand Engineering. This
holistic approach coupled with a technical curriculum that can be personalized
according to each student’s strengths and interests will result in a
revolutionized new approach for the professional formation of
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of the revolution is the theory of
rugged landscape, a conceptual scheme developed in the transdisciplinary field
of informing science. Students and faculty are viewed as clients occupying
certain states under the current research-teaching-service model. To move
faculty and students to their new states (research-students-practice) the theory
calls for bidirectional informing pathways. These pathways will be created by
the various activities to be initiated under this project: (1) empowering
students to Take Responsibility for Understanding Engineering, by introducing
opportunities for self-development via the execution of personalized
qualification plans, active participation and leadership roles in technical
forums, participation in industry and community outreach projects, and direct
involvement in the faculty evaluation, promotion, and tenure processes; (2) the
development of a Professional Formation of Engineers multi-course layer across
the curriculum to actively and continuously engage the students at every class
level; (3) the formation of technical Track-Focused Advisory Boards to create
industry-students-faculty interactive environments; (4) a lecture series with
industry speakers to create interactive bidirectional links between students and
professional engineers; (5) multidisciplinary projects to be solicited through
industrial networks and the community to form the major experiential learning
component of the revolutionized program. Student empowerment requires students
to be goal-oriented and self-motivated. The theory of Action-State orientation
will provide the basis for enhancing the motivation of students. The possibility
that interventions can lead to the transformation of students from state to
action-orientation is a key novel aspect of this project. The Organized
Revolution will be used to answer the following high level research questions
(1) What is the experience and impact of an individualized and adaptable
qualification plan for the student and faculty community? (2) What is the nature
and impact of integrating traditional silos of research, teaching and service
under the rugged landscape paradigm on department culture? and (3) What are the
interaction and mediating effects of qualification change and cultural shift?
The project team will leverage the university’s membership in the Florida
Consortium of Metropolitan Universities as the foundation of the dissemination,
scaling, and adaptation activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.