* 2022012
* Collaborative Research URoL: Epigenetics2: Epigenetic pathways to regulate homeostatic resilience: Model-based discovery of rules across diverse mammals
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Bruce Birren, Broad Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 669,810.00

This project will examine biological rules that govern how different species
respond, at the cellular level, to changes in their environment, and why some
species are more robust than others. All species encounter environmental
variation, but some tolerate extremes that would be dangerous to most other
species. Fruit bats withstand dramatic changes in blood glucose between feeding
and flying, camels tolerate high body temperatures in hot desert environments,
and deep-diving mammals survive with little oxygen during long dives. The goal
of this project is to understand how diverse species cope with extremes by
measuring how their cells respond in the lab to changing culture conditions that
mimic real-world variation. This will provide a foundation for developing
mathematical models to understand the genetic components of this tolerance, and
why the response differs between species. This project will provide active
learning and research opportunities for middle school, undergraduate and
graduate students, including many from historically underserved populations. It
will develop sixth grade curricular enrichment in biology and computer coding,
provide opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in laboratory
research, and support graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Through
cross-institutional collaborations, it will establish mentoring relationships
between students at different levels. This project will also develop and
disseminate outreach materials for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
mammals lie somewhere between the extremes of strict and flexible homeostasis,
meaning that they tolerate fluctuations in cellular biochemical conditions to
varying degrees. Some species tolerate extreme variation in cellular conditions,
often for environmental factors that are specific to each organism. Conversely,
variation in cellular conditions is poorly tolerated by many other species,
including humans. This project will apply a common-garden framework to cultured
cells from diverse mammals to uncover epigenetic responses that render cells of
diverse species robust to variation in the internal milieu. RNA-seq, ATAC-seq,
and cellular morphology and physiology data will be used to assay the responses
of cells from different species when exposed to a panel of variable oxygen,
glucose, and temperature conditions. By analyzing these datasets using new
comparative computational approaches and an evolutionary framework, the project
will identify genes involved in strictly homeostatic versus flexible cellular
phenotypes. These genes will be modeled as “agents” in an agent-based modeling
approach to distinguish between a "driver" hypothesis, with robustness
coordinated by a few epigenotypes of large effect, or an alternate "small-
impact" hypothesis, with robustness arising from many epigenotypes of
individually small effect, and between the possibility of few versus many
evolutionary paths to a given robustness phenotype. This cross-disciplinary
collaboration will pioneer a new strategy to discover the nature — and limits —
of cellular buffering abilities that underlie extreme phenotypes and reveal the
"rules" whereby mammalian cells cope with environmental
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Understanding the
Rules of Life: Epigenetics Program, administered as part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas
through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.