* 2022227
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2020 Association of Computing Machinery Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Yong Zheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 19,000.00

This is funding to support about 10 students enrolled in MS or PhD programs in
U.S. educational institutions, to present their accepted papers and posters
and/or to attend the Doctoral Consortium associated with the 28th International
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP 2020). User
interfaces that adapt themselves to available user information (such as special
needs or individual preferences) are becoming increasingly important, so much so
that adaptability has become a selling point for software products. A system
with the ability to construct and consult a user model (an explicit
representation of properties of a particular user or group of users) can adapt
diverse aspects of its performance and enhance its effectiveness, usability
and/or acceptance in a variety of situations (e.g., to reduce information
overload, to improve the quality of information retrieval, filtering and
annotation, and to generate useful information visualizations). Applications for
user modeling range from electronic commerce and intelligent learning
environments to health care and assistive technologies. Relevant platforms for
user modeling include mobile and wearable systems and smart environments, as
well as individual desktop systems, groupware, adaptive hypermedia, and other
web-based systems. The annual UMAP conference is the premier forum at which
academic and industrial researchers from all these fields present their latest
research and to exchange their complementary insights on user modeling issues.
Presenting their work at UMAP will have a significant impact on the careers of
the future generation of user modeling, adaptation, and personalization
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants in the Doctoral
Consortium will have the opportunity to present their work to a knowledgeable
audience and through lively discussions get useful comments at an early stage of
their research when it will be most useful. Just as importantly, they will have
a chance to meet established researchers and other graduate students doing
similar work, to exchange ideas and to make contacts that will be invaluable to
them as they progress in their scientific careers. Interacting with young
researchers is also beneficial to experienced investigators, by providing fresh
ideas and new perspectives. Thus, the Doctoral Consortium is a great confidence
builder for the students involved, and highly stimulating to the senior
researchers as well. Many past participants in the UMAP Doctoral Consortium have
gone on to become well-regarded researchers and practitioners in the field.
Students whose work has been selected for presentation at the Doctoral
Consortium will benefit from that experience in a number of additional ways.
They will be invited to write a paper that will be published in the UMAP 2020
conference proceedings, which will be included in the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) Digital Library. And they will have a 30-minute window in which
to present their work (with a short demonstration where appropriate), including
time for questions and discussion. During the question/discussion period and in
subsequent informal interactions, organizing committee members and other
participants will provide constructive comments on each student's work and
attempt to address aspects on which the student has requested advice. The
organizers have reaffirmed the long-standing and demonstrated UMAP commitment to
diversity; to this end, they will make special efforts to recruit women and
members of under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.