* 2022562
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Interaction Between Coastal and Riverine Processes and the Built Environment in Coastal Arctic Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Nina Stark, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 135,655.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment and built environment, addresses
important societal challenges, and engages with local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaskan communities and their built
environment are affected by permafrost thaw, coastal and river erosion,
flooding, and other natural processes altered or accelerated by environmental
changes. Arctic coastal communities in particular face compound threats from
riverbank erosion, permafrost thaw, and increasing coastal storm impacts. As
data collection campaigns in the Arctic are costly and often limited to periods
of the year when weather affords access to sites of interest, significant gaps
in data and information can result. This NNA planning grant employs workshops
designed to discover gaps in knowledge and develop associated research questions
and hypotheses to address issues affecting coastal Arctic communities in Alaska.
It identifies novel strategies for making targeted measurements in these
challenging environments. This project also facilitates development of ideas for
novel but feasible long-term data collection and monitoring strategies that
encourage and rely upon local community engagement. Additionally, this project
aids the development of a new multi- and interdisciplinary research team to open
pathways towards future research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NNA planning
grant synthesizes and develops key research questions related to the interaction
between coastal and riverine processes and the built environment in the coastal
Arctic region in the context of environmental change. This research project is
positioned at the nexus between the sciences of the natural and built
environments and includes co-production of knowledge with local Arctic
communities, as it identifies effective data collection and monitoring
strategies to answer these questions, pinpoints expertise needed to assemble a
diverse and interdisciplinary research team to address these questions, and
engages Alaskan Arctic coastal communities and stakeholders to develop a
feasible, sustainable, and impactful research strategy. These goals are achieved
through two workshops that include researchers, federal and state agency
stakeholders, and community stakeholders, as well as a diverse representation of
domestic and international experts, early career researchers, and students. This
project engages local community stakeholders into all aspects of the project to
learn about and incorporate their knowledge and needs. The project plans to
disseminate research findings widely as it assembles a core research team for
future steps into research on Arctic coastal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.