* 2022023
* NRT-HDR: AI-enabled Molecular Engineering of Materials and Systems (AIMEMS) for Sustainability
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,008,213.00

NRT-HDR: AI-enabled Molecular Engineering of Materials and Systems (AIMEMS) for
Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular engineering is a dynamic and
evolving field that applies molecular-level science in experimental,
theoretical, and computational approaches to engineer advanced materials,
processes, devices, and systems. Starting from molecular level concepts and
principles offers exciting opportunities for targeted design and exquisite
tuning of material/system properties for specific applications. Focusing on use-
inspired research driven by sustainability will lead to substantial societal
benefits. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a powerful tool that is rapidly
transforming almost every aspect of society. By integrating AI with molecular
engineering, this research traineeship will open new horizons for engineering
complex, multifunctional materials, processes, and systems within a modern
framework of sustainability, and will dramatically accelerate scientific
discovery and technological innovation. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Chicago (UChicago) will
train a new generation of graduate student leaders at the frontiers of knowledge
in AI-enabled molecular engineering of materials and systems for sustainability.
The program will train nearly one hundred and fifty (150) students, including
twenty (20) directly funded by this grant, by intentionally integrating
transferrable professional skills with interdisciplinary technical skills
ranging from materials science to computer science and social science into the
curricular design and thesis research projects. Through a strategic partnership
with Argonne National Laboratory and with industrial collaborators, the program
will further leverage world-class expertise and unique facilities to train
students toward a range of research and research-related career pathways, both
within and outside academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduates from the NRT
program will be equipped with technical and professional skills to effectively
lead an interdisciplinary team to responsibly solve global challenges in a
rapidly evolving environment. Technical content will be delivered through
existing core molecular engineering courses, and through four new courses with
relevant modules specifically designed to teach students how to use Argonne’s
world-class facilities such as Advanced Photon Sources – Upgrade (APS-U), Aurora
exascale supercomputer, and Materials Engineering Research Facility (MERF).
Students will take part in specifically designed professional training programs,
particularly in science communication, teaching &amp; mentoring, leadership
&amp; management, and career exploration and preparedness. NRT trainees will be
co-advised by a team consisting of a UChicago faculty, an Argonne scientist, and
an industry advisor to provide the most enriching experience for graduate
students. They will carry out team-based, convergent research projects in
molecular engineering of various soft and hard materials and assembly of these
materials into systems toward water, energy, polymer, and sustainability
applications. The project will lead to sustainable training programs at UChicago
including a new MS degree program in computational molecular engineering. The
program is fully dedicated to deepening the educational impact on Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) diversity through partnership
with NSF INCLUDES and minority-serving institutions. The program has the
potential to serve as a national model for training next-generation AI-empowered
graduate student leaders through strategic, inclusive university-national
laboratory-industry partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.