* 2022213
* Collaborative Research: Higher order interactions, functional trait changes, and species coexistence in an annual plant community
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jonathan Levine, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,899.00

Natural communities are often composed of dozens or hundreds of interacting
species. However, for simplicity, the study of species interactions in ecology
most often focuses on interactions between pairs of species. Ecologists often
then assume that our understanding of interactions between species pairs can be
used to make sense of the dynamics of entire communities. This core assumption
is challenged by the potential for Higher Order Interactions (HOIs), which occur
when the interaction between a pair of species is changed by the presence of a
third species. HOIs can either make it easier or more difficult for species to
coexist in a diverse community, depending on the strength and the nature of the
effects. The possible existence of these interactions therefore fundamentally
challenges our understanding of how biodiversity is maintained in natural
communities. However, we know very little about how strong or widespread HOIs
might be in nature. The research will quantify the strength and prevalence of
HOIs among plant species in a grassland community and test if certain physical
or physiological characteristics of plant species make HOIs more likely to
occur. The project will address a fundamental challenge in community ecology,
train a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher, and be used to improve
courses offered at the high school, undergraduate and graduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will combine large-scale field experiments,
detailed measurements of plant functional traits, and the application of
mathematical theory to ask three questions: (1) How strong are Higher Order
Interactions (HOIs) among competitors in nature? (2) How do HOIs affect
opportunities for species coexistence? (3) Can ecologists predict the magnitude
of these interactions in nature with knowledge of plant functional traits? The
project will quantify the magnitude of nearly 150 three-way HOIs through a large
field experiment in a California annual plant community subjecting focal species
to simultaneously varying densities of two different competitor species. Models
with HOIs will then be fit to the demographic data collected. To address the
coexistence consequences of the fitted HOIs, the invasion condition for
coexistence and species persistence times will be evaluated in parameterized
models that either include or exclude these HOI terms. To assess the
predictability of HOIs, the research will measure how plant functional traits
plastically respond to the densities of other competitors, and this information
will be used to predict the value of the fitted HOIs. Taken together, the
research will allow ecologists to both quantify the importance of HOIs for
species coexistence and identify their functional basis, laying the groundwork
for further mechanistic studies of these interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.