* 2022444
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Planning for Infrastructure Resiliency and Adaptation amid Increasing Mass-Movement Risks across the Cryosphere
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Tong Qiu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 124,882.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural and built environments to address important
societal challenges at this intersection, and engages internationally and with
local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing climate conditions have
increased the occurrence of mass-movement hazards in the cryosphere, such as
landslides, debris flows, and slope failures resulting from thawing of ice-rich
permafrost. Mass-movement hazards across the cryosphere pose a significant risk
to people and infrastructure, such as highways and pipelines. This project
brings together experts from diverse backgrounds, including engineers,
geoscientists, computer scientists, and officials from a variety of academic
institutions, public and government agencies, and industry, to discuss key
challenges and formulate research priorities in 1) characterizing mass-movement
hazards in the cryosphere, 2) mapping such hazards using machine learning, 3)
forecasting such hazards using artificial intelligence, and 4) building climate-
change-resilient infrastructure through flexible and adaptive approaches to
reduce costs. The project outcomes enable planners and policy makers to identify
critical infrastructure that is most threatened by mass-movement hazards in the
Arctic, sub-Arctic, and mountainous regions, and high- and low-hazard areas when
planning future infrastructure near urban and rural
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the development and planning
activities of a convergent research team to address infrastructure resilience
and adaptation to increasing mass-movement risks across the cryosphere as the
climate warms. Planning activities center around two annual workshops that will
identify gaps in our current understanding and existing methodologies to
develop: 1) more automated hazard mapping tools through remote sensing and
machine learning, including well-established tools like convolutional neural
networks; 2) compilations of datasets and databases and interactions with
potential users; 3) more reliable artificial intelligence models including time
series machine learning for hazard forecasting; and 4) more flexible and
adaptive approaches to reduce costs for infrastructure resiliency and
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.