* 2022854
* Elucidating and Computing Metabolic Networks for Co-Valorization of Cellulose and Lignin Derivatives
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Ludmilla Aristilde, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 490,000.00

Conversion of lignin and cellulose from trees and plants into valuable products
could reduce our reliance on non-renewable feedstocks such as petroleum and
natural gas. Pseudomonas are species of soil bacteria with robust and varied
metabolisms. As a result, they can produce a variety of potentially important
molecules. This project will develop a detailed map of the pathways involved in
processing lignin and cellulose by Pseudomonas. The regulation of these pathways
will also be studied. The project will extend research opportunities to
undergraduates and will engage women with STEM outreach activities at a local
high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to understand the mechanisms
of the metabolic networks in wild-type and engineered Pseudomonas putida
strains. Mixed-substrate utilization of sugars from cellulose and hemicellulose,
and aromatic substrates from lignin will be the primary focus. There are three
specific objectives. First, elucidate the metabolic architecture for
simultaneous processing of carbons derived from cellulose and lignin monomers.
Second, analyze the metabolic network fluxes towards relevant biosynthetic
pathways quantitatively. Third, identify the metabolic nodes under regulatory
control in the network. The project will employ a combination of stable isotope-
assisted metabolomics, proteomics profiling, genome-scale quantitative flux
modeling, and in silico predictions of optimal metabolic programming. The long-
term goal of this research is to unravel metabolic pathway limitations to
converting lignocellulosic feedstock derivatives to value-added building
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported jointly by the
Cellular and Biochemical Engineering (ENG/CBET) and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology (BIO/MCB) Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.