* 2022952
* Substrate structural complexity and abundance control distinct mechanisms of microbially-driven carbon cycling in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Carol Arnosti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 746,220.00

Substrate Structural Complexity and Abundance Control Distinct Mechanisms of
Microbially-Driven Carbon Cycling in the Ocean&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost half
of the organic carbon produced in the ocean is processed by bacteria. Bacteria
use extracellular (outside the cell) enzymes to break down large organic
molecules to small sizes that can be transported into their cells. It has
recently been discovered that bacteria use extracellular enzymes in two ways:
‘selfish uptake’ and ‘external hydrolysis’. External hydrolysis releases low
molecular weight products to the environment where they can be used by other
organisms. ‘Selfish uptake’ releases little or no products. This research will
determine the extent and location of ‘selfish uptake’ in ocean waters. This
process affects the distribution of organic carbon in the ocean, the flow of
small organic molecules to feed a wider range of bacteria, and the composition
and dynamics of the bacterial community. Recent results show that ‘selfish’
bacteria are active in deep ocean waters, where they take up complex
polysaccharides (sugars) that are not hydrolyzed externally. These results
inspired a new model that links ‘selfish uptake’ and external hydrolysis to the
amount and complexity of the organic matter that is used by bacteria. This
project will test the model by describing the polysaccharide fraction of marine
organic matter, and studying the relationships between organic matter abundance,
structural complexity, and extracellular enzyme use. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in the project as members of the research team in the
field and in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the
hypothesis that the mechanism of polysaccharide processing is related to the
cost to a cell of producing the enzymes required for its hydrolysis, and the
probability that a cell will receive sufficient return on investment for
producing the enzymes. The conceptual model that will be tested suggests that
external hydrolysis is favored when organic matter is abundant, or when enzyme
production costs can be shared (e.g., on particles, in biofilms); selfish uptake
would be a better strategy when high molecular weight (HMW) organic matter is
scarce, and particularly when the HMW organic matter is very complex. This study
will test this model by characterizing the structure of polysaccharide-
containing components of dissolved organic matter (DOM) and particulate organic
matter (POM) collected from the ocean, by determining the extent of selfish
uptake and rates of external hydrolysis of different polysaccharides by natural
microbial communities from the surface and the deep ocean, and by incubation
experiments that control for the abundance of polysaccharides of different
structural complexity. This project will be carried out in collaboration with
colleagues at the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, whose expertise
in carbohydrate chemistry and structural analyses, and in advanced microscopy
and analysis of complex microbial communities, are central to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.