* 2022090
* MRI: Acquisition of Dual Beam FIB/SEM to Enable New Capability for Research, Education and Training at UDC
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Jiajun Xu, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2022
* USD 511,707.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Major Research Instrumentation award
allows the acquisition of a focused ion beam integrated with a scanning electron
microscope at the University of the District of Columbia (UDC). This instrument
will aid UDC, a historically black college and university, in its goal to
transform into an effective urban research institution serving a diverse student
population. The instrument can produce high resolution images with nanoscale
resolution of surfaces, cross-sections and three-dimensional structures.
Characterization and analysis at the nanoscale will promote and benefit faculty
and student research in the cutting-edge research fields of national needs. The
instrument will enable multidisciplinary research at UDC into a wide range of
fields. These include magnetic devices for control systems, solar cell for
energy harvesting, nanomaterials and nanodevices for thermal management and
energy systems, soil improvement for hazard mitigation, and water resources
recovery techniques for sustainability. This instrument will be a key component
of UDC’s research infrastructure. The instrument will also play a critical role
in the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students from a
broad spectrum of STEM disciplines. The activities enabled by the instrument
will enrich students’ educational experience and provide rewarding research
training. The instrument will foster partnerships with surrounding universities
and community colleges to provide experiential learning to students. Educational
resources on microscopy will be disseminated through workshops and engineering
open houses to teachers and high school students. These activities will
introduce of K-12 students to the fundamental concepts and techniques of
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dual Beam
Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM/FIB) delivers superior
performance to analyze three-dimensional structural characterization and
compositional information of engineered and natural materials at nano-scale
resolution. The FIB uses the milling function to create cross section inside the
material that illustrates its internal structure at the nano-scale. The FIB/SEM
complements the existing nanotechnology and characterization resources at UDC
and provides much-needed capabilities in the areas of high-resolution imaging,
depth profiling and 3D reconstruction, and chemical spectroscopy at the
nanoscale to catalyze new scientific discoveries. It will serve as an
indispensable tool for research that will create and enhance (i) understanding
and fabrication of novel, direct-write nanofluidic structures; (ii) knowledge
about the effect of ferromagnetic (FM) electrode composition on magnetic and
transport properties of magnetic tunnel junction based molecular spintronics
devices (MTJMSDs); (iii) fundamental understanding of the energetics of phase
change inside self-assembled nano-micelle-based materials; (iv) understanding
the correlation between nanowire microstructure and fabrication conditions as
well as the resulting photovoltaic performance; (v) understanding of the nano-
micro mechanisms of microbially induced calcite precipitation (MICP) and other
mineral precipitation processes and their effects on the macro mechanical
properties of sand and silty soils; and (vi) knowledge about the prevention of
uncontrolled precipitation and dissolution of the minerals struvite/vivianite as
well as biodegradation or chemical cleavage of metal-chelate complex to recover
it in a controlled environment. The instrument will set the stage for increased
levels of interdisciplinary collaborations in the fields of nanoscale electronic
and optoelectronic devices, advanced manufacturing, nanotechnology for renewable
energy as well as environmental and geotechnical engineering applications across
different disciplines and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.