* 2022571
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: Navigating Convergent Pressures on Arctic Development
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Lawson Brigham, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2025
* USD 118,272.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few transformations are as dramatic or as
complex as those occurring now in the Arctic. There are rapid changes in climate
and the environment, in international treaties and regulations, in national
security, and claims for territory. At the same time, Arctic communities and
Indigenous Peoples are looking to find their place in a changing global economy.
This convergence of changes and aspirations is leading to questions about what
kinds of infrastructure are needed, where it should be located, and how this may
impact Arctic people and environment. This project is using a combination of
observations, satellites, maps, and models to identify where useful and viable
locations for new development might be located. These kinds of data and analysis
have not been combined before to make such an assessment. These locations are
then explored with communities, emergency managers, environmental scientists,
industry representatives, local governments, and members of Indigenous groups.
Through this merging of environmental sciences, real-world engineering,
financial analyses, and cultural concerns, the project is documenting likely
future developments and understand their impacts on the Arctic environment and
its people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alongside amplified Arctic environmental
change, changes in global markets, regional geopolitics, and community
aspirations are motivating visions of new opportunities to develop or enhance
new industries in shipping, resource extraction, tourism, and fisheries. At the
same time, Arctic communities and Indigenous peoples are making clear their
aspirations for the future. This project asks how these converging pressures
will shape Arctic development between now and 2050. The project is using an
approach that is novel through its convergence of diverse disciplines, as
follows. Plausible locations for development are being identified using natural
resource distributions, national- and company-level ambitions, and community
aspirations. High-resolution climate scenarios, observations, and satellite data
are providing the environmental context for access and safety requirements.
Financial and environmental assessments, regulations, and treaties provide a
third layer of evaluation. The integrated product is then interrogated in an
iterative manner with an independent International Reference Group of academic,
Indigenous and practitioner experts. Through this process, the project is
developing an assessment identifying convergent geophysical and socioeconomic
pressures on Arctic development, and their potential cascading impacts on local
communities, the environment, global commodity chains, and international
relations. This assessment seeks to provide a knowledge resource for engagements
in grounded community-based research as well as supporting communities,
governments, businesses and industries seeking to navigate the New
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.