* 2022439
* International Conference of the Learning Sciences: Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Britte Cheng, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 12/31/2020
* USD 6,240.00

The United States has historically been the global leader in the
interdisciplinary field of the learning sciences, which involves the study of
teaching and learning in contexts ranging from children learning math in school,
to adults learning highly technical jobs in the workforce. Research in the
learning sciences draws from diverse methodologies and domains, including the
fields of psychology, sociology, linguistics, design studies, cognitive science,
and computer science. The preeminent conference in this field is the
International Society of Learning Sciences Conference (ICLS). At this conference
the latest research is presented and practitioners learn the state of the art
techniques that support the research and design of learning interventions,
integrated with advanced technologies. This project supports a Doctoral
Consortium and Early Career Workshop for approximately 10-20 attendees,
providing opportunities for the participants to interact with international
researchers and practitioners. The conference and related activities will
address important challenges associated with the transformation of education and
broadening of participation in the digital age. The conference will be held
virtually this year due to Covid-19.

Building upon prior ICLS conferences, several activities and mentoring for
participants will be included- both before, during and after the conference.
Prior to the conference, doctoral consortium participants will interact with
assigned mentors to discuss research interests and prepare a research
presentation covering dissertation progress. During the workshop, they will
share this presentation in an interactive format, facilitated by the mentors.
After the conference, activities will include online discussions to extend the
workshop experience. Activities for the Early Career Workshop are similar, but
with a focus on community building and professional development, including
mentoring regarding tenure and career path. All participants will interact with
a career panel, journal editors, and with each other in a virtual reception. The
activities are important to build capacity and support new researchers in the
interdisciplinary areas of the computer and learning sciences, supporting
participants who then go on to mentor graduate students and other junior
researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.