* 2022590
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: A Purpose-Driven Merger of Western Science and Indigenous Knowledge of Water Quality in Alaskan Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yuri Shur, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 915,710.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents,
Forecasting, and Resilient Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The well-being
of Alaskan Indigenous communities depends on access to safe drinking water.
However, water pollution has remained a reality for many of these communities
due to naturally occurring and anthropogenic pollutants. As the climate warms,
environmental changes will likely exacerbate water contamination problems by
releasing entombed microorganisms, ancient organic carbon, nutrients, and metals
through thawing of permafrost and melting of glaciers. While Alaskan communities
are highly vulnerable to such changes, they also hold valuable Indigenous
Knowledge about their water resources. This project aims to merge Western
scientific knowledge with Indigenous Knowledge of water to better understand
these changes in water quality over time. Additionally, this project will lead
to the development of a framework for true convergence of Indigenous Knowledge
and Western science that can be applied to similar environmental and cultural
changes ongoing in other communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
collect and aggregate Western scientific data and Indigenous Knowledge of water
quality in three environmental systems that are unique to the Arctic (glaciers,
permafrost, and a glacier-impacted river system). Specific project objectives
are to (i) assess the physical, chemical, and microbial quality of water stored
frozen in glaciers and permafrost, (ii) analyze the interaction between
background water chemistry (e.g., dissolved organic carbon, metals, nutrients)
and microbial ecology at the present time, (iii) delineate Indigenous water
quality knowledge using ethnographic approaches, including photo-voice and semi-
structured interviews, and (iv) communicate with Alaskan community members
through advisory boards and open community meetings at Selawik and Anchorage. A
true convergence between Western scientific data and Indigenous Knowledge will
be forged by a purpose-driven approach (i.e., community well-being) to shared
learning. The broader impacts of this project include (i) engagement with
underrepresented communities in STEM, (ii) inclusion and training of a diverse
pool of students in project goals, and (iii) the novel “celebration of water”
event in which photo-voice activities and stories told by Alaskan community
members will broadly disseminate project knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.