* 2022844
* Advancing a Systems Approach to Studying the Earth: A Strategy for the National Science Foundation
* GEO,RISE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,048,851.00

The Earth is a complex system, with myriad interactions and feedbacks among the
atmosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere, cryosphere, biosphere, and the individuals,
institutions, and technologies that respond to and influence these dynamics.
Many pressing societal concerns -- such as ensuring a fresh water supply,
responding to natural disasters, and retreating from sea level rise -- involve
multiple processes that interact in dynamic and often nonlinear ways. A systems-
based approach to understanding our planet can help guide responses to these
societal concerns. This award provides funds for a National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine study to develop a consensus report with a
compelling vision for a systems approach to studying the Earth and discussion of
the facilities, infrastructure, coordinating mechanisms, computing, and
workforce development needed to support that vision. It will assist several
National Science Foundation directorates (including Geosciences, Biology,
Engineering, Computer and Information Science and Engineering, Education and
Human Resources, and Social, Behavioral, and Economics Sciences) in building
bridges across disciplines to significantly advance a systems-level, integrated
understanding of the Earth. The study will provide clarity about where future
research on the Earth system can yield most benefit for the people and societies
that depend on this information for their decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
activity will utilize the National Academies’ substantial experience and
expertise in scientific community engagement and consensus building to develop
the vision and explore mechanisms to leverage and align key facilities and
programs. The work will be conducted by several Boards throughout the Divisions
on Earth and Life Studies, Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education,
Engineering and Physical Sciences, and Policy and Global Affairs. Portions of
the work will be conducted in parallel “workstreams” that will leverage the
existing network of expert advisory groups in place at the National Academies.
An ad hoc committee of volunteer experts will work with an experienced staff
team to conduct background research, encourage community engagement, and prepare
report text. The committee and staff will solicit input from across Earth
science communities, by means of an in-person workshop, virtual mini-workshops
on specific topics, interviews with key NSF contacts and other stakeholders,
online requests for input, and the use of electronic communications and
networks. With significant engagement of diverse expert and decision maker
communities throughout the study, the project will build new connections and
capacity for advancing and applying knowledge of the Earth system. The peer-
reviewed report will be disseminated widely through briefings, on-line
discussions, webinars, presentations and sessions at relevant conferences, and
other related activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.