* 2022969
* Quantifying Iron Turnover in the Upper Ocean via Time-series Measurements at Station ALOHA
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Hawco, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 460,241.00

Phytoplankton are the base of marine food webs but their ability to grow in the
open ocean by photosynthesis is limited by the scarcity of key nutrients
especially iron. To understand how phytoplankton respond to global environmental
changes, it is essential to predict how the nutrient content of seawater will
change as well. Iron is essential to the light-harvesting machinery of
phytoplankton but is an extremely small fraction of seawater (1 part per
billion) . Iron is much more abundant in soils and when dust storms blow these
soils out to sea, the iron content of seawater increases. It is unknown how long
the effects of these iron supply events last, which depends on how well the
marine ecosystem can recover and reuse iron before it sinks to the seafloor. It
is also unknown if human activities have added to the natural Fe supply. The
proposed research will address these questions by conducting a 3 year time-
series of iron measurements in the North Pacific Ocean. Here, dust supply from
Asia occurs mainly during spring, allowing the loss of iron over the summer and
fall months to be documented. Unique chemical signatures will be used to
distinguish iron supply from the deposition of desert dust or from human
sources. This record of the marine iron cycle will be important for validating
ecosystem models that are used to predict how climate change will influence the
growth of phytoplankton in the future. The research would make a scientific
contribution to the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series, help improve biogeochemical iron
models, student training at the graduate and undergraduate level, and support an
early career scientist. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A 3 year time-series of iron (Fe)
measurements is proposed to constrain the magnitude of external Fe input and Fe
recycling in the open ocean. Near-monthly observations will be conducted in the
North Pacific Subtropical Gyre onboard Hawaii Ocean Timeseries cruises, which
receives regular dust input during springtime and is minimally influenced by
deep mixing. Water column profiling of dissolved and particulate Fe
concentrations – combined with the flux of Fe recorded in trace-metal-clean
sediment traps – will define a residence time of Fe in the upper water column.
Iron uptake rates will be quantified through short-term incubations using a
novel stable isotope technique and will be used to derive a turnover time with
respect to biological uptake. Finally, the isotopic composition of dissolved and
particulate Fe in the mixed layer will be measured to evaluate the potential
importance of anthropogenic and Hawaiian Fe sources, which are poorly
constrained. Together, these measurements will define the tempo and variability
of the open ocean Fe cycle and provide a means to validate models that simulate
the biogeochemistry of this key micronutrient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.