* 2022241
* EAGER: Development of the Novel Recombinase System for the Intersectional Dissection of Neural Circuitry
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Byungkook Lim, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 04/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

A comprehensive understanding of brain cell diversity and cell-to-cell
communication (connectivity via specialized junctions between cells called
synapses) is essential for understanding the anatomical substrates and cellular
mechanisms that underlie brain function. Elucidation of the detailed synaptic
organization of specific neural circuits is a necessary component for achieving
this goal. Progress in this area of neuroscience has been limited by a lack of
tools that can simultaneously reveal multiple cell types with distinct molecular
and physiological properties within the same brain areas, as well as
highlighting in detail how these cells are connected to each other. This project
utilizes a novel molecular-biological strategy for defining multiple cell types
and their interconnections in mouse brains, enabling investigators to mark
individual cells that express combinations of engineered genetic elements. This
technique is combined with an existing method that inserts two incomplete parts
of a fluorescent molecule onto the surfaces of different nerve cells. If those
cells communicate by forming a connection (synapse) with each other, the
fragments of the fluorescent molecule come into close enough contact to become
functional again, and synapses are identifiable as colored dots of fluorescent
light. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the
development and optimization of these tools, and the genetic constructs will be
distributed via a non-profit agency; all protocols and sequence information will
be made widely available through the PI's website. These new tools will greatly
enhance the speed and precision with which neuroscientists can study the
detailed organization of brain circuitry, and the synaptic connections made onto
specific neurons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces novel molecular
and viral strategies for defining multiple cell types and their synaptic
organization. It is based on a novel viral strategy to achieve the
intersectional expression of transgenes among specific neuronal populations in
transgenic mouse lines that express Cre, flippase (FLP), and other recombinases.
A novel site-specific recombinase system (phiC31 and a phiC31-dependent single
inverted open reading frame [pSIO]) is used to acheive virus-mediated, specific-
transgene expression without cross-reactivity to other recombinases, both in
vitro and in vivo. This phiC31/pSIO recombinase system is then combined with
"enhanced Green fluorescent protein Reconstitution Across Synaptic Partners"
(eGRASP) to label synaptic contacts made by specific inputs. By providing a
novel experimental framework for identifying the cellular constituents of local
neural circuits and examining the synaptic organization of multiple presynaptic
inputs onto specific neurons, and by optimizing these tools for general use and
making them freely available to the scientific community, this project is
expected to accelerate discovery about the organizational and functional
properties of neural circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.