* 2022468
* RAPID GPS data acquisition in Jamaica for coseismic and postseismic studies of the Jan. 28, 2020 M=7.7 Oriente Fault earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Dennis DeMets, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2021
* USD 38,704.00

This RAPID project will gather and make available data from 50 GPS sites in
Jamaica and surrounding islands following the magnitude 7.7 that occurred on
January 28, 2020. As the most recent of four earthquakes that have ruptured the
Caribbean-North America plate boundary since 2009, the Oriente Fault earthquake
has renewed concerns about seismic hazards in nearby southern Cuba and on the
densely populated island of Jamaica, where similar faults last ruptured in 1907.
The researchers supported here will gather data with collaborators at the
Jamaican Earthquake Unit of the University of West Indies and archive the data
at UNAVCO, where it will be available to the entire community. The new data will
be analyzed, modeled, and interpreted in collaboration with a team that includes
scientists from France, Cuba, Hispaniola, and Jamaica.

This data collection effort will provide the foundation for several distinct
research areas of interest. The project will include an estimation of a geodetic
fault-slip solution and earthquake moment. New geodetic slip solution will be
used to calculate the magnitude and pattern of Coulomb stress changes across
active faults elsewhere in the region, which is critical for evaluating near-
term seismic risks associated with the 2020 earthquake. A postseismic slip
solution will reveal whether the 2020 earthquake triggered any silent deep fault
slip or slip on adjacent unruptured areas of the Oriente Fault. The refined slip
solution will be used to predict and study the viscoelastic after-effects of the
earthquake, which will be critical for interpreting and modeling the regional
GPS velocity field for decades to come. Thew new data along with superb Jamaica
GPS data from the two decades before the earthquake will be essential for
refining viscosity estimates for the lower crustal and/or upper mantle, which
are critical for modeling and interpreting GPS data in tectonically active
regions worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.