* 2022955
* Collaborative Research: Cleaning stations as hubs for the maintenance and recovery of microbial diversity on coral reefs.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Amy Apprill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2023
* USD 254,669.00

Biodiversity in the ocean is influenced by interactions between disparate
organisms which ultimately shape population, community, and ecosystem dynamics.
Symbiotic interactions involving subsets of species can have disproportionate
impacts on communities, reaching well beyond each interacting species. Coral
reefs host some of the most iconic symbiotic interactions in nature and are host
to the highest diversity of life on the planet. Cleaning symbiosis, wherein
small fish or shrimp remove external parasites and associated microorganisms
from specific clients, is common on coral reefs. Sites on the reef occupied by
cleaners, or “cleaning stations”, attract a wide variety of fish species that
engage in direct physical contact with the cleaner. These highly used
territories are viewed both as “clinics of the sea”, where parasitized and
sickly fish seek the service of cleaners, but also as potential “garbage dumps”,
where unnecessary parasites and other microorganisms are removed. This project
seeks to understand the role of cleaning symbiosis transferring microbes in
coral reef environments. This research supports training for U.S. graduate
students and for undergraduates from Arkansas State University, a primarily
undergraduate institution that includes a large population of first-generation
college students. These students participate in field site research and have
opportunities to visit the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution for broader
exposure to ocean science and more specific laboratory training. The project
strengthens international collaboration and further builds on the existing
relationships between the team of scientists and resource managers, local
divers, fishers, and boat operators, as well as K-12 schools and environmental
education programs, and will therefore contribute to local economies. Outreach
efforts include a film highlighting this research and publicly accessible
narratives shared through press releases and an on-line
magazine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the benefits of cleaning to reef ecosystem
health have been extensively studied, the cleaning costs for cleaner species and
the role of cleaning stations as potential sinks for microbial diversity and
possibly even pathogens have never been assessed. Here, the researchers utilize
the unique features of cleaning stations to understand transfer of bacterial and
archaeal symbionts amongst fish and within coral reef environment. The study
capitalizes on cleanerfish access to multiple variety of hosts or clients within
stations to address new questions about how cleanerfish act as vectors to
transfer microorganisms between hosts on a reef and if and how these
microorganisms may play a broader functional role in reef resilience.
Specifically, the project addresses the following hypotheses: 1) Cleanerfishes
serve as keystone regulators of microbial communities, enhancing microbial
community diversity and transferring key microbial species between clients, and
2) Cleanerfishes are a particularly important contributor to reef resilience,
facilitating recovery of the microbiome following disturbance. The research team
uses an integrative interdisciplinary approach involving field and laboratory
observations and experiments, and molecular-based tools. The core research team
includes experts in cleaning mutualisms, fish behavior, coral reef ecology, and
microbial ecology. The proposed project aims to link behavior of individual
organisms with ecosystem-level process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.