* 2022254
* Collaborative Research: Data Driven Discovery of Singlet Fission Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Brian Reich, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this award. This project
leverages advances in quantum-mechanics-based materials simulations, data
science, and artificial intelligence to discover new solar cell materials. A
fraction of excess energy of light in the form of high-energy photons absorbed
by solar cell materials can be converted to heat rather than to electric
current. This results in a loss of energy conversion efficiency. Many crystals
are made of atoms that self-arrange in a regular spatially periodic pattern.
Crystals can be made where organic molecules can form the fundamental unit
instead of atoms. These molecular crystals may undergo a process known as
singlet fission, which enables the conversion of that excess light energy into
current carrying charges rather than heat. Singlet-fission-based solar cells are
not yet a commercial technology due to dearth of suitable materials that exhibit
this process. Over a million molecular crystal structures are known, but it is
unknown for which ones singlet fission can occur. Experiments and even advanced
quantum mechanical simulations are too costly and time consuming to test many
known or predicted new molecular crystals. To overcome this barrier, the
interdisciplinary team of experts in computational materials science and
statistics will harness methods of data science and artificial intelligence. The
team will investigate the use of machine learning methods to accelerate the
process of materials discovery by rapidly identifying potentially promising
candidate molecular crystals. The team will generate data from quantum-
mechanics-based simulations to construct and iteratively improve machine-learned
models. This research is expected to lead to the discovery of new materials that
exhibit singlet fission, which would advance solar cell technology and could
reduce the cost of solar cells. The research will lead to methodological
developments that would enable materials discovery for other applications.
&lt;br/&gt;This project also supports training in advanced high-performance
computing at the exascale, and community building at the intersection of
materials science and data science through organizing workshops and conferences.
An outreach activity will engage educators and K-12 students to raise awareness
of careers and research opportunities in materials engineering and data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to
this award. singlet fission is the conversion of one photogenerated singlet
exciton into two triplet excitons. There has been much interest in singlet
fission because of its potential to significantly increase the efficiency of
organic solar cells by harvesting two charge carriers from one photon. However,
few materials are presently known to exhibit intermolecular singlet fission with
high efficiency, hindering the realization of solid-state singlet-fission-based
solar cells. The chemical compound space of possible chromophores is infinitely
vast and largely unexplored. To enable computational discovery of materials that
exhibit singlet fission, the interdisciplinary team will develop a multi-
fidelity screening approach, integrating quantum-mechanics-based simulations at
different levels of fidelity with machine learning and database mining. Machine
learning algorithms will be used to learn from data generated by simulations and
to steer simulations for further data acquisition. The machine learning models
will dynamically adapt as more data is acquired. This will be implemented in a
fully automated iterative workflow, designed to run on exascale high performance
computers. &lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the discovery of new
intermolecular singlet fission chromophores, which will catalyze the realization
of "third generation" solid-state singlet-fission-based organic solar cells.
Structure-property correlations revealed by machine learning will advance the
fundamental understanding of singlet fission by deriving chemical insights and
design rules for chromophores and crystal forms with enhanced singlet-fission
efficiency. In addition to singlet-fission chromophores, materials may be
discovered with desirable properties for other organic electronic device
applications. In addition, this project will lead to new methodology needed to
tackle the data-science challenges posed by searching for singlet fission
materials. This project will lead to statistical developments in optimal
sampling strategies for high-dimensional problems involving many data sources
and in adaptive models that dynamically evolve as more data is acquired. The
developed approach may be extended to other problems, where properties of
interest arise from complex phenomena, for which data acquisition is costly or
time consuming, and predictive descriptors are unknown. &lt;br/&gt;This project
also supports training in advanced high-performance computing at the exascale,
and community building at the intersection of materials science and data science
through organizing workshops and conferences. An outreach activity will engage
educators and K-12 students to raise awareness of careers and research
opportunities in materials engineering and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.