* 2022983
* NSF IUSE: GP-UP: Accessing the geosciences through social action at the University of Puerto Rico Humacao
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Denny Fernandez del Viso, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 348,536.00

ITIAS-GEO program is an innovative transdisciplinary program that will create
opportunities for Hispanic undergraduate students at the University of Puerto
Rico Humacao (UPRH), a small, undergraduate minority serving institution with no
geoscience program, to experience the geosciences. Twenty undergraduate
students, comprising two cohorts, will be supported through a novel geoscience
learning ecosystem that incorporates both for-credit undergraduate community-
based social action research (CBPR) and co-curricular professional development
and geoscience career exposure. The students, recruited from the natural and
social sciences at UPRH, will identify, develop and conduct a geoscience project
under the mentorship of social and natural science faculty and in partnership
with the local community using CBPR conducted over a period of four semesters.
In doing so, students will engage deeply with locally relevant science and its
human context and gain vital STEM skills while collaborating with a community
already struggling with the impacts of climate change, inspiring them to pursue
a career in the geosciences. In addition to their locally based experience, the
students will participate in an intensive geoscience immersion week at the
University of Colorado at Boulder to enhance their network and understanding of
opportunities in the geosciences, and be part of a comprehensive professional
development and career support program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITIAS-GEO
program specifically addresses the imperative to broaden the participation of
underrepresented populations in STEM by providing support and incentives to
Hispanic, low-income students at a small minority serving institution to engage
with and continue toward careers in the geosciences, and builds capacity for
faculty at the UPRH to engage in geoscience-centered research within existing
social- and natural- science courses. By engaging the community in the research
from start to finish, the participating students and faculty will also provide
relevant and wanted information and support to a community that is working to
understand and adapt to the human and physical impacts of environmental hazards
and climate change. Key objectives of the project include: 1) Provide non-
geoscience majors from the social and natural sciences with awareness of and a
pathway into the geosciences through research, mentoring, and service learning;
2) Develop STEM career-relevant skills in critical thinking, data analysis,
scientific and public communication, interdisciplinary team science, and
scientific identity to undergraduate researchers; 3) Engage both students and
the local community in geoscience through community-based participatory research
and outreach; 4) Develop awareness of geoscience careers and their relevance for
Puerto Rico; and 5) Create a mechanism for collaboration between institutions
toward scientific and broadening participation goals in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.