* 2022716
* The Seismic Response of Mexico City Using Fiber-Optic Seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Zack Spica, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

Cities around the world are steadily growing. Their increasing concentration of
people, buildings, and infrastructures increases their vulnerability to
earthquakes. The application of seismic building codes reduces the risk for
populations. Yet, establishing and applying these codes at a city scale is not
trivial. It requires a local understanding of how strongly the ground may shake
during future events. Unfortunately, the available data to inform such an
understanding are often scarce. This is because of the difficulty to deploy a
dense network of seismic instruments in urban environment. Here, the researchers
test and further develop a new technology, called Distributed Acoustic Sensing
(DAS). DAS turns the fiber-optic cables running through every city into a dense
network of seismic sensors. By injecting laser pulses at one end of a cable and
analyzing the backscattered light, one can measure the shaking of the cable and
that of the ground around it. The team uses a DAS network on Stanford University
campus to improve the extraction of seismic measurements from fiber-optic
cables. The new methods are then tested at large scale in Mexico City, which
faces extreme seismic hazards. The project has strong implications for risks
assessment and mitigation in cities around the world. It fosters international
collaboration with Mexico. It also provides support and training for a
postdoctoral associate and a graduate student at University of Michigan Ann
Arbor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One main objective of the project is to
deploy a DAS seismic array on a telecom network located along subway lines in
Mexico City. The team has secured access to 3 fiber-optic cables which run over
~60 km across the city, from North to South. The researchers expect to acquire a
dataset of about 10,000 channels. They will develop new geophysical methods and
adapt them to the tremendous amount of data DAS provides. Mexico City seismic
activity and ground motions will be monitored for about 6 months. The project's
ultimate goal is to obtain shallow seismic velocity structures along the path of
the fiber-optic cables and provide estimates of ground-motion spatial and
temporal variability. The project, thus, is a real-life test of the efficiency
of DAS technology to assess and mitigate seismic risks in dense urban
environments. Its expected outcomes are new cost-effective methods to inform the
geotechnical properties of city shallow subsurface. In Mexico City, the
collected DAS data will help researchers better understand the strong site
amplification effects occurring in the city basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.