* 2022727
* Assessing topographic impacts on tropical glacier extent and moraine formation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Meredith Kelly, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 368,272.00

Many mountain glaciers are currently retreating as a result of climate change,
and decades of research have used past glacial fluctuations (advances and
retreats) to understand the mechanisms of past climate change. Yet, mountain
glaciers are also influenced by underlying topography (e.g., the mountain height
above a glacier and valley slope beneath a glacier). This project examines the
influence of topography on glacial extents using computer modeling in
conjunction with reconstructions of past glacial extents in mountain ranges in
Uganda and Colombia. The small footprint of these tropical mountain ranges makes
it likely that neighboring valleys experience similar climate conditions and,
thus, any differences in glacial extents should be due to topographic
differences among the valleys. Moreover, Uganda and Colombia are among the few
tropical locations where long-term records of glacial changes in multiple
adjacent valleys may be obtained. The project will improve the ability to
forecast future glacial changes and model landscape evolution. It will also
advance the use of past glacial extents to understand the causes of past climate
changes. The project supports an international tropical glacier workshop and the
development of high school STEM activities that aim to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups. It also supports two early career female researchers in
a domain of science where women remain highly
underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use glacial modeling in
combination with modern climate data and surface exposure dating of glacial
moraines (ridges that mark former glacial extents) to assess topographic impacts
on tropical glacial extents and moraine formation. It has the following two
objectives: 1) assess how variations in specific topographic characteristics
influence glacial extents using glacial modeling with idealized digital
elevation models; and 2) assess how variations in topography influenced past
glacial extents in two tropical mountain ranges (the Rwenzori Mountains in
Uganda and the Sierra Nevada del Cocuy in Colombia) using glacial modeling and
surface exposure dating of moraines. The project will provide one of the few
datasets available to examine the relative impacts of climate and topography on
glacial extents and, thus, advance the ability to model the response of glaciers
to future climate changes. It will also improve the ability to infer past
climate conditions from the geomorphic record of glacial
extents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.