* 2022629
* EAGER: Modes in Random Media and Tissue Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 03/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding wave propagation in random
systems is a fundamental problem with myriad applications. This work aims to
show that all wave phenomena can be reduced to simple resonance properties. The
role of resonances in wave propagation will be explored in space and time in
experiments, and in numerical simulations and analytical theory. It will be
shown that key aspects of waves in complex systems can be described in terms of
a simple sum. These findings will be utilized to characterize transport in novel
systems such as photonic topological insulators. The project includes
development of a new and hopefully very impactful medical imaging technique for
thin sections based on a spatial map of the transmission time. These studies
have implications for medical imaging, telecommunications, resource exploration,
and photonic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This
projects seeks to provide a simple and comprehensive understanding of the
statistics of modes and their role in wave propagation in random systems. Early
work by Wigner and Dyson on the statistics of resonances, variously known as
energy levels, eigenstates, quasi-normal modes, or simply as modes, focused on
the probability distribution of level spacings and widths in nuclear scattering.
But in open non-Hermitian systems, modes are not orthogonal, and it is the
correlation between them that has the greatest impact on wave transport and
energy deposition inside random systems. The role of modes in wave propagation
will be explored in space and time in microwave and optical experiments, and in
numerical simulations and analytical theory. The correlation between modes leads
to destructive interference between modes and greatly suppresses transmission
while leading to spatial and spectral correlation of the energy density within
disordered media. Though the interference between modes is crucial, it was
recently found that key dynamical variables, such as the transmission time,
density of states and the sum of energy deposited in the sample for unit flux
incident in all channels can be described as an incoherent sum over modes even
in systems with dissipation and gain. These results will be utilized to
characterize the limits of robust propagation along the domain wall between
metacrystals with different Chern numbers in topological insulators. The project
includes development of a new medical imaging modality for thin sections based
on a spatial map of the transmission time, which is equal to the spectral
derivative of the phase of the transmitted field. Finally, the simple functional
form for the derivative of the phase will be explored as an approach to
analyzing the field into the underlying modes. The results of these studies are
relevant to both classical and quantum waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.