* 2022293
* CAREER: Maximizing the Science Output of EXO-200
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Liang Yang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 02/28/2023
* USD 414,189.00

Neutrinos are among the most mysterious sub-atomic particles in the Universe.
Recent breakthroughs in neutrino oscillation experiments have revealed that they
have tiny masses and have raised several intriguing questions. Why are neutrinos
so much lighter than the other particles? What is the absolute scale of the
neutrino masses? And are the neutrinos their own antiparticles? The keys to
addressing these questions may lie in the search for a very rare decay process
called neutrinoless double beta decay. During such a decay, two neutrons inside
a nucleus simultaneously decay into two protons, emitting two electrons and no
neutrino. The goal of the project is to perform one of the most sensitive
searches of this rare decay using data from the EXO-200 experiment. A discovery
of this elusive decay would signify that neutrinos are their own antiparticles;
thus neutrinos obtain their masses differently from other particles. The results
may also shed light on the mystery of why there is more matter than anti-matter
in the Universe. In addition to his research on neutrinos, the principal
investigator will also develop an educational program to strengthen science
education at the middle-school level. Specifically, the PI will organize
workshops on middle-school physical science teaching in collaboration with the
College of Education at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and build
closer connections between middle-school students and science majors at Illinois
through a series of innovative outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will integrate research, outreach, and education around the development
of novel analysis techniques to enhance the performance of large liquid xenon
detectors such as EXO-200. In its Phase-I operation, EXO-200 has demonstrated
the unique capability of large liquid xenon detectors in the search for
neutrinoless double beta decay in Xe-136. With detector upgrades in 2016 and
three years of additional Phase-II running, EXO-200 can improve by threefold its
sensitivity to the Xe-136 neutrinoless double beta decay half-life. The work
focuses on the development of new analysis techniques to enhance the detector
energy resolution and improve its background rejection capabilities, which are
essential for maximizing the physics reach of EXO-200. Understanding and
demonstrating the ultimate performance of EXO-200 can provide essential inputs
to the design of future tonne-scale detectors. The analysis techniques to be
developed can also be applied to large noble liquid detectors for particle
physics experiments and medical imaging. In parallel, educational and outreach
activities are planned to enhance middle school science education. The PI
together with colleagues at Illinois will organize workshops for area middle
school teachers on physical science teaching in accordance with the New
Generation Science Standards and the development of hands-on classroom
activities to implement the new standards. The PI will also direct undergraduate
volunteers in outreach to middle school students through demonstrations, an
online forum, and assisting in school-initiated science programs.