* 2022154
* Collaborative Research: Blueschist rheology: experimental constraints on glaucophane strength and deformation mechanisms
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cailey Condit, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 294,571.00

Subduction zone faults host the largest earthquakes on earth and produce deadly
tsunamis. At depths greater than about 30 kilometers, these faults deform
continuously and build up stress on the locked shallower zones, ultimately
causing major earthquakes. However, because of a lack of experimental
constraints, the mechanisms by which deep portions of subduction zones behave is
not well understood. This work investigates the mechanical strength of
glaucophane, a ubiquitous subduction zone mineral, which largely controls the
behavior of these ductile zones. A set of deformation experiments at MIT’s Rock
Deformation Laboratory and the characterization of experimental products at the
University of Washington’s Structural Petrology Laboratory provide new
constraints on glaucophane strength. Results from this work directly inform our
understanding of natural earthquake hazards by placing ductile deformation
within the broader framework of subduction zone faults. This research funds two
early career scientists, one of whom is a woman, and will support two graduate
students, one of whom is an underrepresented minority in STEM. This work will
also provide a summer research opportunity, mentorship, and funding for an
underrepresented minority undergraduate student through the Research Experiences
in Solid Earth Science program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zones are the
loci of the world’s largest geologic hazards and constitute the main avenue for
chemical recycling between surface material and the deep earth. The tempo and
occurrence of these processes are directly influenced by the mechanical behavior
and strength of the subduction interface, the thin tabular fault and shear zone
that accommodates subduction deformation and motion. The rheological evolution
of this interface is fundamental to understanding plate tectonics, subduction
zone dynamics, convergence rates, and plate boundary slip behaviors.
Observations of the rock record from between the brittle-ductile transition zone
and sub-arc depths suggest that this rheology is controlled by viscous creep in
blueschists and that deformation is accommodated in large part by glaucophane, a
sodic amphibole. However, there is currently a lack of any rheological
parameters for the viscous deformation of glaucophane, and thus blueschist
facies rocks cannot be incorporated into geologic or geodynamic models of
subduction zones. This knowledge gap is due to a dearth of experimental studies
on creep in blueschist facies rocks and exists in part because of the challenges
associated with accessing viscous deformation in hydrous minerals in the
laboratory. A Griggs-type high pressure high temperature deformation apparatus
at MIT’s Rock Deformation Laboratory is capable of producing viscous creep in
glaucophane by utilizing predominantly single-phase aggregates. The mechanical
results of these experiments provide key rheological parameters and a flow law
for creep in blueschist facies rocks during subduction. Microstructural analyses
of experimental products, done at the University of Washington’s Structural
Petrology Laboratory, including high-resolution electron beam imaging and
electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), link these mechanical results to
deformation mechanisms (e.g., dislocation creep or diffusion creep) and provide
a bridge between the experimental results and observations from the rock
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.