* 2022618
* Collaborative Research: NNA Track 1: Central North Atlantic Marine Historical Ecology Project
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Nicole Misarti, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2023
* USD 973,341.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions between social systems and natural
environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic residents, Data and
Observation, Global Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atlantic cod has been an important resource for coastal
and inland communities throughout the Atlantic world for at least 1000 years.
This humble fish played an important role in feeding communities, developing
markets, and facilitating trade and continues to be a vitally important species.
Management decisions made about existing cod populations are based on
scientist’s ideas of what a baseline ‘normal’ or ‘natural’ cod population is.
This ‘baseline’ for cod is mostly based on data from the last 100-150 years,
including how large cod populations have been, how large the fish have been, how
old, etc. On top of this are ideas of how these fish respond to changing human
and environmental conditions. A variety of techniques from marine biology,
archaeology, and history now allow us to track changing marine ecological
conditions as well as relative population size over the last millennium. By
creating a deeper record of cod populations over the last millennium, this
project contributes vital data that will improve understanding of the cod
fisheries as they reacted to climate, political and economic change in the past
and how the Icelandic fishing communities of today can adapt and remain
resilient as the fishery changes with warming Atlantic waters and new political
and economic drivers. The project uniquely involves international and
transdisciplinary research between the natural environment and social systems
including archaeology, ecology, history, fisheries and oceanography. The
knowledge gained from the project is beneficial to our planning strategy to deal
with impacts of environmental change on American fisheries and the people who
depend on them. The new interdisciplinary methodology also provides novel
opportunities for educating university students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use bones from cod as well as other coastal species that have been
excavated from archaeological sites in Iceland and the Faroes over the last 30
years. These sites were lived in from the 9th to the 19th centuries. These bones
will be the subject of a variety of biochemical analyses that allow us to track
population size, body length, and feeding changes over the last millennia. These
analyses will be combined with archaeological and historical methods to build a
new and deeper record of the relationship between cod, humans, and the
environment that will serve as an important tool in managing this relationship
in the present and future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.