* 2022685
* Mechanisms for causal and non-causal predictive learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Erie Boorman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 657,263.00

A key feature of human learning is use of the past to predict what is likely in
the future. For example, people rely on past experience to predict that thunder
is often followed by a downpour. But there are different ways to learn how
events are related. For example, some events co-occur (thunder and rain), while
others are causally related (cloud cover and rain). People can also learn long-
range relationships—for example, that rain will lead to more flowers, which
leads to more insects, even though rain may not directly affect insects
population. This project will investigate how different brain areas support
these different kinds of learning abilities, and will fill important gaps in
understanding exactly how the brain changes in response to experience. As such,
the proposed research will significantly advance our understanding of how the
brain supports learning and memory. Because predictive and causal relationships
are at the heart of many high-level cognitive activities including reasoning,
language, decision making, the proposed research will have a broad scientific
impact. More broadly, the findings may have important implications for education
by elucidating how we learn, and for artificial intelligence, in which causal
reasoning is a major frontier. Additional impacts on education and society will
also be enabled through our outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A set of
neural areas, important for memory, show learning-related changes that represent
predictive relations. However, it is unknown how predictive memories form, or
what they reflect about observed experience. This project will investigate which
“core predictive memory” areas support learning of causal or non-causal
predictive relations. Experimental aims will focus on three major principles of
causal learning: sensitivity to confounds, temporal specificity, and
representation of structure. Computational models will make specific predictions
about how these areas should respond to evidence if they learn according to
classic theories from theoretical neuroscience. A well-established fMRI measure
of relational strength will then test these model predictions in core memory
areas. The first aim will test whether core memory areas are sensitive to
confounds, or reflect simple co-occurrence. The second aim will test whether
core memory areas are temporally specific. This will resolve whether and which
areas learn temporally precise, causal relations as opposed to cumulative
predictive relations better suited for planning. The third aim will test whether
core memory areas represent explicit structure. Overall, these findings will
sharpen and deepen understanding of how predictive memory areas work together to
support higher order cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.