* 2022356
* Workshop on Women in Medical Robotics; Atlanta, Georgia; April 22-24, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Ann Majewicz Fey, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scheidt
* 12/31/2020
* USD 16,450.00

This award will provide support for a workshop that will be part of the
International Symposium on Medical Robotics, taking place at Georgia Tech in
Atlanta, Georgia, April 22-24, 2020. The goals of this workshop are to highlight
the contributions of women and underrepresented individuals to the field of
medical robotics, and to inspire the next generation of medical roboticists.
Speakers will provide a comprehensive outlook on medical robotics by covering
research from bench to bedside across a wide spectrum of applications within the
field of medical robotics. This workshop aligns with the overall objectives of
the M3X program in that interactive sessions will center around topics including
the modeling and integration of human intent and human sensorimotor capabilities
into robotic controls, and the influence of robotic behavior on the mind and
motor function of the human in the loop. This award will promote the progress of
science through interactive panel sessions capturing the unique professional
perspectives of medical robotics researchers who have chosen "alternate career
paths" and are at different stages of their careers. Special emphasis will be
given to women and underrepresented minorities in the invited research talks.
This workshop will provide an opportunity for networking among the participants
to foster collaboration and to create mentorship opportunities for students and
junior researchers. Thus, the award will benefit society by supporting education
and diversity in the field of medical robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Workshop on Women in Medical Robotics will bring together experts from academia,
industry and clinical practice for a one-day event highlighting the
contributions of women and underrepresented individuals to the ﬁeld of medical
robotics. The workshop will include research talks on topics such as: Medical
and Surgical Robotics, and Human-centric Modeling for Medical Robotic Systems.
Interactive panel sessions will also discuss professional development and
specific challenges faced by women and underrepresented individuals in medical
robotics research. The event will also include a student poster session
highlighting research at the intersection of mind, machine, and motor systems
(M3X) in the context of medical robotic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.