* 2022253
* Informational Masking of Communication Signals: Behavioral Constraints and Neural Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Mark Bee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2024
* USD 696,404.00

Vocal communication is fundamentally important in the social and sexual
behaviors of humans and other animals. In many species, vocal communication
occurs in large social groups, where high levels of background noise constrain a
listener’s ability to hear and process vocalizations. In the context of human
speech perception, these constraints are collectively known as the "cocktail
party problem," which refers to the difficulty of following a conversation in a
crowd. Recognizing speech in noise is particularly challenging for people with
hearing loss. At present, how the noise of a crowd constrains the brain’s
ability to recognize vocalizations is poorly understood at a cellular level.
Discovering the origin of these constraints and their impacts on vocal
recognition is necessary to advance knowledge of the neural basis of hearing and
vocal communication. Treefrogs are one example of an animal that encounters and
solves a biological analog of the human cocktail party problem. During their
breeding season, male treefrogs gather around suitable bodies of water where
they produce loud mating calls in dense and noisy choruses to attract females.
In order to reproduce, a female treefrog must recognize the vocalizations of a
calling male of her species amid the cacophony of a noisy breeding chorus. This
project integrates behavioral experiments with neurophysiological recordings
from individual neurons in a subcortical area of the vertebrate brain to
identify the mechanisms by which noise interferes with a female treefrog’s
ability to extract information about species identity from the calls of a
potential mate. The public outreach component of this project involves the
creation of a new museum exhibit called “Ear of the Beholder” at the Bakken
Museum. The PI will host a formal graduate student exchange program between the
labs of the PI and Co-PI and will have an extensive undergraduate research
program with a special emphasis on under-represented populations in biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noise interferes with signal processing in two
fundamentally different ways. “Energetic” masking impairs signal detection in
noise and occurs when signals and noise produce competing excitation in the same
peripheral auditory filter, such that they directly compete on the auditory
nerve. “Informational” masking occurs when competing sounds disrupt central
processes for extracting signal information, which in turn degrades signal
recognition. Most behavioral studies of masking in animal communication focus on
energetic masking. Few studies have investigated the neural basis of
informational masking at a cellular level in animal models. Consequently,
significant gaps remain in understanding how noise causes a breakdown of neural
processing to give rise to vocal constraints with evolutionary consequences.
This project integrates behavioral experiments on mate choice with extracellular
and in vivo, whole-cell recordings of interval-counting neurons in the anuran
inferior colliculus to investigate informational masking in Cope’s gray treefrog
(Hyla chrysoscelis). Female gray treefrogs only recognize sounds as mating calls
when they exceed a threshold number of pulses in length, a process mediated by
interval-counting neurons. This project tests the central hypothesis that
concurrent sounds impair extraction of this temporal information by disrupting
sound processing by temporally tuned interval-counting neurons in the inferior
colliculus. Our working hypothesis is that informational masking increases the
threshold number of pulses required for call recognition by altering the time-
dependent integration of excitation and inhibition performed by interval-
counting neurons. The expected outcome of this project is a better understanding
of the neural mechanisms involved in hearing and vocal communication in noisy
social groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.