* 2022876
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Marine Arctic Resilience, Adaptations and Transformations
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kevin Berry, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
focus on Resilience in a Rapidly Changing Arctic. Integrated teams of scientists
and stakeholders will address key areas of arctic resilience understanding and
action. This collaboration of academic and non-academic knowledge systems
constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that will advance not only
understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but also spur action,
inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for resilience. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Marine Arctic Resilience, Adaptations and
Transformations (MARAT) project will focus on Arctic marine food webs, which are
changing at unprecedented rates to understand how species will adapt, how new
ecological configurations will emerge, and how communities dependent on marine
resources will cope with change. This project will integrate models, local
knowledge, and comparative case studies to assess the resilience of Arctic
marine food webs to climate and fishing pressures, and how communities adapt or
transform to such changes. The project will use methods and theories from the
natural and social sciences, as well as integrating perspectives from local
communities, national governmental agencies and multilateral institutions all
focused on sustainable fisheries. Specifically, the MARAT project will employ
food web models, local ecological knowledge, and comparative case studies to
evaluate the resilience of Arctic marine food webs to climate change and fishing
pressures. The project will: 1) generate a generic Arctic marine food web model;
2) develop case studies focused on Arctic char in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut,
Canada, and salmon in Alaska; 3) explore how Indigenous local and scientific
knowledge inform fisheries co-management; and 4) develop tools to assess the
adaptive capacities of Arctic communities relative to changes in marine
environments. This project will expand previous efforts of the Arctic Resilience
Report to upscale the resilience assessment of the Arctic by providing insights
on how marine food webs are changing in the Arctic, and what opportunities and
challenges they pose to governing agencies and local communities depending on
marine ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.