* 2022984
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the atmospheric flux of bio-active trace elements to the southwestern Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Vincent J. Salters, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2024
* USD 284,928.00

Marine phytoplankton (microscopic photosynthetic algae) produce about half of
the oxygen we breath and remove billions of tons of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere each year. This primary productivity plays a central role in
controlling atmospheric carbon dioxide (pCO2) levels and the global climate.
Yet, phytoplankton productivity is limited by lack of iron (an essential trace
element) in about 40% of the global ocean. While phytoplankton productivity
helps remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, it also removes iron and other
essential trace elements (like manganese, cobalt, copper, and zinc) from the
upper ocean. One critical issue is, “What are the sources for these essential
trace elements that are needed to replace those removed by phytoplankton to keep
the annual productivity cycles going?” This is especially important in the
waters of the Southern Ocean around Antarctica, where ocean circulation brings
deep water to the surface; water that is enriched in nutrients like nitrate and
phosphate but depleted in essential trace elements. The main source for iron in
the open ocean is from desert dust deposition. In this project, scientists will
collect aerosols (fine particles in the air) and rain samples over the Southern
Ocean to measure how much iron (and the other essential trace elements) is
depositing to surface waters. Other scientists will be measuring how fast
phytoplankton are growing, and together we will learn how the input of trace
elements from dust helps to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This
information can then be used to help predict the future of Earth’s climate. The
scientists will communicate results of their study to the public via open house
events at their respective campuses, as well as through online forums. One
undergraduate student from Florida International University, a leading minority
serving university, would be supported and trained as part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will measure the aerosol fractional solubility
and atmospheric deposition of bio-essential trace elements as part of a
multidisciplinary project studying trace element sources, transformations and
sinks in the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern Ocean. The research cruise
track will cross the currents and oceanographic fronts that are major pathways
of the general circulation in the region where we expect to find multiple
possible aerosol sources, and where aerosol Fe deposition and rainfall rates are
predicted to range over 1-2 orders of magnitude. Aerosol samples (bulk and size-
fractionated) will be collected on a daily basis and event-based rain samples to
be analyzed for total and soluble major and trace elements including nitrate,
phosphate, silicate, chloride, sulfate, Na, Mg, Al, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn,
and Cd. In addition, scientists will analyze the water-soluble organic compounds
in aerosols, focusing on compounds such as oxalate and methane-sulfonic acid
(MSA) that enhance aerosol trace element solubility. Scientists will use Be-7
concentrations in aerosols and the upper water column to calculate aerosol bulk
deposition velocities and test whether the relationship between rainfall rate
and bulk deposition velocity that we have previously published can be applied on
a more global basis. Further, scientists will use the trace element
concentration data along with air-mass back trajectory analysis to apportion the
aerosols between anthropogenic and natural sources, and study how aerosol
sources affect the fractional solubility. Aerosol and rain subsamples will be
provided to collaborators on the cruise for the analysis of additional important
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.