* 2022707
* NNA Track 2: PredictFest: To Build Capacity for Arctic Stakeholders in Need of Multi-Scale Predictions
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Donna Hauser, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 258,530.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment and social systems, addresses
important societal challenges, and engages with local and Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has been made to improve
the accuracy both of short-term weather forecasts and longer-term climate, sea-
ice, and other environmental forecasts. Nevertheless, there remains a
forecasting gap on the scale from two weeks to a few months, especially in the
Arctic. This subseasonal-to-seasonal (S2S) scale is important for planning
subsistence hunting, commercial fishing, hazard response and risk mitigation,
and other activities. This project supports development of improved S2S
prediction capacity through a collaborative design process and workshop,
PredictFest, that engages Arctic stakeholders to identify needs and applications
for such predictions. PredictFest participants will prepare research pitches
that articulate stakeholder planning and decision making needs, identify
technical and modelling approaches that respond to those needs, identify
relevant connections and applications, and set out a plan for continued
development. PredictFest provides an opportunity for Arctic residents and
scientists to work together to develop applications for seasonal forecasts of
sea ice, precipitation, and other environmental factors, which support
traditional and commercial uses of marine and coastal regions. In addition, the
project fosters a team-centered approach to applied research, education, and
outreach and builds relationships between Arctic residents and scientists to
support future work. Direct engagement between scientists and other Arctic
residents, including Indigenous organizations, community members, business
owners, and public decision makers, encourages new thinking about how seasonal
forecast information may be used and what steps may be taken to realize stated
goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports an innovative new approach to
capacity building that leverages emergent S2S platforms and science to identify
research programs to support the diverse set of Arctic stakeholder planning and
decision-making needs. The project contains three phases: (1) stakeholder
engagement and development of sub-seasonal to seasonal prediction focus, 2)
composition of development teams and implementation of PredictFest, and 3) post-
assessment and collaborative refinement of PredictFest outputs. Co-learning and
co-production contribute to the rapid identification of arenas where seasonal
scale predictions might be most beneficial to decision making in support of
natural, built, and social environments. During PredictFest each participating
team is comprised of natural and social scientists, stakeholders and community
representatives, as well as technical support staff. The topic of focus, Marine
Environments and the Near-shore Coastal Interface, generates distinct
predictions that can be used to support community subsistence centered on marine
mammals, commercial fisheries including fixed gear participants, and hazard
response and risk mitigation planning. From a prediction standpoint a number of
approaches will be pursued by the teams. These include developing new
relationships between variables typically using linear models or tree-based
learning, using time-series forecasting techniques models such as Autoregressive
Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), and pattern
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.