* 2022397
* Collaborative Research: Novel Modular High-density High-efficiency medium voltage power converter
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Dong Dong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 197,203.00

Novel Modular High-density High-efficiency Medium-voltage Power
Converter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High power solid-state power converter is a
critical component in many applications, such as accessing renewables energy and
energy storages from grid, e.g. solar, wind, and batteries and driving high
power motors. Traditionally, most of such power converter are rated below 1
kilovolt or within lower voltage class for its simplicity. Recently, for further
system cost reduction and efficiency improvement, industry is moving toward
medium-voltage solutions, which can directly access the medium voltage grid, to
save bulky transformer, cables and cost of the converter. To achieve such goal,
it is desirable to develop a medium voltage high-power solid-state power
converter, which is high-efficient, high power density/low volume and with ac
output waveform close to an ideal sinusoidal waveform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address such desire, the principle investigators proposed a novel modular high
density medium-voltage power converter topology, namely three-level hybrid
modular multilevel converter, which combines branches with cascaded modular
cells and traditional three-level structure. The proposed concept leads to
various topology variations for medium voltage application. In particular, the
rectifier variation with diode as the three level structure can provide a
significant cost and total system size saving and efficiency improvement
compared to classic modular multilevel converter solution. Compared with the
state of art solution, this proposed solution can reduce the converter
volume/weight by up to 50% and the improve the converter efficiency by up to 30%
while achieve the same voltage and current rating. In addition, thanks to the
modular design, the proposed solution can also achieve high-fidelity ac output
and can be scaled up to higher voltage rating for future applications without
intensive engineering design rework. The low voltage and medium voltage silicon
carbide devices can be used in the proposed family of topologies to leverage its
switching-loss savings to synthesize high-fidelity ac output. Such modular
design also means built-in system redundancy which can substantially improve
system reliability. Thus, the intellectual merits of the proposed solution will
make a strong impact on a broad range of medium voltage power conversion
applications, like renewable energy grid-integration, subsea and offshore dc
power delivery, naval medium voltage direct current power system, industrial
variable speed drives, and transportation high-speed electric propulsion system.
There are many fundamental control challenges and operation analysis for this
topology and its variations. Through the proposed program, the detailed topology
and operation analysis of the family of proposal converter topology will be
performed for both unity power factor and non-unity power factor conditions. The
phase-arm and phase energy balancing strategies will be explored and verified in
simulation. And its benefits will be analyzed through detailed engineering
design for down-selected example systems, including fault handling capability.
In the end, scaled prototypes will be developed to demonstrate its innovation
and benefit to industry. The unique industry consortium and Navy collaboration
provided by the universities will foster a collaborative relationship among
industry members, Navy R&amp;D community, and academic researchers, which will
consequently make a strong impact through this NSF research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.