* 2022576
* I-Corps:  Early Detection of Recurrence for High-Risk Breast Cancer Patients
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Lonnie Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the well-being of women at-risk for breast cancer (BC) recurrence. BC is a
leading cause of death for women in the United States and a substantial
contributor to decreased quality of life. Each year, more than 250,000 American
women are diagnosed with BC and an estimated 30% of BC patients will experience
a recurrence within 5 years. Though methods exist to approximate the risk of
recurrence, there is no way to determine if and when a patient will experience a
recurrence. When BC advances to a late stage, there is a decrease in quality of
life characterized by distressing pain, depression, and a 30-70% loss in walking
capacity, balance, and physical strength. Economically, the cost of care for
late stage BC is 2-fold greater than early stage, and it imposes an economic
burden of $12 billion per year in lost productivity and healthcare costs. The
commercial development and clinical deployment of the proposed device which
monitors for BC recurrence would enable therapeutic interventions at life-
preserving timescales. This would preserve patient health, provide peace-of-
mind, and relieve financial strain resulting from reactive, late-stage
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes an implantable system
for monitoring and measuring markers of health and disease in a way that is
fundamentally distinct from methods used clinically today. A small microporous
biomaterial implant has been developed that sits beneath the skin and enables
the monitoring of cancer recurrence. Extensive research has demonstrated that
the proposed implants become vascularized and collect immune cells. In mouse
models of cancer, changes in the cell composition and gene expression of the
implant can be used to monitor and diagnose cancer recurrence. The team has
demonstrated the non-invasive monitoring of cancer biomarkers as a means of
providing high-value diagnostic data. This new method for early detection of BC
recurrence represents an improvement over the status quo and emerging liquid
biopsy technologies. Currently, recurrence is diagnosed when symptomatic and by
mammography - both limited to sizable tumors greater than 0.5 cm. Liquid
biopsies that measure cancer DNA in the blood have low sensitivity and are only
capable of detecting breast cancer at a sensitivity of 10% (at 98% specificity)
in patients already diagnosed by mammography. The proposed implant would
continuously monitor for biomarkers of cancer recurrence to enable the diagnosis
and treatment at timescales that extend survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.