* 2022894
* Collaborative Research: NRI: INT: Dense 3D Reconstruction of Dynamic Actors in Natural Environments using  Multiple Flying Cameras
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 638,460.00

While large-scale multi-camera domes have been developed for data collection in
controlled laboratory settings it is not possible to achieve a similar level of
measurement quality outdoors where there is much potential benefit to such data
collection. For example, use of such measurements include the body dynamics of a
running cheetah, or people, or analyzing herding behaviors of animals or birds.
This leads to scientists relying on extremely inefficient and dangerous data
collection methods. For example, biologists studying the behaviors of wild
animals try to predict where the animals will be and place some cameras which
only give some limited data at specific locations. This project addresses such
challenges by exploring the research of methods and development of a large-scale
data collection tool for high-resolution and multi-viewpoint visual recording
and motion analysis of natural group behaviors (e.g., herds of animals or groups
of people) in-the-wild over very large environments (e.g., desert plains or
mountain sides) using a team of flying robots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops computational models that integrate the fundamentals of
computer vision and multi-agent control to measure the group of actors in 3D.
Through the development of this system, this project will make major advances in
technology at the intersection of perception and control that include: (1) a new
study of methods for precise, rapid, and robust target motion forecasting and
relative state estimation that estimates the 3D motion of the robots and actors
quickly with strong uncertainty estimates; (2) a new decomposition of the
perception-aware multi-objective multi-UAV safe motion planning problem, that
allows long-term planning based on consistent actor forecasting uncertainty
models and coverage objectives; (3) a new guaranteed safe but adaptive paradigm
for reactive flight control that is able to generate safety maneuvers even under
large disturbances and vehicle dynamics changes, and that can leverage prior
flight experience for real-time adaptation; (4) new theory of 3D reconstruction
for dynamic scenes captured by UAVs that will enable high-resolution mesh and
skeletal reconstruction of the groups of actors. The research outcome will be
disseminated through multiple educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.