* 2022577
* Collaborative Research: NNA Track 1: Global impacts and social implications of changing thermokarst lake environments near Yukon River Watershed communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Katey Walter Anthony, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 907,444.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems and the natural
environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data and
Observation, Forecasting, and Global Impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations
and modeling suggest the globe is standing on the inflection point of abrupt
permafrost change. Increased methane emissions from newly formed lakes in
melting permafrost regions likely play a major role in global climate. Reduction
in permafrost and associated landscape change increasingly place Arctic and
global communities at risk. Hence, improved forecasts for planning are
critically needed. This project brings Alaskan communities together with social
and natural scientists to examine changes in permafrost thaw lake environments,
including the effects on Yukon River watershed villages and global climate. The
project goals were defined by the Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council
(YRITWC) to focus on lake area change, drinking water quality, and frozen
transport corridorsâ€”topics identified by local stakeholders as critically
important. The study sites comprise six villages across the vast Yukon watershed
varying in permafrost types, climates, ecosystems, communities, and cultures.
Project scientists and interns and advisors from Yukon villages are measuring
lake area change, water chemistry, extent of ground melt, and methane emissions.
This project is a collaboration between Yukon River Watershed indigenous
villages, the YRITWC, Northern Social-Environmental Research (NSER), the
Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) at the University of Colorado
Boulder (CU), Mechanical Engineering (CU), the Cooperative Institute for
Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES), and the University of Alaska
Fairbanks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research study region, methane ebullition
from thermokarst lakes is an imminent source of major increases to the radiative
effect but substantial uncertainty surrounds the timing and scale. Land and
aerial observations of present-day methane emissions in permafrost-dominated
regions of Alaska are highly divergent. To reconcile this uncertainty, two new
technologies are being deployed to bridge missing measurement scales: 1) Dual
frequency comb spectroscopy is being used in the Arctic for the first time, and
2) Fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicles provide novel methane sensing.
Additionally, Indigenous knowledge of landscape change is being utilized with
frozen ground/lake ice phenology to inform and add context to collected
measurements by employing qualitative research techniques, participatory
mapping, and semi-directed interviews. Research results have direct local
application through integration with the Indigenous Observation Network database
that links Indigenous, State, and Federal entities. The capacity for co-
produced, adaptive forecasts is being enhanced with a web-based, open-source
modeling environment of permafrost dynamics, climate, and surface processes.
Based on guidance from the YRITWC, a Landscape Evolution Model of lake area
change is being developed for its community planning applications. Indigenous
knowledge provides key inputs for the model based upon a new mismatch matrix
approach where matches can validate outputs, and mismatches reveal potential
opportunities to adjust parameters and optimize forecasts. This
interdisciplinary approach converges natural and social science paradigms to
produce environmental knowledge important for contributing to the understanding
of both global dynamics and addressing local societal
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.