* 2022421
* Single-Step Fabrication and Programming of Shape-Memory Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Pranav Soman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2024
* USD 453,457.00

Manufacturing technologies that employ smart materials have the potential to
revitalize American manufacturing in diverse areas, such as aerospace,
biomedicine, energy, and healthcare, through creation of devices that can
perform dynamic functions that cannot be achieved by any current approach. Gaps
in understanding of the design and preparation of smart materials and the
effects of materials processing on their properties and functionality has led to
limited fabrication paradigms. This work investigates the fundamental science
underlying the interaction of programmed temperature-induced strains and the
changes in shape upon heating of shape memory polymers. A process termed
Programming-via-Printing will enable single-step fabrication of fully 3D, solid
or porous devices with uniform or spatially varying functionality from
individual, rather than composite, smart materials using 3D printers. This
research has the potential not only to promote the progress of science through
improved fundamental understanding of manufacturing of smart materials but will
advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare by broadly impacting the
many fields using smart materials. Improved understanding will bring the
manufacturing of complex smart material devices to new application areas. The
multi-disciplinary approach and integrated science and engineering education
activities will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
research and democratize and facilitate spread of the technology
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use integrated,
interdisciplinary experimentation and simulation to contribute in-depth
understanding of advanced manufacturing principles for application of shape-
memory polymers in 3D printing. Strains programmed in 3D shape-memory polymers
during printing can be quantitatively understood, predicted, and controlled to
create complex shapes and functions not currently achieved. The research will:
study and tune programming of shape-memory during printing; model determinants
of shape-memory from synthesis through printing to understand, predict, and
control function; and design, characterize, and study in proof-of-concept shape-
memory polymer devices that can only be prepared when programmed via printing.
These contributions are significant, because they are expected to provide new
fundamental manufacturing understanding of the design, development, and
modification of shape-memory polymers for 3D printing while also broadly
enabling future applications of shape-memory polymers in 3D printing through
study of the Programming-via-Printing approach and discovery of new
manufacturing phenomena that can only be studied or applied when shape-memory is
programmed via printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.