* 2022279
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Securing the Hardware and Software for Approximate Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Qiaoyan Yu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,988.00

Approximate Computing (AC) trades accuracy for performance and energy
efficiency. AC is increasingly attractive in various computation-intensive
applications such as imaging processing, audio recognition, information search,
and artificial intelligence. However, recent work shows that the unique
approximate behavior and computational uncertainty in AC systems attract new
attack opportunities. Compromised AC modules will sabotage the integrity and
security of the entire computing system because AC components closely interact
with non-AC modules in the same system. This project will identify the risk of
applying approximate mechanisms in computing systems and explore effective
methods to protect AC systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop holistic, hardware-software integrated methods to secure
AC systems. More specifically, the research tasks include: (1) performing a
thorough study on the security vulnerabilities of the hardware and software for
AC systems, (2) developing methods to locate the vulnerable AC modules, (3)
exploring hardware and software obfuscation methods to secure AC systems, and
(4) evaluating the attack resilience of a cross-layer proactive defense
framework in practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this
project will facilitate the security of large-scale energy-efficient computing
systems used in military, government, transportation, and commercial
applications. This project is expected to support female Ph.D. students and
engage more women students via the Workshop for Women in Hardware and Systems
Security (WISE). The project will also promote undergraduate research and train
undergraduate students to compete in international security
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The output of the project (source code,
documentation, experiment log, and scholarly publications) will be managed by
the version control system Git. New developed curriculum materials will be
managed by the course system Canvas at the University of New Hampshire (UNH). A
local copy of all the data and documents will be stored in the backup servers at
UNH. Data will be retained for at least three years beyond the award period. The
scholarly publications, presentations, and open-source code will be available on
the project homepage at https://mypages.unh.edu/qyu/secure-approximate-
computing-systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.