* 2022428
* Entanglement and emergence in quantum states of matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Xiao-Gang Wen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2024
* USD 720,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education that aims to use recently developed concepts for describing
topological states of electrons in materials to gain insight into how strongly
interacting systems of electrons organize themselves in electrically conducting
states. There are many different kinds of materials in the world, such as
metals, insulators, and semiconductors. These materials make electronic devices,
such as cell phones, computers, TV's, and even the internet possible. To design
electronic devices with desired functions, theories are needed to describe and
to predict the properties of metals, insulators, and
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;As the theoretical physicist Landau discovered, states
of matter such as liquids and crystals can be organized through the symmetry
transformations performed on a given state that leaves it unchanged. For
example, a rotation of 90 degrees around a principle axis of a crystal of common
salt, can rotate new atoms into positions that were originally occupied by the
very same kind of atom, so the crystal appears unchanged. The concept of
symmetry also allows magnetic and other states to be organized by similar
considerations. In recent years, it has been discovered that ideas from
topology, the branch of mathematics concerned with geometric properties that are
unchanged by deformations, twisting, and stretching objects, bring insight into
new possible phases of matter, called topological phases. Topological insulators
are a common example. They are fundamentally different from ordinary insulators
in that while the bulk does not conduct electricity, their surfaces do, as if
they belonged to a metal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is becoming understood that
quantum entanglement is another underlying principle for materials, one which
leads to a new class of quantum materials, also known as topological materials.
Entanglement is a purely quantum property of a system that has no analog in our
everyday experience. It reflects connections between the properties of a quantum
system's parts, even if the parts become physically separated. The property is
reflected in the structure of the many-electron state. The corresponding
material theory -- the theory of topological order -- predicts a new class of
insulators and semiconductors with new topological and quantum properties. These
topological materials may play key roles in making quantum computers, just like
silicon plays a key role in making commonly available conventional computers and
cell phones of today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education that aims to use modern
fundamental concepts developed for topological states of matter to gain insight
into how strongly interacting systems of electrons organized in gapless states.
Research over the last 30 years reveals that Landau's symmetry breaking theory
only describes a small set of possible phases that matter can have. The phases
of matter can be much richer than has ever imagined before. The concepts of
topological order and symmetry protected trivial (SPT) order to describe those
new types of quantum phases. After much research, a systematic classification
understanding of all topological orders and SPT orders for both bosonic and
fermionic systems, in 1-, 2-, and 3-dimensional spaces has emerged. The time is
now ripe to attack the next big problem: a systematic understanding of strongly
correlated gapless states. This award supports the PI's research to engage this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI takes the view that in general, an
interacting system wants to be gapped, the most stable state. If an interacting
system is gapless, the gapless state must be very special and highly organized,
so that those gapless excitations can remain gapless even in the presence of
interactions. This suggests that the general and systematic understanding of
gapless quantum&lt;br/&gt;states is possible. First, the low energy part of a
gapless state may become several decoupled sectors, where the interactions
between different sectors flow to zero in the infrared limit under
renormalization group flow. This appears to happen quite generally, such as the
sectors with different velocities in 1d gapless system become decoupled at low
energies. Consequently, in the low energy limit, there are often emergent
symmetries and higher symmetries. Since each decoupled low energy sector is not
a full system, each sector by&lt;br/&gt;itself is often anomalous. A sector by
itself may have a gravitational anomaly or higher symmetry anomaly. It is well
known that an anomaly can affect low energy dynamics, in particular, it can
protect the low energy excitations with the result that they are gapless in some
cases. The "gaplessness" of each decoupled sector may be understood via its
anomaly. This may enable a systematic understanding of strongly correlated
gapless states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strongly correlated gapless states
should be much more complicated and much richer than strongly correlated gapped
states. It may take some time to gain a fully systematic understanding of
gapless states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.