* 2022746
* Collaborative Research: Did Mantle Magma Cause Ultrahigh-Temperature Metamorphism (UHTM) in Southern Madagascar?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Holder, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 259,405.00

The collision of Earth’s continents, as a result of plate tectonics, causes the
crust to thicken, buckle, and become hotter, leading to lasting transformations:
metamorphic mineral reactions, the formation of magma, and the reorganization of
elements throughout the Earth’s crust. These processes that permanently alter
the continents are most extreme in ultrahigh-temperature metamorphic (UHTM)
rocks, where temperatures exceeded 900 °C. Recognizing these transformations in
rocks from the Earth’s past is fundamental to understanding how the continents
have changed through time. Yet, why UHTM occurs in some continental collision
zones, but not others, remains unknown. This project will address the unresolved
question of how and why rocks reach such ultrahigh temperatures by investigating
the UHTM rocks exposed in southern Madagascar. Specifically, this work will test
the hypothesis that magmas ascended from Earth’s mantle and heated the rocks of
southern Madagascar to temperatures exceeding those of typical mountain belts,
causing UHTM. Age dating and chemical analyses of the mineral zircon will
establish the timing and origins of magma intrusions, respectively, to determine
their relationship to UHTM. This project will support graduate student education
at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the University of Michigan, and will
include cross-cultural collaboration among scientists from the U.S.,
Switzerland, and Madagascar. In partnership with a local organization, it
provides employment and rehabilitation opportunities for disabled individuals in
Massachusetts. In addition, a hands-on education project will encourage
underrepresented minority students to participate in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will test the
hypothesis that sizable plutons (the origins and ages of which are unknown) were
the principal heat source responsible for UHTM in southern Madagascar, an
archetypal UHTM terrane formed during the Late Neoproterozoic to Early Cambrian
assembly of Gondwana. Prior research suggests that conductive, mechanical, and
radiogenic heat sources combined were incapable of raising mid-crustal
temperatures to &gt;900 °C, so mantle magmas may be the missing heat source.
Zircon Hf, delta 18O, and U-Pb ages, combined with whole rock major- and trace-
element data, will be used to constrain the proportion of mantle versus crustal
melts in the major plutonic suites in southern Madagascar and estimate the
magmatic flux. Additional zircon and monazite analyses in host gneisses will
establish whether magmatism and UHTM were contemporaneous. By resolving the
timescale and extent of mantle heat advection, these results will test whether
there was a causal link between magmatism and regional UHTM. In doing so, this
study will enhance understanding of the regional heat budget and provide a
comprehensive U-Pb zircon dataset for southern Madagascar. The results will have
direct implications for coeval UHTM events recorded in Sri Lanka, India, and
Antarctica, and will inform our understanding of Phanerozoic collisional orogens
in general. Additionally, this project will develop dual-multicollector laser
ablation split stream ICPMS techniques that will enable simultaneous measurement
of Hf and U-Pb isotopes on multicollector instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.