* 2022738
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Coastal Fronts in Mixing and Ventilating Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James Thomson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 637,045.00

Coastal fronts are regions of the upper ocean with sharp boundaries that
separate distinct water masses. Fronts are associated with conditions of
enhanced turbulence and vertical velocities. Interactions between strong
stratification, flow convergence, and enhanced vertical fluxes near fronts have
important and immediate implications for gas and energy exchange within the
world’s oceans. Detailed observations using state-of-the-art methods that
include an instrumented autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) and drifting
platforms would be used to resolve fine scale dynamics that lead to the
enhancement of mixing and vertical exchange in the vicinity of a coastal front.
The data collected and subsequent analysis would improve estimates of exchange
rates that determine a system’s susceptibility to acidification and hypoxia,
primary production, and transport of material. This study will improve our
ability to predict and manage coastal ocean acidification and hypoxia, as well
as enable new lines of inquiry into upper ocean exchange processes. The project
will also contribute to the development of the career of a young scientist.
Outreach efforts include participation in the annual University of Washington
Discovery Days event, which draws over 10,000 students from regional K-12
schools to visit the campus and learn about current research. Student
participation at multiple levels would be fostered by pursuing undergraduate
research opportunities through the NSF REU program as well as promote
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students within the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Washington and UC Santa
Barbara. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between surface wave breaking,
bubble-entrainment, and downwelling convergence in the vicinity of coastal
fronts are the focus of the study, with the primary goal being to investigate
the specific nature and transiency of turbulent exchange at these locations. The
proposed work builds on recent results using SWIFT drifters as well as a REMUS
600 autonomous underwater vehicle to measure upper ocean turbulent dissipation
rates. Detailed measurements of turbulent energetics and Reynolds stresses will
provide a transformative view of exchange processes at episodic and transient
frontal features. This would be linked to dynamics driving frontogenesis through
control volume analyses and estimates of topographic form drag. Through the
collection of comprehensive in-situ measurements proposed here, the role(s) of
surface fronts in ventilating and mixing coastal and estuarine waters would be
quantitatively characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.