* 2022385
* EAGER: Membrane Allostery:  How membrane mechanics regulates activity of membrane receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Atul Parikh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Many proteins function by relaying information of chemical activity at one site
to a distant site on the same molecule. This simple concept of long-distance
communication – collectively referred to as allostery – reverberates across much
of biology by providing the most rapid, direct, and efficient means to switch
proteins between functional and non-functional forms. But can such action-at-
distance also arise when the two sites reside on different, but closely
interacting, biological assemblies? This project seeks to address this question
by experimentally investigating long-distance communication between cellular
membranes and a ubiquitous protein called E-cadherin, which is embedded within
these membranes. This project uses single-molecule measurements with model
membranes and living cells to tease-out relations between the mechanical
properties of the membrane and the molecular-level organization and function of
E-cadherin. These studies will address how cell membranes control the
reorganization of E-cadherins on the cell surface and consequently regulate cell
interactions and cell migration during tissue formation and wound healing. The
effort also provides benefit to the broader scientific community by establishing
a new paradigm that links the global material properties of cellular membranes
with biochemical behaviors of individual proteins. The work will (1) train
graduate and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary collaborative research
combining tools, techniques, and perspectives from membrane biophysics, single
molecule science, soft matter, mechanobiology, and biochemistry and (2)
implement proactive mechanisms to engage underrepresented minorities and
contribute directly to enhancing diversity, inclusion, and equity with the STEM
fields. It thus integrates outreach, education, and research in basic
interdisciplinary research at the interface between the physical and biological
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will address a central
hypothesis that changes in membrane mechanical properties – such as those
elicited by an upstream mechanical stimuli – can induce allosteric activation of
embedded membrane proteins. They will combine approaches, methodologies, and
tools developed in single-molecule biophysics, functional protein dynamics, and
membrane mechanics. Specifically, they will use (1) quantitative
characterization methods including single molecule force - fluorescence
microscopy, wide-field and high-content spinning disk confocal fluorescence
microscopy, and phase contrast optical microscopy; (2) molecularly-tailored and
mechanically activated membrane models (e.g., giant lipid vesicles subjected to
well-defined osmotic stresses); and (3) living cells expressing fluorescently
tagged, embedded membrane proteins. As a test-bed, the proposal investigates the
force-induced clustering of E-cadherin, a key cell-surface adhesion receptor,
which is essential in orchestrating complex movement of cells during tissue
formation and in maintaining tissue integrity. The PI and co-PI will focus their
efforts to resolve key determinants of the force-induced protein clustering in a
minimal model and establish biophysical determinants for allosteric protein
clustering on live cell surfaces. Successful completion of this EAGER
application will establish the experimental rules underlying membrane allostery,
in the specific context of cell-cell adhesion. These principals would be broadly
applicable to membrane allostery across multiple aspects of cellular
organization, dynamics, and function including signaling, homeostasis and
adaptation, and mechanobiology. Even more generally, the insights obtained from
this research should provide experimental data for determining whether global
mechanical properties can influence properties of single
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function clusters of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.