* 2022382
* I-Corps:  Rapid home microbiome diagnostic tests
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,10/31/2023
* George Watts, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in monitoring
microbes in the built environment (home/work/healthcare providers), and on
ourselves (the human microbiome) as a part of holistic health and wellness.
While culture-based methods are the current gold-standard for identifying
microbes, the time and difficulty in culturing particular organisms prevent
their application in broad-scale environmental monitoring. New approaches to
sequence DNA directly from a sample, referred to as metagenomic next-generation
sequencing (mNGS), offer a path forward. mNGS is unbiased and offers the
potential to 1) achieve results in 24 hours compared to days for culture, 2)
avoid the issue of fastidious organisms, 3) avoid culture growth bias, 4) detect
viral, fungal, and parasitic organisms in the same assay, and 5) detect the
presence of drug resistance genes. Advances in mNGS technology and data analysis
have reduced the cost mNGS, and therefore warrant its development in consumer-
based products. By providing customers with an evidence-based approach to
measuring and monitoring their home environment, mNGS could benefit consumers by
monitoring potential environmental hazards, demonstrating the effect of cleaners
and air purification systems, and improving health in individuals, especially
those that are immunocompromised (e.g., elderly, diabetic, autoimmune diseases,
and cancer patients) or suffering from asthma and
allergies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will conduct customer
discovery activities to explore the possibility of commercializing a scalable
and novel big data approach to compute the distance between metagenomes based on
the genetic similarities and differences between microbial communities. These
analyses provide a way to cluster similar metagenomes, or in contrast,
distinguish between microbial communities to determine the impact of ecological
(or clinical) conditions. The team will explore the utility of their approach
for developing a consumer-facing product to analyze the home microbiome. As part
of the I-Corps program, they will conduct &gt;100 customer interviews from
diverse perspectives to hone in on a potential product and unmet need. An
individual’s personal environment represents a vast array of surfaces and
environmental factors that vary by region, climate, and lifestyle and may have
an important on human health. Potential products explore the connection between
the home environment and hazardous microbes, for health, safety, and limiting
infectious disease transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.