* 2022440
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Human Capital in Technology Adoption and Discovery: Impact on Japans Industrialization
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rajshree Agarwal-Tronetti, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 475,000.00

Human capital is a critical ingredient in the discovery of innovations and
adoption of technology, but what type of human capital is most important for
such activities, and what are the roles of higher-order technical skills in
particular, remain largely unexplored. Japan started its transition to modernity
in the late 1870s by building an engineering education system from scratch. It
searched for a way to allocate newly minted engineering cadres to the right
places given its economic and societal needs, all while facing several practical
constraints. This project will conduct an in-depth theoretical and empirical
investigation of the process of formation of engineering human capital in late
19th century and early 20th century Japan, and the mechanisms that allocated
that human capital. The team will construct and employ a detailed database based
on alumni yearbooks to follow the census of degreed Japanese engineers through
their careers. In so doing, they will identify work networks and their effects,
linking these to the performance of firms, industries, and regions. The project
will also investigate how educated engineers contributed to socially beneficial
discovery by matching the constructed database to inventors’ names in Japan
Patent Office data. Barriers to technology adoption represent a main obstacle to
economic development, but we still have little systematic knowledge of the roles
performed by the key actor, the engineer. This project examines the process and
effects of developing an educated engineering workforce. In-depth examination of
the underlying processes and mechanisms will inform contemporary theoretical,
policy, and managerial discourse, including valuable lessons for U.S.
policymakers. It will also have implications for the global fight against
poverty and economic stagnation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore
various issues related to technology discovery and adoption, as well as firm and
regional competitiveness, by focusing on the availability and allocation of
higher-end technical skills embodied in educated engineers. This will form a
richer picture of the sources of industrial and social development. It will also
highlight the importance of network effects and the role played by competitive
market allocative mechanism. This project, by developing and deploying for
quantitative analyses a unique trove of alumni lists and other archival sources
in Japan, will make an important contribution to understanding key issues tied
to technology adoption, growth, and development. Studying the interactions among
technological opportunity, human capital formation, market demand, and
institutional rules is a promising way to better understand how nations can both
take advantage of existing advanced technologies and develop new ones.
Elucidating engineering human capital’s role in the context of late 19th-early
20th century Japan (the first modern industrial economy to establish itself
outside of Western Europe and its North American and Australian offshoots) will
not just be novel intellectually but will also inform debates about promoting
technology adoption and scientific discovery in today’s developing countries.
The project will also make publicly available a comprehensive decades-long
dataset on engineers, their employers, and networks. The team will broadly
disseminate findings through presentations in seminars and conferences as well
as through academic publications. The project will also help train graduate
students as research assistants and as coauthors on academic papers and will
enhance collaboration with Japanese universities and individual scholars through
joint work. The database will be made available so others can use it to examine
and build additional theories and insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.