* 2022282
* Using organic biomarker paleohypsometry to reconstruct the punctuated uplift history of the Northern Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Guangsheng Zhuang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 284,603.00

The Tibetan Plateau has long served as a natural laboratory for the study of
extreme topography related to continent-continent collisions. The northern
Tibetan Plateau is a key location for understanding how the India-Asia collision
produced high topography in the continental interior 1,000 km away from the
tectonic plate boundary. This project will reconstruct the history of past
topographies of the northern Tibetan Plateau by using a newly developed
quantitative approach. Data generated from this project will reveal when and how
the northern Tibetan Plateau was uplifted to the present elevation and will help
to differentiate between tectonic models. Broader impacts of this project
include: 1. support of two early-career investigators, 2. training of graduate
and undergraduate students in field and laboratory analyses, 3. enhancement of
national and international collaborations between institutions in the United
States and Canada, 4. incorporation of analytical techniques into undergraduate
courses, and 5. community outreach events, such as mentoring underrepresented
minority students with science projects, delivering presentations and field-
based videos, and examining geology specimens at local charter
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how an orogenic plateau formed far
away from a plate boundary has long been a dynamic and controversial topic in
continental dynamics. High topography is the manifestation of crustal and mantle
processes, and this project aims at understanding which mechanism
(underthrusting, mantle dynamics, infilling of ‘piggy-back’ basins, or crustal
flow) controls the construction of high topography at the north margin of the
Tibetan Plateau and what implications it bears for the India-Asia collision. The
project will test the hypothesis that high topography in northern Tibetan
Plateau has been constructed during a pulse of outward expansion from 15 to 8
million years ago. The project investigators will first develop an integrated
approach that combines techniques in sedimentary geology, organic geochemistry,
and geomorphology. The investigators will test the approach with Holocene
sediments from three selected river catchments within the Qilian Shan region and
use organic geochemistry proxies, i.e., hydrogen isotopes of n-alkanes derived
from terrestrial higher-plant leaf waxes and distribution of microbial glycerol
tetraethers produced in soils, to calibrate the relationships between proxies
and the elevation distributions of river catchments (hypsometry). The
investigators will apply the calibrated proxies to well-dated sedimentary rocks
in the foreland basin of Hexi Corridor and the intermontane Qaidam Basin to
constrain the elevational history of the Qilian Shan range between the two
basins. This approach will be of broad use in similar climatic regimes in
orogenic belts in the western United States, the Andes, and other parts of the
Tibetan Plateau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.