* 2022297
* Manufacture of Inexpensive Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Brian Grady, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 506,176.00

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) exhibit exceptional mechanical, thermal, and electronic
properties but are still very expensive to manufacture. The production volume of
CNTs is currently growing at ~15%/year but the amount of CNTs produced today is
miniscule (0.01%) compared to carbon black, a material commonly used today in
many applications such as automotive tires. Because the current CNT growth
processes are not cost effective, CNTs are not used in many applications despite
their higher performance. This research project investigates and develops the
underlying science and technology of new synthetic scalable processes to make
ultralong CNTs by taking advantage of minimizing the amount of seed chemical
(catalyst) required. Over 90% of carbon black in use today is for rubber
reinforcement, mostly in automobile tires where the carbon provides a preferred
trade-off between the rolling resistance/wet traction for improved gas mileage.
Increased gas mileage of 3-5% could be achieved if CNTs were used instead of
carbon black in tires, which in turn could reduce US greenhouse gas emissions by
~1%, providing significant societal and economic benefits for the US. This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanism underlying the growth of ~1 mm long
carbon nanotubes on exfoliated laminar mineral sheets, in a commercially
scalable process, is investigated. The expected yield is 10-100 times higher
than currently achieved and would eliminate the need to separate the
catalyst/support from the nanotubes. Critical scientific and technical
challenges include models for the improved catalyst dispersion within narrow
lamellar catalyst layers and the reaction – diffusion conditions required so
that the reactants and co-fed water can reach all active sites and extend
catalyst lifetimes. The understanding and control of reactant concentration
gradients is critical as it impacts the nanotube length and uniformity. Long
nanotubes are unsuitable for applications that involve compounding tubes with a
polymer and hence the tubes will be milled to produce lengths similar to what is
commercially used today (average lengths 1-10 microns). The relationship between
length reduction and ball milling parameters, specifically impact energy of a
single collision and cumulative impact energy, will be determined to allow
scaling up of this process to commercial milling devices. Average lengths of
10-50 microns will also be produced to better explore how longer tubes perform
in compounding operations. Tubes will be mixed in one thermoplastic
(polycarbonate) and one tire formulation to determine nanotube performance. CNTs
of three different diameters will be milled to the same aspect ratio to
determine if aspect ratio is important in filled polymer
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.