* 2022946
* GP-UP: Building a Geoscience Field Learning Ecosystem for the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Sarah Tindall, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2024
* USD 397,822.00

This project will create a Geosciences Field Learning Ecosystem (GFLE)
throughout the State of Pennsylvania (PA), expanding opportunities for
Geoscience college students, faculty, and high school students (particularly the
historically marginalized), and connecting PA universities and students more
directly to the professional Geoscience community. The ecosystem itself is a
network of collaborating university faculty, programs, administrators, working
professionals, community stakeholders, and high school teachers / administrators
committed to sharing resources and responsibilities to provide world-class field
education for undergraduate Geoscience college students, and Geoscience field
experiences for STEM-interested high school students. The PIs hypothesize that
the network connecting pre-college (URM) students and teachers, faculty from
PA’s universities, Geoscience majors, and working professionals, coupled with
world-class Geoscience field experiences, will increase recruitment, retention,
and preparedness of PA’s Geoscience workforce, and may serve as a model for
other ecosystem collaborations within Pennsylvania’s State System of Higher
Education and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creation of a Geosciences Field
Learning Ecosystem (GFLE) in Pennsylvania will enhance collaboration among
faculty, industry partners, state agencies, pre-college students, and Geoscience
majors throughout PA; improve field-based learning to increase students’
preparedness for the workforce or graduate school; and introduce Geoscience
career pathways to both Geoscience majors and pre-college students, especially
the historically underrepresented. The GFLE has three primary tasks at its
inception: 1) to build a statewide, collaborative Ecosystem Steering Committee
that will identify and assess shared strengths, and merge opportunities and
networks; 2) to create, implement, and assess a novel, service-learning-based,
summer Geoscience Field Course (GFC) supported by collaboration of the entire
ecosystem; and 3) to incorporate place-based, societally-relevant service-
learning field experiences for high school students from PA’s URM population. By
working together as faculty and administrators across multiple Pennsylvania
State System of Higher Education universities, reaching out to both employers
and high school students, and providing field instruction in a highly relevant
service-learning context, the principal investigators plan to build a dynamic
community focused on supporting amazing field learning opportunities and
outreach to our current and prospective students, as well as potential
employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.