* 2022941
* New Tools for Quantifying Cloud Response to Varying Climate States
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Steven Krueger, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2023
* USD 667,219.00

Clouds play a central role in Earth's climate as they regulate both the amount
of sunlight reaching the Earth and the amount of infrared radation the Earth
emits to space. But the climatic effect of clouds is an aggregate effect over a
bewildering variety of cloud types, structures, and sizes. In principle this
aggregate effect can be calculated on a cloud-by-cloud basis, simulating all
clouds in detail and then adding up their individual contributions. But such
simulations are impractical and in any case do not provide a satisfactory
explanation for cloud behaviors. An alternative approach is to look for ways in
which the fine-scale properties of clouds are determined, at least
approximately, by the bulk properties of the large-scale atmosphere. This
approach has the advantage of focusing on cloud properties which are likely to
be influenced by climate change and may act to amplify or moderate the amount of
warming caused by greenhouse gas increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent work
the PIs have developed a theory in which the stratification of the large-scale
atmosphere exerts a thermodynamic constraint on the fine-scale complexity of
tropical convective clouds. The theory assumes a quasi-equilibrium state in
which convective potential energy generated by solar heating at ground level is
dissipated by horizontal turbulent mixing between rising air in clouds and
surrounding clear air, which has lower potential energy. Since the sides of a
cloud constitute a boundary through which mixing occurs across a potential
energy drop, the theory implies a relationship between the length of cloud
perimeter on a surface of atmospheric potential energy (specifically saturated
static energy) and the stability of the atmosphere to overturning motions at
that level. In quasi-equilibrium this relationship further implies that the
number of clouds with a given perimeter length is inversely proportional to that
perimeter length. Also, the mass flux through the sides of a cloud is related to
the potential energy difference between the cloud and its environment. This
relationship can be used to show that clouds of high convective potential energy
are exponentially more rare than clouds of lower potential energy (a form of the
Boltzmann distribution).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award tests the
theory's predictions regarding the perimeter and energy dependence of cloud
occurrence using satellite observations and model simulations. Further work
addresses the extent to which the relationship between cloud number and
perimeter length can be used to infer the number of clouds with a given
horizontal area (possibly following Korcak's law), as cloud area has a direct
connection to the climatic effects of clouds. Finally, the implications of the
theory for changes in tropical convective clouds in response to climate change
will be explored. Atmospheric stability is expected to increase in a warmer
climate, and the relationship between stability and perimeter length suggests
that warming will increase cloud number and total perimeter. But some work is
required to reconcile this result with other thermodynamically-based arguments
for changes in tropical cloud cover with warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
has societal relevance given concerns regarding the severity of climate change
and its impacts on people and the environment. Clouds are perhaps the greatest
source of uncertainty in efforts to determine the amount of warming produced by
increases in greenhouse gas concentrations, and the relationships between fine-
scale cloud properties and large-scale atmospheric conditions examined here
could help to reduce this uncertainty. The project includes participants at the
University of Lille and thus promotes international research collaboration. It
also provides support and training to two graduate students and one
undergraduate, thereby building the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.