* 2022040
* NRT-HDR: Harnessing AI for Understanding &amp; Designing Materials (aiM)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* David Banks, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,016,203.00

Over the last decade, there has been a shift in materials science research from
slow individual experiments and computation to the beginnings of accelerated
data-driven artificial intelligence (AI) approaches. Yet to achieve the promise
of rapid discovery, design, and application of new materials, the development of
a new generation workforce trained at the nexus of AI and materials is
essential. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship awarded to Duke
University, AI for understanding and designing Materials (aiM), will provide
integrated training for both materials and computer scientists, to advance the
research and training frontiers of this new convergent field. Students will
develop expertise in AI and materials science through a new curriculum bridging
disciplines, linked with convergent research, professional skills, and external
internships. This NRT will fill a critical gap in the advanced manufacturing
workforce, facilitating future on-demand materials development for vital
societal applications in flexible electronics, biomedical implants,
infrastructure development, and many other areas. A total of 50 PhD students
will be trained in the aiM program, 25 of whom will be NRT funded, from degree
programs in computer science, data science, statistical science, and all
materials disciplines including materials science, physics, chemistry, and all
engineering fields with the goal of broadening participation of women and
underrepresented minorities by recruiting a diverse group of undergraduates and
promoting retention through culturally aligned mentoring and an inclusive
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aiM program will deliver core elements
designed to equip trainees with competitive 21st century professional and
technical workplace skills. These core elements include: (1) newly developed
transdisciplinary courses fusing data and materials science with problem- and
project-based learning; (2) experiential learning through real-world application
in internships with national lab or industry partners; and (3) professional
development through boot camps, workshops, mentoring, outreach opportunities,
and industry networking events. Students from both materials and computer-
science domains will gain critical in-depth cross-training that integrates
knowledge and methods across disciplines and enables development of new
frameworks for discovery and innovation. New research frontiers will incorporate
computational methods for different material classes, growing materials data
warehouses for simulated and experimental data, and development and improvement
of AI methods for scientific discovery. This NRT will impact students far beyond
Duke through development of parallel open online course modules based on the
fundamentals and applications of “AI for materials” coursework and an annual aiM
Challenge in which teams across the world can compete on a common materials data
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.