* 2022782
* Collaborative Research: Manganese as a key reactant in the expanding low oxygen zones of the Gulf of Mexico, USA
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 892,732.00

The Earth’s flow of energy – from animals, to plants, to microbes – is dictated
by electron transfers, namely, moving electrons from one molecule or element to
another to gain energy. Photosynthesis is perhaps the most familiar such
reaction, where the electrons from carbon dioxide and water are used to make
oxygen and sugar. However, before the appearance of oxygen-generating
metabolisms, early life metabolism was governed by different electron transfer
reactions – most of these involving metals because of their ability to readily
donate and accept electrons. As a result of this early evolution, metals still
play a central role in microbial life, as essential elements in enzymes. One
such important metal is manganese (Mn), which is particularly good at donating
and accepting electrons given that it can be in three different forms in the
ocean. One form of Mn is a solid Mn-oxide, which is very reactive and almost as
strong an oxidant as oxygen itself. This form of Mn is completely generated by
bacteria, but we still know little about how bacteria do this, or why! One good
place to understand these Mn reactions is in areas where oxygen is not present,
because there, Mn reactions may dominate. The Gulf of Mexico is a region where
oxygen concentrations have been decreasing steadily due to over-enrichment of
nutrients from anthropogenic sources. This system is ideal for examining Mn
reactions under low oxygen conditions, so in this project, how Mn reacts under
different levels of oxygen will be determined. Scientists from the University of
Rhode Island and Texas A&amp;M University will also specifically target the
bacteria that make these solid Mn oxides, to try and understand the mechanism of
formation. Finally, the scientists will try to measure where the Mn is coming
from and where it is going, to get a better idea of how Mn may undergo a
complete reaction cycle. Understanding how metals cycle in the ocean is central
to understanding life on Earth, as the inventory of metals has been subject to
shifts in chemistry, like changing oxygen conditions, over the Earth’s history.
A science communications student, an artist at sea, and a videographer will be
incorporated into cruise activities to link the science with public outreach.
This project will support three graduate students, undergraduate students, and
two early career researchers. This project will focus on recruitment of
underrepresented minorities to provide an introduction to STEM research and
field work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, scientists from the University of
Rhode Island and Texas A&amp;M University have developed the chemical techniques
to deconvolute manganese redox cycling in marine environments but have yet to
thoroughly apply these new methods in diverse environmental systems or to couple
manganese speciation and cycling with that of other elements. Here, the
scientists propose to fully speciate manganese in the Gulf of Mexico, evaluating
the formation, prevalence, and bioavailability of Mn(III)-L compounds and the
role of microbes in facilitating Mn(III)-L and Mn oxide formation. In
particular, the scientists seek to examine the stability of Mn(III)-L complexes
across seasonal, salinity and oxygen gradients and to characterize both
terrestrial and biotic Mn(III)-binding ligands. We hypothesize that Mn cycling,
particularly in seasonally anoxic and suboxic zones, is intricately but
enigmatically linked to the cycling of other redox sensitive species, including
nitrogen and organic carbon compounds. This study will study these dynamics in
the Gulf of Mexico, which has gradients in (1) productivity on a seasonal cycle,
(2) salinity and terrestrial input via its tributaries and (3) a dynamic and
seasonal oxygen regime. All of these gradients profoundly impact the redox
chemistry of Mn and other elements and thus must be taken into account to create
an accurate framework for understanding coupled redox cycling. In conducting
this research, not only will we broadly elucidate the marine manganese cycling,
we will also highlight previously cryptic chemical dynamics that drive the
formation and dissipation of oxygen minimum zones in fragile coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.