* 2022791
* Macrosystems Biology and NEON enabled science investigator meeting
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Sydne Record, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,770.00

Today, pressing environmental problems, such as climate change, use of water
resources, and food security abound. It is important for society to understand
these environmental issues because they impact natural resources needed to
sustain life on Earth. One of the biggest challenges in gaining knowledge about
how the non-living and living world works is that most research in environmental
science has been done at small, local scales, but many current environmental
issues operate at regional, continental, and global scales. Thus, scaling up
environmental research across space is vital. Macrosystems biology seeks to
understand research on biosphere processes and their complex interactions with
climate, land use, and changes in species geographic distributions at regional
to continental scales. Such large-scale scientific research demands a
collaborative team of scientists, including individuals with the ability to
integrate across disciplinary and cultural differences, so that insights made
are of the highest scientific quality and are socially equitable. Given the
collaborative nature of macrosystems biology, advances in this field are made
through shared knowledge of the science and of how to promote productive,
diverse teams. This meeting will promote knowledge sharing by providing an
opportunity for researchers to share insights into macrosystems biology advances
and into team science. Through professional development and engagement of a
diverse group of scientists, collaboration of active researchers, and generation
of new ideas and synthesis of research projects, this meeting will broaden the
impact of currently funded Macrosystems biology research. Specific efforts will
be made to emphasize perspectives of early-career and traditionally under-
represented researchers in all aspects of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference proposal will support a meeting
of project scientists funded through the NSF Macrosystems Biology and National
Ecological Observatory Network Enabled Science (MSB-NES) program. The meeting’s
theme will be team science with emphases on inclusion and access. The meeting
will advance macrosystems biology and NEON enabled science through four goals:
1) facilitating networking and community-building among a diverse group of MSB-
NES researchers; 2) reflect on the first ten years of MSB research and outline
knowledge gaps to be addressed in the next decade; 3) providing training on team
science in a diverse landscape for MSB-NES researchers that will help teams to
successfully broaden participation; and 4) identifying aspects of team science
that promote open science and inclusion to make accessible insights from MSB-NES
research teams to a wide audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.