* 2022977
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Environmental Context of Urban Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Lauren Ristvet, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,136.00

This research undertakes a geoarchaeological investigation of human-environment
interactions in a lowland region, where water in the form of rivers, wetlands,
and sea encouraged the location, timing, and configuration of the first urban
communities. Geoarchaeology is well suited to investigate the environmental
context of early cities because it combines the geological sciences with
archaeological datasets to examine the intersection of society with the natural
world. The team will conduct their research in an area that was once part of a
dynamic estuarine delta where the size and physical arrangement of cities
coevolved with their environment. The research investigates these phenomena
through the collection and analysis of paleoenvironmental datasets to provide a
deep-time perspective on urban adaptation to watery settings. STEM diversity is
supported through the involvement of graduate students and senior research
scientists while the interdisciplinary integration of earth systems scientists
with archaeologists will benefit an increasingly inter-dependent and urban
global society facing climate instability and sea-level rise. An open source and
web-based database application will store and synthesize the geoarchaeological
information by joining new data with previously published work from adjoining
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though archaeology has both supported and
challenged the notion that societies shaped and were shaped by their
environments, there is broad consensus that sociopolitical complexity first
arose in communities associated with river valleys and coastal plains. This
project will extract sediment cores by hand auger and percussion drill from
predetermined locations, including off-site sampling of relict levees, crevasse-
splays and floodplain, as well as on-site sampling of ancient canals, harbors,
and clay-filled pits. Radiography and XRF-scanning will be used to identify past
fluvial, deltaic, and marine environments through visual description,
sedimentology, and chemostratigraphy. Isotope studies and trace element analysis
will be used to differentiate between aerobic and anaerobic settings, as well as
the location and flood characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.