* 2022235
* EAGER: Development Of Functional Genetic Tools For Endoparasitoid Wasps
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Todd Schlenke, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Parasitic wasps are numerous and important in natural ecosystems, and are also
commonly used by industry to control pest insects. In this work, the PIs will
test two novel approaches for genetically modifying parasitic wasps. One method
relies on exposing wasps to genetically-modified hosts, and the other relies on
injecting adult female wasps with constructs that will specifically be taken up
by their ovaries and embryos. Success of either of these methods would
revolutionize our ability to interrogate gene function in in parasitic wasps.
This information would be helpful for the bioeconomy because it would provide
the means to manipulate parasitic wasps to the benefit of controlling pest
insects. This award also funds training of a graduate student. Thus, this
funding is training the next generation of leaders in science in an area
relevant to the bioeconomy. The PIs will broadly publicize and disseminate their
research to academia and biotech companies via conference symposiums, lab
workshops, and video protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Host-parasite
interactions, like predator-prey interactions, are some of the most important
ecological interactions in nature, and parasitic wasps and their arthropod hosts
are one of the most ubiquitous examples of this type of relationship. Parasitic
wasps are diverse, they infect most insect species, and they are one of the most
common biocontrol agents used against agricultural pests. Unfortunately,
standard functional genomics methods like RNAi and CRISPR are inadequate in
parasitic wasps, given that they obligately complete their juvenile development
inside their hosts and are thus recalcitrant to standard injection procedures.
To fully harness the potential of parasitic wasps as a model system, the PIs
will develop novel applications of RNAi and CRISPR to maximize the efficiency of
dsRNA and Cas9-gRNA delivery into wasps. In Objective 1, the PIs will test
whether ubiquitous expression of wasp-targeted dsRNAs in transgenic host flies
will cause systemic RNAi knockdown in wasp parasites. This new method would take
advantage of the facts that hymenopterans can be fed dsRNAs to induce RNAi, and
that endoparasitoids obtain a majority of their nutrients by consuming host
tissues. In Objective 2, the PIs will test whether use of a wasp-specific
glycolipoprotein leader sequence will cause CRISPR components (Cas9/gRNA) to be
trafficked into the developing embryos of wasp ovaries to cause gene knockouts.
The new method relies on injection into older free-living life stages (like wasp
pupae), where many embryos can be transformed via a single injection. This award
was co-funded by the Symbiosis, Defense and Self Recognition and Enabling
Discovery through GEnomic Tools programs in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.