* 2022778
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Negotiating Ocean Conflicts among RIvals for Sustainable and Equitable Solutions
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Siddharth Narayan, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2024
* USD 240,844.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a critical issue in
ocean sustainability. The ocean provides resources and ecosystem services to
multiple marine sectors and stakeholders and the goal of ocean sustainability is
to accomplish a fair and sustainable use of these resources and services. This
means simultaneously achieving economic development (blue growth), environmental
sustainability, social equity and inclusion across space and time, in a context
of growing demands. Often, the needs and actions of the various sectors and
stakeholders are at cross purposes to one another resulting in conflict. This
project seeks to develop and implement qualitative modeling strategies to
address various ocean conflicts. The project will investigate six case studies
located in three ocean regions with diverse income levels and characterized by
rapid ecological and/or social change such as ocean warming, acidification or
resource exploitation, urbanization, industrial development. The project will
assess the origin, drivers, and mitigation strategies of these ocean conflicts
in each case study where a different combination of social and ecological
pressures together with trade-off decisions trigger ocean conflicts. Data
produced from the case studies will be used for graphic visualizations that
construct different narratives about the conflict that will ultimately promote
long lasting equitable resource allocations and impartial transitions to achieve
sustainable ocean management. The project will benefit a broad range of local
and national-level stakeholders, including local communities, government, marine
planning agencies, and local and national decision-makers by increasing the
knowledge base of sustainable ocean multi-use practices to help improve and
foster the blue (ocean) economy while preserving ocean space and
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.