* 2022675
* CAREER: a Disaggregated and Distributed Hardware and OS Framework for Next-Generation Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 08/13/2019,05/31/2025
* Yiying Zhang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 430,783.00

We live in the big data era. The abundance of digital information enables us to
have a better understanding of the world and to make intelligent decisions.
However, the volume and variety of data and its generation speed raise many
profound new challenges. Datacenters host and process data, and they play a key
role in the success of all the applications. This project aims to answer a
simple yet important question: how shall we build next-generation datacenters
that are cost-effective and deliver good performance?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
decades, the unit of deployment, operation, and failure in datacenters has been
a computer server, that contains all the hardware resources that are needed to
run a user program. However, this is too coarse for today's applications; it
restricts the effectiveness of datacenter resource utilization, and limits the
flexibility of hardware changes. As a result, there are huge energy and monetary
wastes in today's datacenters and it is hard to incorporate new hardware
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to break the traditional
server model into fine-grained hardware resources. Instead of packaging hardware
devices in a server and connecting servers with a network, future datacenters
will connect hardware devices directly to the network. Doing so makes it more
flexible and cheaper to run applications and deploy new hardware. This project
will build the software infrastructure for this new datacenter model. Through
innovation, design, and development of the proposed infrastructure, this project
will improve the flexibility and reduce the total cost of future
datacenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.