* 2022168
* NRT-URoL: Molecular Probes and Sensors for Complex  Environments
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Victoria DeRose, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

NRT-URoL: Molecular Probes and Sensors for Complex
Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex chemical and physical mixtures
influence important processes related to agriculture, technology, and human
health. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to the
University of Oregon will address the central challenge of developing molecular
sensors and probes that are needed to understand these processes and address
complex problems in biology and the environment. The project will support a
unique program for graduate Master’s and PhD students that will provide training
in the scientific areas of molecular probes and sensors, technological
development, and data analysis. When combined, these areas will generate new
methods of detecting and controlling small molecules in complex media. This
program will also prepare graduate students to enter a challenging, changing
future with a training plan that combines market-aligned research and innovation
training, inclusive leadership practices, and immersive team-led projects. A
total of 150 Master’s and PhD students will be involved in the program,
including 25 NSF-supported PhD students. The combination of elements in this
training program will produce a cohort of scientists who are uniquely prepared
to address societal needs in diverse and dynamic workforce environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will catalyze research to solve complex
problems in environmental and life sciences arenas by developing synthetic
molecular probes and novel devices. Major themes include: (a) Molecular sensors
for analytes in complex environments; implantable chemFET sensors for
regenerative biology; autonomous, self-contained sensors for real-time
environmental monitoring; (b) Chemical tools for interrogating biological
processes, including novel carbon nanohoops for multiplexed and multimodal
biological imaging and multiplexed approaches to address the roles of reactive
sulfur species in biology. Each of these themes brings together synthetic
chemistry, sensing and detection, and analysis of complex data, all of which
will be supported by the training environment. Trainees in this program will
participate in a professional development series focusing on inclusive practices
necessary to succeed in a diverse collaborative environment. Scientific and
technical skills will be provided through targeted modules on chemical biology,
device synthesis, biological models, and data analysis, as well as mentored
‘immersion laboratories’ designed in collaboration with industrial partners. In
addition, all trainees will participate in a Lens of the Market professional
development program that provides a mechanism to align fundamental science with
market needs, provide strong professional development, and launch student
careers. Successful elements of the NRT, as identified through rigorous
evaluation, will be institutionalized at UO and shared with the broader academic
community to provide a model for translating this training program to other
disciplines or research areas. &lt;br/&gt;…………………….&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.