* 2022036
* NRT: Building resilient landscapes for food, energy, water, and ecosystems in America's megalopolis
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Steward Pickett, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,998,915.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of Connecticut and the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies will
support the development of a new model of graduate education focused on
predicting, managing, and communicating risks to food, energy, water, and
ecosystems in urbanizing regions. Accelerating threats from climate change,
habitat degradation, overexploitation, and species invasions threaten access to
food, energy, water, and other ecosystem services, especially in cities.
Preventing loss of critical services requires accurate predictions of these
risks. To meet this demand, we will train graduate student teams to predict
alternative futures and design resilient landscapes. This traineeship program
will create a novel, cross-cutting framework for STEM education that combines
collaborative and problem-based learning and research, while applying techniques
aimed at recruiting and retaining a more diverse student cohort. Trainees will
develop new skills in an immersive, team-based education model that also applies
new knowledge to real-life applications. Enhanced skills in risk assessment,
management, and communication will create a highly skilled workforce that can
address the 21st Century threats to human life support systems. The traineeship
anticipates preparing 64 Ph.D. students, including 32 funded trainees from the
life sciences, engineering, geography, geosciences, natural resources,
statistics, economics, and computer science. Ultimately the grant will promote
the training of students for jobs as risk analysts in a range of careers, not
just in academia, but also in industry, non-profit organizations, and
government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a rapidly urbanizing world, society needs
landscapes that are resilient to risks to food, energy, and water, and other
ecosystem services (FEWES). The challenge for society is to design landscapes
that provide multiple human benefits, maintain ecosystem function, and prove
resilient to future risks. This project will address unresolved debates such as
whether to develop land intensely, leaving more land untouched (land-sparing) or
to develop land moderately, but over a wider area (land-sharing). To resolve
such debates and create resilient urban-to-wild landscapes, students will learn
how to apply landscape risk assessment to estimate threats, benefits, and
uncertainty by exploring landscape linkages and developing scenarios that
include socioeconomic impacts for tradeoffs among FEWES. This traineeship will
also develop a novel, cross-cutting framework for teaching STEM education by
synergistically combining collaborative, problem-based, and service-based
learning to assess risks to FEWES. These practices will be combined to develop a
unique approach to graduate education called Team-TERRA, or Team-based,
Transdisciplinary, Estimation of Risks, and Real-world Analysis. Students will
originate from different backgrounds and disciplines and will learn to transcend
traditional disciplinary boundaries. Trainees will earn a certificate in
Environmental Risk Assessment by learning how to work with stakeholders, develop
quantitative analytical skills in predicting risk and uncertainty, explore
options for managing such risks, and communicate risk and uncertainty to
clients, stakeholders, and the public. Overall, trainees will learn transferable
skills by working with real-world problems, while providing an important service
to governments, NGOs, and businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.