* 2022828
* RAPID: In Situ Measurements of Australian Bushfire Smoke in the Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2020,06/30/2020
* Terry Deshler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anne Johansen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 6,847.00

In this RAPID project, two PIs propose to conduct field observations in New
Zealand and Costa Rica to determine physical and chemical properties of smoke
particles that were entrained into the stratosphere during recent large
wildfires in Australia. New knowledge will inform atmospheric chemists and
modelers about the potential heating effect of these particles as well as their
reactivity toward stratospheric ozone. Results will have direct implications on
the ability to predict climate and changes in the ozone layer that are driven by
intense wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smoke from wildfires in Australia have
reached the stratosphere where the effect of associated brown and black carbon
containing particles is unknown. To better understand their in-situ radiative
effect and chemical reactivity, the PI team proposes to deploy balloon flights
from Lauder, New Zealand, and San Juan, Costa Rica, that are equipped with
particle sizing and counting instruments as well as filter sampling devices.
Filters and specific substrates will be analyzed off-line with scanning and
transmission electron microscopy (SEM/TEM) to determine morphology and obtain
some chemical information including the black carbon content. Results from this
work will advance knowledge of the extent of smoke entrainment into the
stratosphere and associated effects on the radiative budget and ozone layer. In
addition, the project may inform other ongoing/future projects including the
study of polar stratospheric clouds and meteoric smoke in the winter time polar
vortex, and a comparison of in-situ smoke measurements with satellite
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.