* 2022190
* NRT: NNA: Tamamta (All of Us): Transforming Western and Indigenous Fisheries and Marine Sciences Together
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Courtney Carothers, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,300,000.00

The National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) will use Indigenous approaches to transform
graduate education programs in fields that tend to lack cultural diversity
within academia as well as the workforce; fisheries and marine science. The
Tamamta (a Sugpiaq word meaning ‘All of Us’) NRT seeks to broaden and diversify
graduate training to successfully engage Indigenous students, to center
Indigenous knowledge systems in current and new curricula, and to reach widely
across the university and partner organizations toward larger system change.
This NRT closely aligns with NSF’s Navigating the New Arctic program and with
UAF’s strategic goals of solidifying global leadership in Alaska Native and
Indigenous programs and growing a culture of respect, diversity, inclusion, and
care. As the gravity of environmental and social challenges in the Arctic
continues to intensify, the need for bold and transformative action that crosses
cultural, racial, and disciplinary boundaries grows. To respond to this need,
the Tamamta traineeship program will support comprehensive graduate training
that advances science that meaningfully and ethically bridges Western and
Indigenous knowledge systems for 15 to 20 Indigenous and non-Indigenous M.S. and
Ph.D. NRT trainees. The Tamamta program will reach over 100 students over the
course of the project and will engage federal, state, and tribal partner
organizations toward larger system change within fisheries and marine science
and management in Alaska and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past five
years, the Tamamta project team of Indigenous scholars, social scientists, and
natural scientists has worked across cultural and disciplinary boundaries to
build strong, collaborative relationships. This investment and the mutual
respect and trust that have grown as a result are necessary to advance the goals
of this work in effective and culturally appropriate ways. The research team
uses evidence-based and Indigenous approaches to transforming graduate
educational programs including an elevation of Indigenous ways of knowing and
being, Indigenous rights and values, Indigenous knowledge, language, stories,
and practices. This traineeship program supports interactive and innovative
activities to help transform the fisheries and marine sciences programs and
catalyze change in institutions and partner organizations. These activities will
include: new team-taught interdisciplinary courses; an Elder-in-Residence
program; a visiting Indigenous scholars program; a fish camp and other cultural
immersion experiences; professional development and cultural competency skill-
building with faculty and agency partners; retreats; internships; coastal
research experiences; hosted dialogues; and art installations. By centering
Indigenous cosmologies, values, practices, and knowledge in all aspects of the
program, Tamamta aims to elevate an understanding of the profound cultural and
spiritual connections that Indigenous peoples across Alaska have with the land,
waters, and animals. By creating meaningful educational opportunities for
Indigenous peoples and their values, practices, and knowledge to engage in
science and management systems, this effort will contribute to larger system
changes that are needed to ensure more sustainable fisheries and ecosystems for
current and future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award is being provided by
Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program, one of NSF’s ten Big Ideas. NNA
supports projects that address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly
changing Arctic, empower new research partnerships, diversify the next
generation of Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal and informal
education, and integrate the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This
award aligns with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.