* 2022723
* Defining Critical Heterogeneity in Cathode Architectures for Li-ion Batteries with High Energy Density
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jordi Cabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,625.00

Lithium-ion batteries are the premier choice for clean and efficient energy
storage for portable devices and electric vehicles. However, their performance
still falls short of the metrics required to drive a meaningful shift away from
transportation based on fossil fuels. Specifically, the energy stored per unit
of volume, or energy density, is too low. Challenges in increasing energy
density stem from the concurrent increase in the rate of failure and loss of
power. This trade-off is driven by limitations at the cathode, but its
microscopic chemical structure and mechanisms must be precisely defined for
effective solutions to arise. Through a suite of existing and emerging
techniques based on X-ray mapping, researchers at the University of Illinois at
Chicago seek to reveal how chemical variations, called heterogeneity, at the
nano and microscale determine the ability of modern lithium-ion cathodes to
achieve long lifetimes in batteries with high energy density. This research will
advance electrochemical engineering and battery manufacturing by establishing
novel engineering principles informed by spatially precise chemical knowledge,
which will subsequently guide new breakthroughs. To maximize and expedite impact
in current technology, this research focuses on fundamental questions, yet
applied to cathode materials of interest to industry. The activities are
intertwined with the training of future generations of scientists through
internships for undergraduate and high school students, promotion of science in
local elementary schools and a Summer workshop on electrochemistry. These
activities will have a special focus on members of Chicago's Hispanic
communities, which are traditionally underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limitations in the energy density of Li-ion batteries
stem from the cathode, mainly because layered oxides, the leading family of
candidates, do not currently perform at their theoretical limit. This limitation
is fundamentally underpinned by the underlying electrochemical reactions that
generate flow of electrical charge, which are hindered by incomplete
reversibility and competing processes that degrade activity. The objective of
this research is to correlate macroscopic battery performance to local chemical
composition and progress of the storage reactions in the complex architectures
pursued today. Conventionally, these correlations are established at the
ensemble averages of the bulk electrode and at the level of very few isolated
particles. But these scales are mismatched to the current push to design
multifunctional heterostructures to enhance cathode performance, where it is
critical to ascertain the nanoscale distribution of different elements and its
consistency both within and between many particles. They are also mismatched to
pinpoint the microscopic origin of the failure of competitive cathodes at
extreme rates and extensive cycling, which critically depends on the specific
microscale activity relative to the complete architecture. This research will
quantify critical heterogeneity at relevant length scales with a suite of
techniques of X-ray imaging and mapping, including in 3D and during battery
operation. Novel analytical methods of broad applicability in battery research
will be part of the legacy of this project. The novel insight will provide
actionable engineering inputs to overcome enduring cathode roadblocks toward
transformational energy density in next-generation Li-ion
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.