* 2022705
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Foundations for Improving Resilience in the Energy Sector against Wildfire on Alaskan Lands (FIREWALL)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Matthew Berman, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 125,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, and addresses important societal challenges, builds significant
educational opportunities, and engages with local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Destructive wildfires in the Arctic, which are
projected to grow in increased frequency and magnitude, are driven by
multifaceted factors such as environmental change, expanded wildland-human
interface, and lack of models to integrate natural, engineering, and social
sciences to help coordinate response and recovery decisions. The interaction
between the energy network and wildfires is highly interrelated since wildfires
are compounded directly and indirectly by inaccurate and imprecise management of
the energy network. The situation becomes further complicated in Arctic regions
with complex terrain, constant exposure to nature’s forces, and vulnerable
infrastructure, leading to economic and social losses. Though a series of
workshops, this NNA project enables creative brainstorming, builds synergistic
models, and guides multidisciplinary discussions that will generate knowledge on
better understanding, navigating, planning, and adapting to evolving Alaska
wildfire regimes. Through the lens of energy resilience, the project supports
building stronger ties and facilitates a two-way dialogue among researchers,
local communities, and stakeholders to provide solutions for emergency
preparedness, operational endurance, and enhanced resilience to wildfires.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NNA planning grant expands scientific understanding
of interactions between natural environment, energy infrastructure, and social
systems before, during, and following wildfires. It generates knowledge about
the interaction of wildfires with energy systems and builds on those insights to
develop research directions and roadmaps to deploy advanced energy technologies
for structural and operational resilience against wildfires, while considering
legal and regulatory requirements and local community needs. The project shapes
research directions on the varied wildfire triggers in Alaska, enhances
understanding of interactions of Alaskan energy networks and wildfires, and
guides strategic plans for wildfire resilience. Further, the project engages
local Alaskan communities with an integral and active role in implementing plans
against the undesirable social, psychological, and physical outcomes of
wildfires. The workshops in this project engender a multidisciplinary team that
uses the knowledge and relations gained to develop engineering solutions to
social and environmental challenges, strengthen the connections between Arctic
and non-Arctic communities, and provide Arctic residents with educational
opportunities to train the workforce of the future on Arctic wildfire
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.