* 2022298
* IUSE/PFE:RED A&amp;I: Adapting and Implementing Interactive Problem-Driven Learning, Professional and Computational Skills Development for Early and Vertically-Integrated Engagemen
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Kevin Haas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate an approach to
engage students early and on a continuing basis in Civil and Environmental
Engineering (CEE) programs. It will build the project team's professional
formation of engineers (PFE) approach around multiple strategies based upon
student needs - as well as institutional and departmental priorities and goals.
This approach will enhance students’ sense of belonging to the CEE profession,
department, and major - augmenting student experiences, performance, and
retention in CEE departments. The world needs more civil and environmental
engineers to address 21st Century societal grand challenges including climate
change, the increasing frequency and intensity of disasters, water quality
degradation and scarcity, infrastructure renewal, urban congestion, and
pandemics. This project will create safe environments for all CEE students,
particularly women and underrepresented minorities, and improve their sense of
belonging within the academic program and the profession. Moreover, it will
graduate more CEE professionals with augmented capabilities to address society’s
grand challenges. This project supports the overall goals of the RED program,
including enhancing the professional formation of students and transforming the
culture of the department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CEE programs across the nation
struggle with retention of students, which stems from at least two major issues.
First, CEE students do not begin to take courses in their major program until
later in the curriculum to allow them to complete general engineering and non-
engineering courses, such as math and science preparatory courses. This delayed
engagement can lead to students feeling little sense of belonging in the
program, having little understanding of the profession, and making little
progress in constructing their professional identities - in the first two years
of the program. Second, there are opportunities for CEE programs to continue
modernizing, with ongoing technological change, to retain students who actively
seek computational development. The objective of this RED grant is to develop an
effective and scalable model to revolutionize CEE education through early and
vertically integrated engagement. This project will create a spine of four
mutually informing and highly interactive courses with vertically-integrated
problem finding and problem solving. The courses will address society’s grand
challenges and develop computational, teaming, and reflection skills. This
project will lead to retention and graduation of civil and environmental
engineers who are better equipped – technically, professionally, and socio-
technically - to address society’s grand challenges. We will simultaneously
implement faculty development initiatives to create more reflective and
inclusive professors, and a workload model and teaching schedule to incentivize
faculty engagement in large and interactive freshmen and sophomore courses.
Further, we will create a Whole Person Education (WPE) award, and work with
upper administration to develop a WPE metric for the faculty annual evaluation,
as well as reappointment, promotion, and tenure processes. To accomplish these
goals, this project will partner with Georgia Tech’s Biomedical Engineering RED
Team to apply Schmader and Sedikides’ SAFE Model to improve the sense of
belonging. This project also connects to Clemson University’s Civil Engineering
RED Team to learn from their Arch framework for building technical and
professional skills throughout the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.