* 2022678
* A Mid-Term Assessment of NSF Progress on the 2015 ‘Strategic Vision for Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research’
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Laurie Geller, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 398,520.00

The Polar Research Board will conduct a consensus study to assess progress in
addressing research goals outlined in its 2015 report: A Strategic Vision for
NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research. The study will
identify significant recent advances in scientific understanding and technical
capabilities that present important new opportunities for progress in addressing
the mission of NSF’s Antarctic Sciences Section. In addition, for the three
priority research topics from the 2015 report in particular (on changing ice
sheets, evolution and adaptation of organisms and ecosystems, and cosmic
microwave background), the study will address any current implementation
challenges in advancing these research areas and suggest strategies to overcome
these challenges. The overall goal of the study is to provide NSF with an
objective assessment of progress in advancing the recommendations of the 2015
report and strategies to accelerate this progress. This activity will also help
the scientific community to stay engaged in the priority-setting process, and to
understand how NSF is pursuing the recommendations emerging from this process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity will consider a diverse array of research
initiatives and topics that are each advancing frontiers of scientific
knowledge. In addition to topics that are suitable for core-funding support,
this research also relates to (1) the dynamics of the rapidly changing Antarctic
ice sheet and its implications for global sea-level rise, (2) the consequences
of environmental change for the evolution and adaptation of unique Antarctic
organisms and ecosystems, and (3) observations of cosmic microwave background
radiation as a means to understand the origin and ultimate fate of the universe.
The proposed activity will add value to current knowledge of these and other
Antarctic research topics by helping NSF and the research community understand
what research progress has been made since the 2015 report, what impediments may
be limiting this progress, and what opportunities exist to advance such efforts
going forward. This activity will be planned by an ad hoc committee of
approximately 8 to 10 members. The committee will convene 2 to 3 meetings over a
period of one year. The committee will hold an initial meeting to gather
information and perspectives from NSF representatives. The subsequent
information-gathering steps will involve a mixed set of virtual outreach methods
to reach the research community at large. The committee will produce a short
report with findings and recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.