* 2022666
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Water Infrastructure in the Arctic: Vulnerabilities at the Intersection of Social, Natural and Physical Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kasey Faust, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 198,857.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems to address important societal challenges at this intersection, builds
significant educational opportunities, and engages with local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even when it exists, formal water
infrastructure in rural Alaska often fails to provide an adequate level of
service to Alaskan households and communities. Operating water infrastructure in
the Arctic is particularly difficult due to the unique coupling between the
engineered systems and the unusually extreme challenges from social and natural
systems. The small and remote nature of communities present unusual logistical,
financial, and workforce challenges, while an extreme and changing climate
further complicates the technical work needed to operate and maintain the
systems. Accordingly, this project integrates knowledge of the water service
challenges, data needs, and workforce issues experienced by Arctic communities
and develop approaches to address these challenges and needs with appropriate
strategies. Results from the needs assessment are used in teaching modules, and
the knowledge generated is being used to develop an educational phone and tablet
app that can be used as a tool available for utilities in public outreach.
Broadly, this project is reducing uncertainty surrounding the operations of
Arctic water infrastructure under conditions of climate change, and in doing so
identifies new places where research is urgently
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabled by semi-structured interviews and focus
groups, this planning grant is designed to forefront Alaskan community member
and utility operator knowledge. The team is visiting three communities in the
Yukon Kuskokwim Delta to gather knowledge from individuals with diverse
expertise, including treatment plant operators and the general public. Data are
being transcribed and analyzed using emergent qualitative analysis to
objectively explore questions discovered through a local needs assessment.
Further, through team development using the Delphi method and concept modeling
exercises, this grant is creating the research community needed to identify and
address systemic problems facing Arctic water infrastructure and the people who
use them. Knowledge is being returned to participating communities through
professional organizations, anchor institutions, and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.