* 2022937
* GP-GO: 'Ahihi Learning Ecosystem Model for Hawai‘i Geoscience Workforce Development
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Barbara Bruno, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 378,249.00

This project aims to fundamentally transform the ways geoscience majors are
attracted and prepared at the University of Hawai‘i (UH) through institutional
collaborations with a focus on workforce-relevant professional development and
community-building. This proposal will employ a STEM learning ecosystem model in
which faculty, staff, students, and alumni work together with geoscience
employers to prepare Hawai‘i's diverse students for geoscience careers locally
and nationally. The result will be an increase in the number of women, Native
Hawaiians and other URMs that engage in career-relevant geoscience experiences,
which will lead to their increased participation in the local and national
geoscience workforce. This project will also lead to enhanced economic
development, sustainability and geopolitical security, as many geoscience jobs
have relevance to clean energy, fresh water, climate change and sea level rise.
In this way, this project will contribute to the NSF mission of promoting the
progress of science, advancing the nation’s prosperity and welfare and securing
the national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's overarching goal is to
attract and prepare diverse undergraduates and graduate students to meet
Hawai‘i’s geoscience workforce needs. The PIs have targeted four project
objectives: (A) Develop a data-driven understanding of current and projected
geoscience workforce needs in Hawai‘i, and use these data to drive programming;
(B) Improve career-related pathways into the geosciences by equipping
undergraduate and graduate students with skills relevant to workforce needs
through professional development, networking and mentoring; (C) Build
sustainable, institutional collaborations across the UH system by bridging and
leveraging relevant programs and projects at three Native Hawaiian-serving
community colleges and UH Manoa; and (D) Increase and broaden participation
within Associate of Science in Natural Science and UH Manoa School of Ocean and
Earth Science and Technology majors, particularly among women and Native
Hawaiians. These objectives will be obtained through an integrated set of
interventions designed for academic and workforce success. A key cross-cutting
strategy is leveraging the long-term partnerships with well-established programs
across all three campuses to build cross-campus collaborations and ensure
sustainability beyond the project period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by GEO's IUSE:GEOPAths Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.