* 2022639
* NNA Track 1: Understanding the Changing Natural-Built Landscape in an Arctic Community: An integrated sensor network in Utqiagvik, Alaska
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Leena Cho, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Education, and Resilient
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic communities face many challenges as
they grow and develop in the context of a rapidly changing environment. These
challenges include coastal erosion, permafrost thaw, and ecosystem change.
Arctic cities need to prepare for critical decisions in the future, which
traditional scientific approaches alone are unable to address adequately.
Instead, an interdisciplinary, community-based approach is necessary. Utqiagvik,
the northernmost urban center in Alaska, is facing many of these common
challenges and provides a model for other Arctic cities. This project is
developing and deploying a network of environmental sensors collecting
continuous information over a five-year period in terrestrial and aquatic
locations within the community of Utqiagvik. Community members are deeply
involved in the planning process for placement of the sensors, ongoing
maintenance, and interpretation of the data. The education component of the
project is extensive, providing training opportunities for undergraduate
students, graduate students, two postdoctoral scholars, and community members in
Utqiagvik. The sensor network yields an unprecedented dataset for examining the
interactive effects of the natural and built environments. This project is
improving the health and economic well-being of Utqiagvik and other North Slope
Borough villages in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates two
essential challenges for the Arctic city of Utqiagvik, Alaska: i) the impacts of
existing community infrastructure practices on the surrounding tundra, coastal,
and lagoon landscapes within and around the city, and ii) the impacts of a
changing environment on the design and future planning of community
infrastructure and buildings. The project has four broad objectives. First,
community members and scientists are working together to plan and deploy an
integrated sensor network in four target areas of the city. Second,
environmental data are being used to assess how the infrastructure of the city
interacts with the surrounding air, ground, and water. Third, this knowledge is
informing management of infrastructure and planning initiatives for Utqiagvik,
and is useful for other Arctic communities as well. Finally, the process of co-
production of knowledge among researchers and community members is being studied
to better understand how these relationships can successfully build and maintain
equitable sharing of knowledge and benefits for the residents of Utqiagvik. The
ultimate goal of the project is to understand how the natural and built
environments interact with social systems in an Arctic
city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.