* 2022967
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Enable Elastic Capacity for Transportation Infrastructure through a Transmodal Modular Autonomous Vehicle System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Joseph Chow, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 111,940.00

While roadway infrastructure provides limited capacity, vehicles operating on
roads dominated by passenger cars may easily exceed road capacity over peak
hours, causing traffic congestion, excessive energy consumption and increased
safety risks. In observing that a passenger car takes much space on a roadway
due to the relatively long gap following a preceding vehicle, this EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project explores emerging modular
autonomous vehicle (MAV) technology that can dynamically adjust gaps between
vehicles. With the MAV technology, vehicles composed of multiple modular pods
can be dynamically docked and separated during operations. For example, during
peak hours, modular pods will be docked into longer MAVs, resulting in zero gaps
between the modular pods docked together, which obviously improves highway
throughput and reduces congestion. Whereas during off-peak hours, a long MAV may
separate into shorter MAVs to ensure flexible system accessibility and reduce
vehicle operation costs. This way, the MAV service equivalently creates
“elastic” capacity for fixed transportation infrastructure to adapt
spatiotemporally-varying travel demand. This project is for a new transmodal MAV
system paradigm to realize such elastic capacity of a road transportation
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize this vision, we will adapt
multidisciplinary theoretical methods (e.g., time-geography, queuing theory,
traffic flow theory, and homogeneous analysis) to understand and formulate
operations of an MAV system. Then we will build mathematical models for the
optimal design and operations of an MAV system at various scales by
synchronizing demands and modular pods over time and space. The major challenge
is to deal with continuous time and space as opposed to traditional fleet
management problems with discrete time-space states. This challenge will be
overcome by integrating microscopic trajectory control into macroscopic fleet
management. If successful, this project will provide transmodal concepts to
improve transportation and other related systems that are currently segregated
into different modes. It will help boost the MAV service from a startup stage to
a sustainable industry. The results will help transportation stakeholders
understand feasibility and benefits of the MAV service and devise measures to
incorporate it in their future planning, which may result in profound positive
impacts on surface transportation including transit and freight
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.