* 2022587
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Adaptable Microgrids in Arctic Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kristen Schell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 97,170.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the built environment and social systems to addresses
important societal challenges, builds significant educational opportunities, and
engages with local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic communities
currently face environmental and economic changes that threaten their way of
life. New ways of designing and building electric power systems might help these
communities meet these challenges now and in the future. The goal of this
research is to address these challenges by bringing together researchers, rural
Alaska energy experts, and local people living in the Arctic. These groups are
identifying needs and design research on less expensive, portable, and renewable
energy-based electric systems to address changing conditions. The “adaptable
microgrid” designs from this work have potential for application in other remote
places around the world. The design concepts could also help people build better
water and sanitation systems, thus broadening the impact of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community-researcher partnerships are central to the
development of feasible and socially-accepted models for microgrid design
alternatives. The goal of this planning grant is to create these partnerships
and build trust with Arctic community members and other rural Alaska energy
stakeholders. This is being achieved through the following activities: (1)
Formation of a research advisory committee composed of people from regional
Alaska Native organizations, regional electric utilities, Alaska-wide renewable
energy groups, and the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP) at
the University of Alaska Anchorage; (2) Development of two advisory committee
workshops; (3) Convening meetings of the research team with Arctic communities
to build relationships and gather initial information; and (4) Development of
relationships with Arctic community schools and ANSEP for K-12 education and
continuing participatory science projects. These activities are laying the
foundation for a research agenda focused on community values on energy use,
economic tradeoffs in the design and relocation of infrastructure, demand for
electricity by integrated water and sewer systems, and data inputs for
optimization modeling. The model output is providing communities with options
for building adaptable infrastructure that meets their needs.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.