* 2022861
* Defining the Emerging Pedagogy in the Field of Global Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Evan Thomas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,896.00

The end of poverty is the first goal listed in the United Nations (UN)
sustainable development goals. After fifty years of applying conventional
engineering approaches to international development, poverty impacts two-thirds
of the world’s inhabitants in rural areas and low/middle income urban
communities. Global Engineering, also known as Development Engineering, is an
emerging field that addresses the global drivers and technological,
environmental, and socio-economic barriers that perpetuate poverty. Although
major academic institutions in the United States have started offering courses
and degree programs in Global Engineering, the body of knowledge and pedagogy
for this field has yet to be formalized. The goal of this workshop is to
strengthen collaboration between Global Engineering related programs in the US
and develop a consensus around Global Engineering learning objectives,
educational programming, and supporting educational activities. To achieve these
goals, the workshop will bring together and integrate diverse perspectives from
educators, practitioners and policy/decision makers from academia, government,
industry, and international development agencies. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the development of new pedagogy and
curricula to standardize the educational approach to Global Engineering,
providing structure and rigor to student learning experiences. Further benefits
to society will be achieved through student education and training including the
recruitment and mentoring of students to support the implementation of the
workshop activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of engineers in contributing
to global poverty reduction to achieve the UN sustainable development goals is
evolving. Typically, the engineer’s role in addressing these challenges has been
confined to technology design and development at the community-, regional- or
national-scale. Global Engineering is an emerging field, with university
programs coalescing around shared principles and more holistic approaches to
global poverty reduction that incorporate protection for human and ecological
health. However, the supporting curricula and pedagogy for this field have not
been formalized. The goal of this workshop is to bring together leading
researchers, educators, and practitioners to build upon existing efforts within
individual university programs and establish a consensus around the pedagogy for
Global Engineering education. To achieve this goal, investigators will organize
a three-day workshop with two plenary lectures, lightning presentations, and
breakout sessions. The plenary lectures will focus on three core questions: 1)
What is Global Engineering? 2) What is the role of the global engineer in
contributing to global poverty reduction and progress toward the UN sustainable
development goals? 3) How do academic institutions prepare students to be
practitioners in an emerging field? Discussions will be structured around the
following topics: 1) Creating a body of knowledge for the field of Global
Engineering, 2) Educating the next generation of global engineers, and 3)
Building a community of practice for continuous learning and improvement. The
successful completion of this project will benefit the broad field of
engineering and society through the development and validation of new curricula,
pedagogy, and teaching strategies to educate the next generation of global
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.