* 2022218
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Positioning translational research in the biotech ecosystem: From basic research to more exploitable knowledge
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Nicholas Vonortas, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 11,428.00

Novel scientific discoveries in the biomedical sector do not become viable
clinical treatments or commercial products by themselves. There are numerous
steps to go through and obstacles to overcome along the complex biomedical
developmental process. Translational research has emerged to increase the speed
of the conversion process and improve biomedical productivity. Since 2006, the
National Institutes of Health (NIH)’s Clinical and Translational Science Awards
(CTSA) program has supported over 60 institutions in order to improve the
clinical and translational research environment. While current literature
examines the effect of the NIH translational research program, the scope of its
analysis is generally restricted to publication at the recipient level. This
study analyzes the effect of the NIH CTSA program on biotech entrepreneurship by
expanding the scope of analysis to a broader level. In addition, this project
attempts to identify the effective combinations of conditions for a high level
of biotech entrepreneurship with a specific emphasis on the role of
translational research. The results will contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of the effect of translational research in the context of biotech
entrepreneurial activity and help us to assess the potential benefit of
translational research to the public health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
draws on the entrepreneurial ecosystem approach and the knowledge spillover
theory of entrepreneurship to analyze the effects of translational research on
biotech entrepreneurship. The overarching analytical framework is that
translational research increases biotech entrepreneurship by increasing the
commercially exploitable knowledge stock that is available to entrepreneurs. For
the empirical testing, the project uses federal innovation programs such as the
Small Business Innovation Research as a proxy for biotech entrepreneurship. This
study also considers and examines the biomedical patent, among other forms of
exploitable knowledge. The empirical methods highlight how having the
translational research program makes differences in the outcomes. Data is
collected through various sources including federal agencies such as the
National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, and the Census
Bureau. The findings will be principally disseminated through publication and
will contribute to the literature in the translational research and
entrepreneurial ecosystem fields. Additionally, federal agencies like the NIH
will have access to a careful empirical appraisal of the CTSA program’s
contribution to biomedical enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.