* 2022502
* EAGER: Developing AI Literacy Interventions to Teach Fundamental Concepts in AI
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Cynthia Breazeal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a foundational technology that
impacts on every sector of the economy and every corner of society. AI’s rapid
expansion across fields and industries and its dramatic impact on the economy
and national security necessitate developing a workforce knowledgeable and
capable of working with AI. There is an urgent need to research K-12 students’
capacity to learn AI concepts and processes and how best to support their
development of AI skills and career interests. Meanwhile, broadening
participation in AI is an important need in AI workforce development. Engaging
students from underrepresented groups in AI education can help ensure that the
design, development, and utilization of AI technologies are inclusive and
equitable. The objective of this project is to build field-advancing knowledge
about 1) appropriate measurements and instruments to assess middle school
students’ concept knowledge, awareness of AI and perceptions about AI, and
career orientation; and 2) whether and how students are able to learn key AI
concepts and become more interested in AI and related careers. This knowledge
will be generated through investigating the learning outcomes and efficacy of an
AI curriculum in informal learning contexts with students from diverse
backgrounds, including Hispanic/Latinx and African American learners. The
project specifically addresses middle school students (ages 11-13) because the
middle school years are a critical time for students to begin exploring careers
related to their interests. In order to develop a diverse AI workforce, it is
important to expose students to the wide range of applicability of AI and the
career options it confers. Many of the AI learning activities produced through
the project are not dependent on the availability of computers, contributing to
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in AI learning
experiences for underserved students who do not have consistent access to
Internet services . This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will
focus on four research questions: 1) What are students’ perceptions and
attitudes towards AI and how do they change, if at all, as a result of the
interventions? 2) What knowledge and skills do students develop through the
interventions? 3) What kinds of interactions between youth and curriculum
materials, tools, and peers facilitate students’ conceptual development? and 4)
What connections do students make, if any, between the skills they learn and
application of those skills in various STEM and computer science careers and
fields? The project team will use a design based research approach in conducting
expert reviews, focus groups, and a pilot test to iteratively test and refine
the curriculum, measures, and assessments. The team will then conduct an
efficacy study to collect and analyze data to generate estimates of the impact
of the intervention on youths’ perceptions of and attitudes toward AI, learning
of concepts in AI, and career adaptability. Additionally, video and interaction
analyses, cognitive interviews, and case studies with thematic analyses will be
used to gain an understanding of student engagement with the AI activities;
student interactions that facilitated learning such as interactions between
students and curriculum materials, students and tools, and students and their
peers; and the best strategies to support them to pursue AI related careers. The
project’s deliverables include: the Developing AI LIteracy (DAILy) curriculum;
the Attitudes Toward AI, AI Concept Inventory and AI Career Futures surveys; and
the research findings. The project’s outcomes will build the knowledge base on
appropriate measurements and instruments, students’ learning processes, how and
to what extent students can learn AI concepts in middle school, and the efficacy
of the intervention with an audience of underrepresented youth. The research has
potential to advance the field of AI education by contributing to the definition
of AI literacy, forming the basis for subsequent research on learning
trajectories in K-12 AI education, and generating understandings that are
foundational to developing education programs that will prepare a workforce
knowledgeable and capable of working with AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.