* 2022469
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Cyberinfrastructure (DesignSafe) 2020-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Clinton Dawson, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 12,395,424.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under NSF
14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015 through separate, but
coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for a Network Coordination
Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center (SimCenter), and
Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. This award will renew the CI component of NHERI from October 1, 2020,
to September 30, 2025. Through this award, the University of Texas at Austin and
its partners (Calvin College; Florida Institute of Technology; University of
California, Los Angeles; University of California, San Diego; University of
Notre Dame; University of Washington; and William Marsh Rice University) will
continue to maintain, operate, and enhance the NHERI CI DesignSafe web portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org), a CI that provides data, tools, and
computational resources to enable research to mitigate the impact of natural
hazards, such as earthquakes, windstorms, tsunamis, and storm surge, on the
nation’s civil infrastructure and communities. In DesignSafe, experimental,
simulation, social sciences, and post-disaster reconnaissance data will be
curated, published, and made publicly available in the Data Depot data
repository, while tools for data analysis and computational modeling and
simulation will be provided in the Workspace. The Reconnaissance Portal will
provide a clearinghouse for data products and lessons learned from natural
hazard events in the United States and abroad. Online and in-person training
will be delivered through the Learning Center to enable the next generation of
researchers to use the advanced capabilities provided by DesignSafe. The annual
DesignSafe CI Institute will enable graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers to work closely with project staff to implement their workflows. The
portfolio of DesignSafe capabilities will enable new research discoveries that
can help protect human life, reduce damage, and minimize economic losses during
natural hazard events. This award will contribute to NSF's role in the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact
Reduction Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grand research challenges
in natural hazards engineering, as outlined in the NHERI Science Plan
(https://doi.org/10.17603/ds2-4s85-mc54), require access to big data, cloud-
based computational and simulation tools, and high performance computing
resources, and DesignSafe will provide the resources to deliver these
capabilities. The key to addressing these challenges and transforming research
in natural hazards engineering is transforming research workflows through access
to the required data, tools, and resources. DesignSafe will provide the
foundational building blocks that users can combine to generate transformative
workflows, and will deliver enhanced capabilities in promising areas such as
artificial intelligence and machine learning. These enhanced capabilities
include: (1) the Data Depot with new features related to versioning, metrics,
search, structured data, and tool launching; (2) the Reconnaissance Portal with
new features to support analysis of geospatial datasets; and (3) the Workspace
with new features, including artificial intelligence and machine learning tools,
SimCenter tools, and Jupyter capabilities, to support workflows within different
computing environments. The capabilities available at DesignSafe will also
provide the foundation for enhancing the computational skills of the research
community in natural hazards engineering and to develop a cyber-enabled
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.