* 2022961
* HBCU-RISE Center for Improving Understanding and Forecasting of Orographic Effects on Extreme Weather (EWC)
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Jing Zhang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 999,583.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University (NCA&amp;T) will create an Extreme Weather Center (EWC) to study
extreme weather events such as wind-driven wildfires in complex terrain and
intense hurricanes, which cause severe injuries, fatalities, and damage costing
billions of dollars of economic loss each year with significant impacts on the
general population, economy, and society. The EWC will provide education and
training to undergraduate and graduate students at NCA&amp;T. Students and
researchers will work to improve the prediction accuracy of extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research at NCA&amp;T will expand
research and graduate training to improve the understanding of the dynamics and
mechanisms of orographic effects on wildfires and hurricane precipitation with
the aim of enhancing the predictability of these extreme events. The EWC will
study orographic effects of wildfire formation and evolution; orographic effects
of precipitation associated with landfalling hurricanes; and the impact of
changing climate on the extreme events of wildfires and hurricane precipitation
over mountainous area. Students and researchers will use data synthesis of in-
situ and remotely sensed observations as well as reanalysis of real-case and
idealized numerical simulations with state-of-the-art models. Students will be
trained in data assimilation and ensemble forecasting for improving extreme
weather prediction and statistical analysis of reanalysis data. The research
will be used to develop course materials that will be delivered via an online
portal. Research advancements resulting in improved understanding and
forecasting of orographic effects on extreme weather will benefit the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.