* 2022465
* Collaborative Research: A New Sanidine-Liquid Hygrometer: Experiments, Calibration and Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 01/10/2020,07/31/2024
* Laura Waters, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 135,252.00

The composition of potassium feldspar, a common in continental magmatic rocks,
can record the intensive conditions it experiences as it is growing from a melt.
The research team will calibrate a water-dependent geothermometer based on
sanidine compositions. The calibration will be applicable to determine the
conditions of crystallization of some of the world's most-important and best-
studied suites, including voluminous (&gt;1000 cubic kilometers) ignimbrites and
batholithic plutons. Six undergraduates from Sonoma State, a Hispanic-serving
institution, will participate in the project, including 3 from a program that
promotes STEM fields to under-represented groups. Three students from a high-
school internship program will participate. Three undergraduates from Davis, a
Hispanic-serving institution, will also participate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will generate new phase equilibria results, a hygrometer applicable to
sanidine- and anorthoclase-bearing magmas, and a new method for estimating the
equilibration temperatures and H2O contents of plutonic rocks. Silicic magmas
represent the final products of planetary differentiation and can erupt in
enormous volumes. Voluminous silicic eruptions require that short- or long-lived
volumes of mush (crystals + melt) must exist in the crust. However, there is
ongoing debate about the origins and lifespans of such systems, with conflicting
views from numerical models, isotopic and trace element data, and the plutonic
and volcanic records. The intensive variables recorded by potassium feldspar
have been underutilized in this debate, largely due to a lack of appropriate
models. This project will involve experimental calibration of a new K-feldspar
hygrometer/thermometer that will constrain the conditions (i.e., temperature,
pressure, H2O content) of formation, storage, and extraction of a broad range of
silicic magmas. Six undergraduates from Sonoma State, a Hispanic-serving
institution, will participate in the project, including 3 from a program that
promotes STEM fields to under-represented groups. Three students from a high-
school internship program will participate. Three undergraduates from Davis, a
Hispanic-serving institution, will also participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.