* 2022602
* I-Corps:  AI-Based Tuberculosis Diagnostic Tool
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Ye Duan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software that will serve as an aid to the pathologist to provide
more accurate diagnoses using histopathology images. The software will be
deployed on the cloud so that it can be used anywhere, anytime through a web
portal using a desktop, laptop, tablet, or a smart-phone. The software has the
potential to dramatically speed up the disease diagnosis process with increased
accuracy, which in turn will result in improved quality of care and better
patient outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of novel deep learning techniques for whole-slide image analysis to
aid pathologists in making a better diagnosis for diseases such as tuberculosis.
Pathologists make a diagnosis based on recognizing patterns in histopathology
images. Recognizing pathology patterns takes many years of training. After
training, pathologists spend significant amount of time doing pattern
recognition for the rest of their life. With the potential to save time and
effort for pathologists, and inspired by the recent success of deep learning on
natural images, there is a need to develop artificial intelligence models to
recognize patterns in histopathology images. In addition to tuberculosis, the
proposed techniques and software prototype could be extended to the diagnosis of
other diseases in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.