* 2022390
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Multi-Hazard Damage to Puerto Rico's Civil Infrastructure - Investigation of the Interactions of 2017 Hurricane Maria and 2020 Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Alexandra Hain, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2022
* USD 43,069.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will gather perishable data
documenting structural damage to historic buildings and port structures in the
Ponce, Puerto Rico, area following the 2020 Puerto Rico Earthquake Sequence
(M6.4 on January 7, 2020). This project aims to identify the compounding impacts
of Hurricane Maria in September 2017 and the 2020 earthquake sequence on
structures in Puerto Rico. Traditionally, post-disaster damage assessment
activities focus on one hazard and overlook the potentially destructive
cascading effects of multiple hazards on structures. In some cases, the capacity
losses due to an initial hazard, combined with incomplete restoration efforts,
can significantly impact the performance of a structure under subsequent
hazards. The lack of sufficient field data for a variety of multi-hazard impact
cases prevents the engineering community from accurately characterizing some of
the structural failure modes observed after extreme events and developing
mitigation strategies to reduce the failures. This project will collect
perishable structural damage data that can inform research on potential multi-
hazard mitigation strategies for the design of new structures and the retrofit
of existing ones. This will improve the safety of structures in future extreme
events and minimize the socioeconomic impacts of hazards. In the short term, the
findings of this project can contribute to the recovery efforts in Puerto Rico
by highlighting the importance of understanding multi-hazard vulnerabilities. By
involving several graduate students and early career faculty in the field data
collection, data processing, and subsequent multi-hazard analyses, this project
will support future workforce development in the area of natural hazard
mitigation. Data from this project will be archived and made publicly available
in the National Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https:/www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This
project contributes to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will travel to Puerto Rico in February
and March 2020 to collect a comprehensive data set of structural performance
including geotagged pictures, 3D models, and infrared images, using equipment
from the NHERI RAPID facility at the University of Washington, to document
several unexpected or understudied vulnerabilities of structures observed after
the earthquake sequence. The project team will focus on gathering the following
data: 1) structures and sites that have experienced soil erosion during
Hurricane Maria, 2) structures that lost some of the perimeter or insulation
elements during the hurricane and were not repaired before the earthquake
sequence occurred, 3) structures located on slopes that were susceptible to
landslides or lateral spreading, 4) landslide-driven hydrologic effects of Maria
that may have been worsened during the earthquakes, 5) structures that were
repaired after Maria by adding/attaching heavy components to provide stability
under high winds but not beneficial to reduce seismic loads, 6) flexible
structures that were retrofitted by adding rigid bracing or supports, 7)
structures onshore that were exposed to corrosive seawater due to the hurricane
storm surge, 8) structures that showed signs of damage after the occurrence of
the aftershocks, and 9) structural design concepts such as elevated construction
to avoid flooding that make structures vulnerable to earthquakes. This data will
be used to understand if the impacts of Hurricane Maria, such as inundation,
erosion, saltwater exposure, water damage, and structural damage to external
components, resulted in an increased level of damage or caused unexpected modes
of structural failure during the 2020 earthquake sequence. The information
collected will also be used to determine if post-hurricane retrofit measures
changed how structures performed under the seismic events. This project's data
will help the natural hazards research community build a database in the NHERI
Data Depot that documents the sequential impacts of hurricanes and earthquakes
on structures. This database can be used for subsequent multi-hazard research
studies to improve the performance of structures subjected to multiple hazard
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.