* 2022720
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research:Data-driven Disaster Response Systems Dependent on Time of Day, Season and Location for Megacities
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Upmanu Lall, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,933.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries to address the
growing need for assessment and reduction of disaster risk, collaborative co-
design of resilience strategies with a breadth of stakeholders, and
scientifically and technologically enhanced responses to disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to design a replicable and transferrable
information-sharing system for disaster preparedness and response in megacities.
Such a system would inform immediate response in the face of rapid-onset
disasters, such as floods, earthquakes, and fires. Case studies selected for
this project are Tokyo, Taipei, and New York City due to their complex urban
environments and diverse populations, which present a challenge for disaster
management. To address dynamic disaster scenarios as well as the needs of
vulnerable socio-economic groups in urban areas, this project will integrate
both scenario-based and data-driven planning, while incorporating sensor data
and stakeholder engagement. This work proposes to simulate earthquake and fires
for Tokyo as well as floods for NYC and Taipei and response to these events. The
study will attempt to improve damage prediction and response modeling and will
design a real-time warning and response system for disaster
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.