* 2022124
* URoL: Epigenetics 1: Collaborative Research: Novel epitransciptomics tools to understand and modulate interactions of modified RNAs with protein readers and erasers
* BIO,EF
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Phanourios Tamamis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 210,013.00

In cells of all living organisms, over 150 types of chemical modifications have
been found on RNA molecules. The presence of RNA modifications can alter the
function or stability of the RNA molecules. RNA modifications can be recognized
by specialized proteins called readers, and they can be removed by other
proteins called erasers. An unsolved question is how reader and eraser proteins
distinguish one modification from another. This project seeks to address that
question by using a combination of biophysical, computational, and protein
engineering approaches. The results are expected to provide new insights into
how RNA function is controlled by RNA modification, an underexplored frontier in
molecular biology. In addition to the scientific impact, the research will
provide educational experiences for two graduate students, who will be trained
at the interdisciplinary intersection of molecular biophysics and biochemistry,
as well as experimental and computational methods. The project will also promote
engagement in STEM-related activities by undergraduates and by students in
middle and high school, including those from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the field of RNA modifications has re-gained momentum,
it is now understood that the abundance and effects of these modifications on
RNA are determined by the dynamic interplay between so-called readers that bind
the modifications and erasers that recognize RNA and catalyze removal of the
modification. To understand how these proteins recognize and act on their
substrates, an interdisciplinary approach, combining biophysical, computational,
and engineering methods, will be taken. Two fundamental questions will be asked:
(1) what RNA modifications can be recognized by specific protein readers and
erasers, and (2) what biophysical properties are associated with reading versus
erasing different RNA modifications? To address these questions, studies will be
conducted to predict the rules whereby readers and erasers recognize a suite of
RNA modifications and to validate the predictions by direct tests in cellular
assays. The results will expand fundamental knowledge of the biophysical
mechanisms of protein recognition, in the context of RNA modifications, and
provide impetus for future design of synthetic schemes to control gene control
by tuning levels of RNA modification in cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded by the Understanding the Rules of Life: Epigenetics Program,
administered as part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging
Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological Sciences. Co-funding is provided by
the Molecular Biophysics Program, Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.