* 2022260
* NNA Track 2: Groundwater treatment, delivery and use in rural Alaska
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Laura Eichelberger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,998.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, addresses important societal challenges, and engages with local and
Indigenous communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groundwater is a key drinking
water source in Alaska. However, groundwater in Alaska is commonly contaminated
with naturally occurring metals including iron, manganese, and arsenic. When
these contaminants are present in drinking water, they pose a serious health
threat. Water treatment systems in many rural communities are not always able to
remove these contaminants. This situation endangers the well-being of the
community, diminishes trust in the treatment system, and reduces use of the
treated water. The goal of this project is to address challenges involved with
treatment, delivery, and use of drinking water in rural communities, with a
special focus on indigenous residents. Benefits to society result from
identification of ways to improve water services for communities of indigenous
Alaskans that use groundwater contaminated with iron, manganese, and arsenic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contamination of groundwater with naturally occurring
iron, manganese, and arsenic poses a significant threat to Alaskans who use it
as a source of drinking water. The goal of this project is to address this
threat by: i) creating a holistic conceptual model of the factors, interactions,
and feedbacks that shape access to safe, reliable, and socially acceptable
drinking water in rural Alaska, ii) identifying gaps in our understanding or
capacity to solve the problem, and iii) building a team of experts and community
members poised to tackle these gaps. To accomplish this goal, project leaders
are leveraging existing knowledge about treatment, delivery, and use of
contaminated groundwater in indigenous Alaskan communities from a diverse set of
experts and stakeholders, including Tribal members. The project is led by three
female scientists with backgrounds in natural science, engineering, and
anthropology located at a traditional research university (University of
Washington) and a Tribal non-profit (Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium).
Project results hold the potential to fundamentally advance understanding of the
complex system of natural and built environments, as well as social factors that
affect safe drinking water access in rural Alaskan communities, and facilitate
the generation of novel hypotheses about how this complex system will respond to
Arctic climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.