* 2022887
* HBCU-RISE: Enhancing research and education infrastructure of the Bioenvironmental Science PhD program at Morgan State University: Microplastics in estuarine ecosystem
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Chunlei Fan, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,999.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure in
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) program supports the development of STEM
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. With National Science Foundation support, Morgan State
University will form an interdisciplinary faculty team to: (1) establish a core
research laboratory of marine microplastics and upgrade infrastructure for
faculty research and student training; (2) develop and offer new courses and
curriculum modules in bioenvironmental science; and (3) recruit students and
provide them with effective program activities to complete doctoral
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the Chesapeake Bay as a model estuarine
system, this project explores the source, transport, fate, and impact of
microplastics in the aquatic environment. Research objectives are to (1)
identify the composition, size fraction, and abundance of microplastics in the
estuarine ecosystem; (2) explore and characterize the processes and mechanisms
driving the transport/degradation of microplastics in the marine environment;
and (3) use Eastern Oyster (Crassostrea virginica) as a model species to examine
the potential impact of microplastics on the marine
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplastics are recognized as a ubiquitous
environmental contaminant. Given their small size, microplastics pose a threat
to the entire marine ecosystem via processes such as inadvertent ingestion and
bioaccumulation through the marine food web. This study will develop strategies
to prevent the entry of microplastics into the oceans and mitigate their
negative impacts on the marine environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages existing resources to provide new pathways for Morgan State University
students to participate in high impact research. The project will broaden the
scope of the existing doctoral program, making it accessible to students from a
wider range of disciplines, and transform the program into a more comprehensive
multidisciplinary research program that prepares students for an increasingly
competitive research environment. This project will have significant impact on
the research and education infrastructure at Morgan State University through
support for faculty and student researchers and extensive curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.