* 2022510
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Biocultural Impacts of Emerging Inequality and Health Disparities in the Past
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Stephanie Berger, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,128.00

Social inequality plays a role in disease and health disparities worldwide, and
the skeletal remains of past populations offer a unique means of exploring the
development of social inequality and the origins of modern health patterns
across time and space. This doctoral dissertation research project is a
bioarchaeological study of the impact of social inequality on childhood
developmental disruption, exploring the effects of early life stress on
inflammation, disease, and mortality later in life. The interdisciplinary
investigation will advance bioarchaeological knowledge and approaches by
focusing on the biological processes that link development to individual and
population health outcomes. The project will support undergraduate and graduate
student training in STEM laboratory and field research and contribute to ongoing
international collaborations and scientific capacity building.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses skeletal remains to examine the
interactions between social inequality, developmental plasticity, immune
function, morbidity, and mortality in the past. Skeletal data from three
research sites representing key shifts in sedentism, agriculture, and social
complexity will be analyzed with interdisciplinary approaches (latent class
analysis, causal mediation analysis, and analysis of variance) to explore two
relationships: the direct effect of developmental phenotypes on morbidity and
mortality outcomes; and the role of subsequent immune phenotypes in mediating
the effect of development experience on morbidity and mortality outcomes. This
project explores possible social determinants of inequality by compiling
phenotypes and outcomes for kin groups, estimated through an analysis of
biological distance (principal components analysis, multidimensional scaling,
and agglomerative clustering) of non-metric and metric dental variation, to
assess the distribution of health disparities and determine if kinship shaped
experiences of inequality. This project is jointly supported by the NSF
Archaeology and Biological Anthropology programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.