* 2022055
* NRT‐URoL: BRIDGES ‐ Building Resources for InterDisciplinary training in Genomic and Ecosystem Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* B Hurwitz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,859.00

The new science of ecosystem genomics integrates the large-scale science of how
ecosystems work with the small-scale science of how genes and genomes of
organisms interact with their environments. Ecosystem genomics promises new
knowledge to sustain the biological systems that support, interact with, and are
disrupted by human society, such as the agroecosystems that supply food to the
world -- and, more generally, the plants, microbes, and insects that shape
local, regional, and global cycles of energy, water, and carbon in both natural
and managed ecosystems. The challenge that limits fulfillment of the promise of
ecosystem genomics is transdisciplinary integration: fundamentally, an education
and training challenge. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to the University of Arizona will address this challenge by training
a diverse cadre of scientists to catalyze innovation across biological scales
and science disciplines. This project will diversify and improve inclusion in
science and technology fields, key to enhancing intellectual strength and
fostering transdisciplinarity. The project anticipates training an
intellectually and culturally diverse group of 40 MS and PhD students, including
20 NRT-funded trainees. Trainees will be recruited from a broad range of
disciplines, including genomics, data science, ecosystem and environmental
science, hydrology and atmospheric sciences, ecology, and plant-, insect-, and
microbial biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BRIDGES project will implement a
training program that combines (1) an interdisciplinary curriculum and a new
graduate minor; (2) novel, social science-based “Cultures of Science” training
(integrated into the natural science training program), based on the insight
that truly transdisciplinary research is not just a technical challenge, but
also one of bridging cultural differences between disciplines; (3) team-based
research experiences focusing on topics such as enhancing crop resistance to
drought in the southwest US (with industry partnership); integrative microbiome
science, data analytics, and genomics (with a US start-up company); engagement
with biomes from desert to rainforest (at UA’s Biosphere 2); leveraging multi-
omics technologies (with a world-leading U.S. government research laboratory);
and global challenges in the Philippines (advancing sustainable rice production)
and France (testing evolution-ecology theories with precision ecosystem
experiments at the world-class Ecotron facility); (4) teaching and outreach
experiences including at minority-serving high schools, (5) professional
development training, and (6) an Annual Institute in Ecosystem Genomics
Convergence, an opportunity for NRT trainees to advance proposals, share results
of team-based research experiences, and participate in interactive workshops for
professional development and training in inclusivity, pedagogy, science
communication, and the practice of science. Results and successful practices
will be broadly disseminated to the education community as the program
diversifies and implements best practices for inclusion in STEM while fostering
a new generation of transdisciplinary scientists in ecosystem
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.