* 2022369
* Collaborative Research: How Does the Brain Represent Abstract Concepts?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Keith Holyoak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 136,959.00

The ability to reason about the relations between sets of concepts—relational
reasoning—gives rise to abstract thought, and has fueled some of humanity’s
greatest achievements in science and technology. Although prior research has
identified where in the brain relational reasoning takes place, this project
pushes the research field by addressing how the brain represents abstract
relations. Specifically, the project aims to address three key questions: (1)
Can the brain represent an abstract idea independently of the concrete entities
that comprise the content of the idea? (2) Do people represent concepts in an
abstract manner only when explicitly required to do so, or are abstract
relations also retrieved spontaneously? (3) What neural markers reliably predict
differences in reasoning capacity between individuals? That is, do individuals
whose brains represent abstract relations more readily also tend to have
stronger reasoning skills, and/or to perceive meaningful connections that others
miss? This project will identify the computational basis for abstract thought
and reasoning, thereby creating an opportunity to refine artificial intelligence
systems by providing them with more efficient learning mechanisms. This work
will inform future research examining how children, and adults as lifelong
learners, form representations of abstract concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project integrates recent advances in multivariate fMRI, computational modeling,
and behavioral methodology to discover the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying
the representation of abstract relations. Research will systematically examine
the neural bases of this representation, as well as the influence of task
context and individual differences. First, behavioral priming and neural
similarity measures, alongside metrics from a computational model of relational
reasoning, will characterize the overlap in representation between pairs of
concepts that are only abstractly related. Second, manipulation of task demands
will determine whether the magnitude, location, and stability of neural
representations vary with explicit cognitive instructions. Finally, development
of a novel 'neural score' metric will determine neural markers of individual
differences in relational reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.