* 2022981
* High-Performance Intelligent Data-Science Institute (HIDI)
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Rosemary Shumba, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,002.00

HBCU-RISE: High-Performance Intelligent Data-Science
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Historically Black Colleges and Universities
- Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering program supports the
development of research capability at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering disciplines.
Supported projects have a unifying focus in a research area supported by the
National Science Foundation, a direct connection to the long-term plans of the
host department, institutional strategic plan and mission, and plans for
expanding institutional research capacity, as well as increasing the production
of doctoral students, especially those underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Bowie State University will establish a High-Performance
Intelligent Data-Science Institute, serving doctoral candidates enrolled at the
Bowie State University Computer Science Doctoral program. The institute will
address the growing national need for professionals and academics in the field
of Computer Science. The Institute will enhance the diversity of professionals
by increasing the number of under-represented minority students and women who
complete graduate programs and attain a Doctorate in Computer Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institute research is organized into two research
projects: (1) deep learning algorithms and high-performance computing for cyber
threat intelligence discovery from the darknet; and (2) human-centric
situational awareness and immersive analytics for big data visualization using
high performance computing. The first project deals with cyber security
breaches, while the second focuses on data analysis to support machine learning
and decision making. The unifying research focus of the Institute is an emphasis
on intelligent data-science in high-performance
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project has three objectives: (1)
create a new specialization in High Performance Data Analytics within the Bowie
State University Computer Science Doctoral Program; (2) increase the number of
qualified applicants to the Bowie State University Doctor of Computer Science
program by developing academic pathways and research opportunities in data
science for Bowie State University; (3) increase the number of underrepresented
minority students and women who attain a Doctorate in Computer Science. The
project will enroll six doctoral candidates per year who will pursue the
Specialization in High Performance Data Analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.