* 2022200
* Acquisition of Micro-Analytical Tools for Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ananya Mallik, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 458,710.00

This award will provide funds to acquire a bench-top scanning electron
microscope (SEM) system and upgrade an aging laser ablation (LA) system that is
paired with an existing inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer, both of
which enable analysis and imaging of microscopic geological samples, including
microfossils, volcanic fragments, and natural and synthetic glasses, rocks, and
minerals. The two requested instruments, which may work in tandem or
independently in the laboratory, will vastly enhance and complement the
established research capabilities at the University of Rhode Island. Each of the
principal investigators has a robust research program that will see immediate
benefit to NSF research projects within the Geosciences. These instruments will
contribute to the professional development of numerous undergraduate and
graduate students, support the growing research program of an early-career
scientist, and enable a broader platform of collaboration among Earth scientists
across many disciplines among Rhode Island
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upgrade of the LA system maintains and
improves functionality of an established and productive laboratory, whereas
acquisition of a compact SEM system adds new imaging capabilities in addition to
enhancing and informing the use of the LA system. Measurements and images
enabled by these instruments positively impact the PIs' endeavors to address key
hypotheses across a range of Earth science fields, including (1) the role of
volatiles and trace elements in plate tectonic cycles, (2) fragmentation
processes during explosive and effusive submarine volcanism, (3) the mechanisms
by which Earth's interior produces a diversity of magma compositions, and (4)
the roles of preservation, taxonomy, and inherent chemical heterogeneity in
microfossil records of past climate conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.