* 2022209
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Damon McCoy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 04/30/2023
* USD 18,000.00

This proposal supports student travel for 18 students to attend the 2020 Privacy
Enhancing Technology Symposium (PETS), to be held in Montreal, Canada from July
14-18, 2020. PETS is a leading venue for quick and wide dissemination of
cutting-edge research that address the design and realization of privacy
services for the Internet and other data systems and communication networks by
bringing together anonymity and privacy experts from around the world to discuss
recent advances in, and new perspectives on Privacy. This travel grant will
enable career development and learning opportunities for US-based and/or US
citizen graduate students. Attending conferences is an important component of
graduate school education for our society's future computer security
researchers. Students will have the opportunity to discuss leading edge research
with world-class computer researchers in privacy, and establish networks,
connections, and mentoring relationships that will serve them well during their
research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support to
encourage participation in the 2020 PETS conference by students who would
normally find it difficult to attend. Criteria for selection include evidence of
a serious interest in the field, as demonstrated by research output, coursework
and/or project experience. Organizers encourage participation of women and
students from other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.