* 2022930
* The interaction between breaking internal waves and gravity currents on inclined slopes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 110,937.00

This research seeks to understand and quantify the interaction between a gravity
current on an inclined slope and a series of incoming internal waves propagating
in a two-layer stratified fluid. The objective will be pursued primarily using
laboratory experiments, and the results will be contextualized by comparison
with numerical simulations and field measurements. Both gravity currents and
breaking internal waves are common in the near-coastal ocean. The mixing of the
fluid and material carried by the gravity current is a key process in
understanding how the land and sea are coupled. There is also a pressing current
need to understand this mixing process in more detail due to increasing pressure
globally to adopt seawater desalination as a hedge against future freshwater
scarcity. These coastal desalination plants discharge highly dense brine
effluent into the ocean, where it is assumed to mix with the receiving ocean
waters. However, current models of this mixing process typically neglect flow in
the coastal ocean, leading to wildly incorrect estimates of the mixing and thus
the environmental impact of these effluents. This project will provide the basic
science needed to close this knowledge gap and improve these models. The results
of this project will be of key interest to engineers and policymakers involved
in designing and permitting coastal facilities such as desalination plants the
discharge effluents into the near-coastal ocean. The results of this research
will be communicated to relevant stakeholders by interacting with colleagues
engaged in translational activities at Stanford. The project will contribute to
education by supporting a young researcher through the end of his Ph.D. studies
and introducing Masters students to research in environmental and geophysical
flows. Finally, outreach activities will be pursued via programs run through the
Bob and Norma Street Environmental Fluid Mechanics
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the experiments, a constant-flux gravity
current will flow down a slope into a two-layer stratified ambient fluid. At the
same time, multiple progressive internal waves propagating on the pycnocline
will interact with the gravity current, changing the way it mixes into the
ambient fluid. The changes to the fate of the gravity-current fluid and the way
it mixes into the ambient fluid will be measured with a combination of dye
imaging and quantitative planar laser-induced fluorescence. Experiments will be
performed for a wide range of relevant gravity-current Richardson numbers and
internal wave Froude numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.