* 2022413
* Innovation Dynamics of Emerging Co-Creation Practices: What are the impacts on Inclusion?
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Danielle Wood, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 475,000.00

The process for creating technology directly shapes who benefits from a
technology and how it impacts societal disparities along characteristics of
historic discrimination such as gender, race, class, national origin,
immigration status, and sexuality. The proposed project creates new knowledge
and evaluation methods to understand specific, emerging innovation trends while
considering geographic effects. The work also creates methods to evaluate how
these innovation trends relate to inclusiveness of who participates in and who
benefits from innovation. The project describes the emerging innovation
activities known as Co-Creation practices and evaluates how these practices may
impact the extent to which historically marginalized groups participate in
innovation and experience beneficial outcomes in the context of several urban
centers: Boston and Detroit. The study team will perform interviews to learn the
stories that describe how start-up incubators, technology development teams, and
government agencies lead innovation processes that consider the needs of a
variety of groups within society. The outcomes of this research will help local
and state governments in the United States create policies that foster inclusive
innovation that helps more people benefit from
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design builds case studies of
organizations that participate in Co-Creation Innovation Practices, focusing on
the areas of robotics, autonomous vehicles, and urban energy. The organizations
are "Co-Creation Facilities" that seek to incubate start-up companies while
enabling close links to potential end-users or "Living Labs" that seek to design
a technology in a context similar to the end-user environment. The study will
consider how history, demographics, geography, culture, and other regional
factors play a potential role in case study organization behavior and outcomes.
The expected outcomes of the study include detailed case study narratives for
several Co-Creation organizations in Boston and Detroit. For each case study
organization, the research team will use the Systems Architecture Framework to
map the objectives of the organization and compare these objectives with their
outcomes. For example, objectives may include providing support to help start up
organizations meet potential funders and outcomes may include the number of
star- up companies within an Innovation Hub that receive external funding within
each year. The evaluation will also consider the extent to which the innovation
process expands participation and safety for groups that experience
disproportionate, harmful discrimination. Finally, the research project will
propose theoretical propositions for cities in the US that can be compared in
the future to other cities. The project incorporates issues of equity
throughout—the composition of the research team, the design of the project, and
the dissemination of results all focus on broadening the impact of research. The
project will incorporate undergraduate and graduate students, will disseminate
research through publicly accessible lectures, and will include both industry
and international partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.