* 2022911
* Diel growth and activity of Prochloroccocus in an Oxygen Deficient Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Gabrielle Rocap, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 606,121.00

Marine oxygen deficient zones (ODZs) occupy less than 1% of the volume of the
ocean, but are responsible for up to half of the nitrogen moved from the ocean
to the atmosphere each year. Nitrogen is a key limiting nutrient for
phytoplankton, thus this loss of nitrogen from the ocean has impacts on the
total amount of marine photosynthesis, which removes carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and provides the base for marine food webs. As ocean temperatures
increase, the size of oxygen deficient zones is predicted to increase. This
project focuses on a microorganism that sits at the intersection of the
nitrogen, carbon and oxygen cycles within marine ODZs, the cyanobacterium
Prochlorococcus. Using water samples acquired on a previous cruise to the
Eastern Tropical North Pacific ODZ, the project assesses the growth and activity
of Prochlorococcus over the day/night cycle to determine their impacts on other
members of the ODZ microbial community. In the lab, cultures of Prochlorococcus
are being grown on different forms of nitrogen and their growth rates and oxygen
production are being measured. Understanding the functioning of biological
communities that reside within these waters is important for predicting global
elemental cycles. A central goal of this project is to broaden the pool of
individuals who pursue graduate work in environmental sciences by providing
undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups early research
experience, sustained financial support, peer mentorship and exposure to the
discipline at a national level. Two female graduate students and five
undergraduate students that are members of groups underrepresented in earth
sciences are participating in the project and are being trained and supported in
their STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the roles of
unique strains of Prochlorococcus found in low oxygen and low light regions of
the Eastern Tropical North Pacific (ETNP) in the oceanic carbon and nitrogen
cycles. In all three major marine ODZs, there are broad regions where the top of
the ODZ shoals to within the photic zone, resulting in a secondary chlorophyll
maximum entirely within the anoxic zone. This secondary chlorophyll maximum is
dominated by cyanobacteria, largely Prochlorococcus, the numerically dominant
phototroph in the oligotrophic oceans. Here Prochlorococcus is photosynthesizing
under very low light levels, fixing carbon and producing oxygen, with
implications for the surrounding microbial community. Although the organic
carbon produced by Prochlorococcus within the ODZ may be an additional source of
organic matter for heterotrophic denitrifiers, fueling nitrogen gas (N2)
production, the concomitant oxygen production may create a favorable habitat for
nitrifying archaea and bacteria which together return ammonium (NH4+) to
nitrate. Prochlorococcus must also acquire nitrogen in some form, potentially
competing with other nitrogen cycling taxa to do so. Importantly, the growth,
oxygen production and nutrient uptake in Prochlorococcus are tightly linked to
the diel cycle. Thus, diel production of oxygen by Prochlorococcus may shift the
balance between nitrification and denitrification over the course of a diurnal
cycle, ultimately influencing the degree of net nitrogen loss. This project is
1) establishing the in situ growth rate of Prochlorococcus populations within
the ETNP ODZ using flow cytometry; 2) sequencing metatransciptomes from ETNP ODZ
secondary chlorophyll maximum over a diel cycle to explore the role of diurnally
fluctuating oxygen on the N cycling community; and 3) characterizing novel
Prochlorococcus isolates from the ODZ by sequencing their genomes, comparing
their growth rates on different N sources, determining their uptake kinetics for
ammonia and nitrite, measuring their oxygen evolution and assessing their diel
transcriptional response under low oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.