* 2022448
* Foundations of Data Science Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Ronitt Rubinfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,494,180.00

The Foundations of Data Science Institute (FODSI) brings together a large and
diverse team of researchers and educators from UC Berkeley, MIT, Boston
University, Bryn Mawr College, Harvard University, Howard University, and
Northeastern University, with the aim of advancing the theoretical foundations
for the field of data science. Data science has emerged as a central science for
the 21st century, a widespread approach to science and technology that exploits
the explosion in the availability of data to allow empirical investigations at
unprecedented scale and scope. It now plays a central role in diverse domains
across all of science, commerce and industry. The development of theoretical
foundations for principled approaches to data science is particularly
challenging because it requires progress across the full breadth of scientific
issues that arise in the rich and complex processes by which data can be used to
make decisions. These issues include the specification of the goals of data
analysis, the development of models that aim to capture the way in which data
may have arisen, the crafting of algorithms that are responsive to the models
and goals, an understanding of the impact of misspecifications of these models
and goals, an understanding of the effects of interactions, interventions and
feedback mechanisms that affect the data and the interpretation of the results,
concern about the uncertainty of these results, an understanding of the impact
of other decision-makers with competing goals, and concern about the economic,
social, and ethical implications of automated data analysis and decision-making.
To address these challenges, FODSI brings together experts from many cognate
academic disciplines, including computer science, statistics, mathematics,
electrical engineering, and economics. Institute research outcomes have strong
potential to directly impact the many application domains for data science in
industry, commerce, science and society, facilitated by mechanisms that directly
involve a stream of institute-trained personnel in industrial partners'
projects, and by public activities designed to nurture substantive interactions
between foundational and use-inspired research communities in data science. The
institute also aims to educate and mentor future leaders in data science,
through the further development of a pioneering undergraduate program in data
science, and by training a diverse cohort of graduate students and postdocs with
an innovative approach that emphasizes strong mentorship, flexibility, and
breadth of collaboration opportunities. In addition, the institute plans to host
an annual summer school that will deliver core curriculum and a taste of
foundational research to a diverse group of advanced undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs. It aims to broaden participation and increase diversity
in the data science workforce, bringing the excitement of data science to under-
represented groups at the high school level, and targeting diverse participation
in the institute's public activities. And it will act as a nexus for research
and education in the foundations of data science, by convening public events,
such as summer schools and research workshops and other collaborative research
opportunities, and by providing models for education, human resource
development, and broadening participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
focus of the institute will encompass the full range of issues that arise in
data science -- modeling issues, inferential issues, computational issues, and
societal issues â€“ and the challenges that emerge from the conflicts between
their competing requirements. Its research agenda is organized around eight
themes. Three of these themes focus on key challenges arising from the rich
variety of interactions between a decision maker and its environment, not only
the classical view of data that is processed in a batch or a stream, but also
sequential interactions with feedback (the control perspective), experimental
interactions designed to answer "what if" questions (the causality perspective),
and strategic interactions involving other actors with conflicting goals (the
economic perspective). The other research themes focus on opportunities for
major impacts across disciplinary boundaries: on elucidating the algorithmic
landscape of statistical problems, and in particular the computational
complexity of statistical estimation problems, on sketching, sampling, and sub-
linear time algorithms designed to address issues of scalability in data science
problems; on exploiting statistical methodology in the service of algorithms;
and on using breakthroughs in applied mathematics to address computational and
inferential challenges. Intellectual contributions to societal issues in data
science will feature throughout this set of themes. The institute will exploit
strong connections with its scientific and industrial partners to ensure that
these research directions enjoy a rich engagement with a broad range of
commercial, technological and scientific application domains. Its sequence of
research workshops and a collaborative research program will serve the broader
research community by nurturing additional research in these key challenge
areas. The institute will be led by a steering committee that will seek the help
of an external advisory board to prioritize its research themes and activities
throughout its lifetime. Its educational programs will include curriculum
development from K-12 through undergraduate, a graduate level visit program, and
a postdoc training model, aimed at empowering the next generation of leaders to
fluidly work across conventional disciplinary boundaries while being mindful of
the full set of scientific issues. The institute will undertake a multi-pronged
effort to recruit, engage and support the full range of groups traditionally
under-represented in mathematics, computer science and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.