* 2022979
* Collaborative Research: Calibrating quartz fabric intensity as a function of strain magnitude: a field-based investigation in the Snake Range core complex, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Lee, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 82,641.00

Sixteen large tectonic plates cover the Earth’s surface and move relative to one
another at rates of several millimeters to tens of millimeters per year. An
important element for understanding the operation of plate tectonics is
documenting the magnitude of deformation of rocks that has occurred at and near
the boundaries of plates. However, rocks that have been deformed at high
temperatures and deep within the crust often do not preserve geologic features
that allow measuring the magnitude of deformation. To address this issue, and
thereby better characterize the rock deformation processes that operate at plate
boundaries, recent research has proposed that measuring the degree (or
‘intensity’) of alignment of the mineral quartz within rock samples can be used
to delineate areas of relatively high- or low-magnitude deformation within the
crust. This represents a promising new technique for understanding the spatial
patterns of deformation. However, the intensity of alignment of quartz has not
been directly correlated to the magnitude of deformation. The goal of this
project is to generate an equation that relates the intensity of alignment of
quartz to the magnitude of deformation. To accomplish this goal, we will
document quartz intensity patterns and measure the magnitude of deformation
associated with each intensity pattern in quartz-rich rocks in the Snake Range
in Nevada. These rocks are ideal for this study because they have yielded well-
defined intensity patterns in past studies, they preserve features that allow
measuring the magnitude of deformation, and they exhibit a change from low-
magnitude deformation in the western part of the range to high-magnitude
deformation in the east. By collecting intensity and deformation magnitude
measurements across the range, an equation relating these two parameters will be
generated, which can then be applied globally to understand deformation
magnitudes in any region that contains rocks deformed at high temperatures. This
project will provide research projects for graduate and undergraduate students,
thereby training the next generation of geoscientists. This project will also
contribute to STEM education by presenting results in introductory geology
courses that will reach 1,500 college students each year, giving talks at Great
Basin National Park and at community colleges in eastern Washington and northern
Idaho, and through a field trip for undergraduate students from both
participating universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how and where
strain becomes localized during deformation is fundamental for illuminating the
processes that thicken, thin, or accommodate strike-slip shearing within
continental crust during tectonism. Researchers have proposed that statistical
intensity parameters calculated from quartz crystallographic fabrics have the
potential to delineate zones of high strain, by interpreting fabric intensity as
a proxy for finite strain magnitude. Several recent studies in the Himalaya have
successfully utilized intensity parameters such as cylindricity to elucidate the
spatial patterns of relative strain magnitude across major shear zones. However,
as these studies were performed within packages of pervasively recrystallized
rocks that lack deformed markers from which finite strain can be measured, they
cannot quantitatively relate fabric intensity to absolute strain magnitude. We
propose that generating a calibration equation that expresses fabric intensity
as a function of finite strain magnitude would be a critical step forward for
expanding the utility of this new approach. In this project, we propose to
perform such a calibration by investigating rocks exposed within a Cenozoic
extensional shear zone in the Northern Snake Range metamorphic core complex in
Nevada. This field locality is ideal because the shear zone contains a quartzite
unit that yields well-developed crystallographic fabrics, preserves micro-,
meso- and regional-scale strain markers, and exhibits a dramatic across-strike
gradient in finite strain magnitude. We propose to obtain cylindricity values
from quartzite samples collected along a 30 km-long across-strike transect, and
to use micro- and meso-scale strain analyses to generate a detailed model of
3-dimensional finite strain of this quartzite unit across this transect.
Integration of these two datasets will allow calculation of a calibration
equation that expresses fabric intensity as a function of finite strain
magnitude, which will provide an indispensable new tool with which to approach
the kinematic and structural analysis of ductile deformation. The results of
this project will have far-reaching implications, as we propose to test the
veracity of a technique that can then be applied globally within any
contractional, extensional, or strike-slip orogenic system, active or ancient.
The calibration between cylindricity and finite strain magnitude can be applied
as a benchmark within any orogen that contains quartz-rich tectonites, in order
to illuminate the spatial patterns of strain localization within shear zones
that exhibit ubiquitous recrystallization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.