* 2022286
* Collaborative Research: The Ecological Basis of Hunting and Meat Sharing in Female Savanna Chimpanzees
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Leslie Knapp, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 152,220.00

Hunting with tools may enable female chimpanzees to routinely ingest and share
meat on a seasonal basis without the need for being provisioned by males. This
project will capture the dietary impacts of female chimpanzee hunting with tools
and compare these findings with other studies that have focused primarily on
male chimpanzee hunting behaviors. The findings from this project will advance
knowledge and broaden perspectives about primate models for understanding human
behavioral evolution. This project increases capacity for chimpanzee research by
fully engaging with and supporting local partners and students. The research is
part of a long-term program that supports habitat preservation in protected and
unprotected areas for the critically-endangered western chimpanzee. The research
further engages in conservation activities through the active study of
conservation genetics, development of conservation action plans, and support of
local research and community services in the research area. The project provides
exceptional research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students,
especially underrepresented minority and first-generation students to support
diversity and inclusion efforts in biological anthropology and STEM, more
broadly. This project also interfaces with Purdue Universityâ€™s EPICS program
(Engineering Projects in Community Service) to provide collaborative design
experiences for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sexual selection
theory and patterns of male-biased hunting and meat eating for chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes) have been traditionally integrated with models of human behavioral
evolution. While there is a well-documented understanding of these behaviors in
forest chimpanzees, a significant gap exists on how chimpanzees hunt and eat
meat in savannas. What little is known about hunting and meat-eating in savanna
chimpanzees, however, starkly contrasts with the typical species pattern. In the
hottest, driest, and most open landscapes inhabited by chimpanzees, tool use and
female-biased hunting comprise a major component of hunting strategy. This study
will test for environmental pressures that may explain this behavior. Little is
known about female-biased hunting because these timid chimpanzees are not
habituated for intensive behavior sampling, and are not being habituated due to
their conservation status combined with risk of infant poaching for the pet
trade. To confront this challenge, the project combines behavioral, isotopic,
nutritional, genetic, visual analytic, and geographic approaches to compare
hunting and meat ingestion between females and males, and in relation to climate
and food availability. This interdisciplinary and multi-site study is a part of
the HUNTRESS project on HUnting, Nutrition, Tool-use, Reproductive Ecology, and
meat Sharing in Savanna chimpanzees to holistically assess female-biased
hunting. The project will measure meat ingestion with stable isotope and feeding
trace analyses, and compare these signatures to direct observations of hunting
and meat ingestion in a reference group of habituated adult males. Furthermore,
the project will compare meat ingestion to annual climate trends as well as food
and macronutrient availability. A molecular component will enable sex-
determination and individualization information from hair and feces. The video
analytics component will measure mammal (prey) availability remotely from
camera-trap videos and still images. At the same, the research will advance
machine-learning capabilities by incorporating domain knowledge to improve
accuracy and precision of mammal localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.