* 2022959
* Collaborative Research: Kelp forest hydrodynamics: observations of drag and cross-shore exchange on the inner shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Eugene Pawlak, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 798,166.00

Kelp forests are common to many mid-latitude coasts, and they are among the most
valuable inner shelf habitats for fisheries, recreation, and possibly biological
carbon fixation. This project seeks to quantify the wave-dependent drag forces
and associated hydrodynamic mechanisms by which giant kelp mediates flow
conditions in inner shelf habitats. The frictional drag generated by individual
kelp plants and whole kelp forests strongly influence circulation and transport
in coastal habitats. However, at present it is not possible to incorporate these
effects into coastal circulation models. High-resolution field measurements will
be used to develop parameterizations of drag on a whole kelp forest in the
presence of coastal currents, surface waves, and internal waves, that will be
suitable for use in inner shelf circulation models. The analysis will seek to
quantify the magnitude by which kelp forests affect cross-shore exchange on the
inner shelf and to determine the mechanisms that mitigate cross-shore exchange
in the presence of kelp so that the findings may be generalized to any kelp
forest environment. This is relevant to understanding coastal environmental
flows and their interactions with a range of types of aquatic vegetation in both
natural systems and for large-scale aquaculture and ecosystem management.
Understanding their hydrodynamics is thus important to management of coastal
waters, as well as to designing natural restoration areas and potential
aquaculture systems. Given the rapid development in high resolution circulation
models as decision-analysis tools for coastal zone management, including the
potentially large hydrodynamic effects of kelp forests can be an essential
prerequisite to producing accurate predictions of inner shelf flows. Thus, one
particular focus of the project will be to develop a new model for kelp drag in
terms of mean currents and wave velocities incorporating simple measures of kelp
configuration and biomass that can be used in coastal circulation models. Given
the fundamental roles hydrodynamics play in shaping kelp forest ecology through
its effects on biogeochemistry and on the transport of larvae, advancing our
understanding of kelp forest hydrodynamics will be of use to a wide range of
researchers and resource agencies. Moreover, given the large body of ongoing
work focused on the Pt. Loma kelp forest, as well as its fundamental importance
to the California coastal ocean due to its large size, the results of this study
should be of particular use to local scientists and managers. Accordingly, the
data collected will also be archived on SCOOS servers as well as on the NODC
database. The project will also support graduate education, post-doctoral
professional development, and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
theme of the project will be to quantify depth-dependent drag associated with
flow imposed on flexible vegetative structures – kelp plants in currents and
waves – where the movement of the kelp is both influenced by, and in turn
mediates, the overall hydrodynamic conditions. Thus, the research will delineate
mechanisms of the complex feedbacks between environmental flows and aquatic
vegetation that can span the entire water column. While past studies in the
field and in the lab have examined elements of this interaction, e.g. changes in
mean flows or wave velocity fields by kelp, this study will provide a holistic
view of kelp forest hydrodynamics particularly including motion of the kelp.
Whereas, in previous field studies kelp drag has always been estimated in ad hoc
ways, here it will be measured directly. Quantitative analysis of field
observations will test three key hypotheses: (1) Movement of the plants in the
presence of waves and sheltering effects that develop when kelp-plant density is
sufficiently high are O(1) determinants of mean drag. This hypothesis implies
that drag of a whole kelp forest is not a simple linear function of the number
of individual kelp plants, but depends on interactions between scale and spacing
of individual drag elements and their movement in imposed flows. (2) Wave-
current interactions and frequency dependent radiation stress alter the flow
field in and around kelp forests. These flow effects along with damping of high
frequency internal waves and internal tides and increased diurnal thermal
stratification imply that (3a) the presence of a kelp forest can locally enhance
cross-shore exchange between the kelp forest and the offshore ocean environment
and (3b) a kelp forest acts as a partial barrier that reduces transport between
the offshore region and the very near shore region inshore of the kelp. The
latter hypothesis predicts the presence of kelp forests can have important
consequences for altering circulation and residence time near
shore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.