* 2022754
* WORKSHOP: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium at ACM CHI 2020
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Leah Findlater, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2023
* USD 23,600.00

This is funding to partially support a Doctoral Research Consortium (workshop)
of about 20 promising graduate students along with a panel of 6 distinguished
researchers from academia and industry. In accordance with CISE policy, the
award will support the 9 students from U.S.-based educational institutions and
will also partially support the panelists as well as 3 foreign-based students in
order to broaden the horizons of all participants (many of whom may never have
attended an international conference). This 2-day event will take place on April
25-26 in conjunction with the ACM 2020 Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI 2020) sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's
Special Interest Group on Human-Computer Interaction (SIGCHI), which will be
held April 25-30 in Honolulu, Hawaii. The annual CHI conferences are the leading
international forum for the presentation and discussion of human-computer
interaction (HCI) research and practice, and they are attended by more than
3,000 HCI professionals from around the world. Research reports published in the
CHI Conference Proceedings and the CHI Extended Abstracts are heavily refereed
and widely cited; they are among the most scientifically respected and impactful
research publications in the field of HCI. More information about this year's
conference, is available online at https://chi2020.acm.org/. The annual CHI
doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next generation
of HCI researchers, allowing them to create a social network both among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Applications are encouraged from all doctoral students whose
research is HCI-related, regardless of the fields in which they are earning
their degrees. To increase the broad impact of the event, the organizers are
committed to diversity. Due to timing issues, the student participants for 2020
have already been selected; there are a total of 20 students (approximately 10
females and 10 males) who represent a wide range of topic areas and backgrounds;
in addition, no more than two students will be from any given institution.

The CHI Doctoral Consortium is a research-focused meeting that has taken place
annually at the CHI conference since 1986, and has helped to launch the careers
of many outstanding HCI researchers. Goals of the workshop include building a
cohort group of new researchers who will have a network of colleagues spread out
across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the
field give them advice, and making it possible for promising new entrants to the
field to attend their research conference. This year's DC will once again adopt
the successful schedule implemented a few years ago, where the group breaks into
clusters of 3-4 students paired with one faculty panelist. Each student
participant will have a time slot of approximately 20 minutes in which to make a
formal presentation about his or her doctoral research and to receive feedback
both from the faculty panelist and the other student participants. The feedback
will be constructive and geared to help the students understand and articulate
how their work is positioned relative to other HCI research, whether their
topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Follow up activities, including two poster
sessions, are planned during the technical program of the conference, and the
students' work will be published in the CHI 2020 Extended Abstracts. SIGCHI's
conference management committee will evaluate the doctoral research consortium,
and the results will be made available to the organizers of future consortia.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.