* 2022699
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: Navigating Impacts of the Arctic Tourism Industry on Nature, Commerce, and Culture in Northern Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Charles Topkok, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Liam Frink
* 08/31/2024
* USD 722,165.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Global
Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
advancing understanding of convergent challenges in the Arctic and Subarctic by
systematically analyzing the impacts of the rapidly growing regional tourism
industry. While there may be economic benefits to the destinations visited
including seasonal employment, private sector investments, and increased tax
revenue, more tourism may also bring other outcomes. These include air, water,
and noise pollution, environmental degradation, and cultural effects such as the
overcrowding of ports and adjacent areas and a sense of being overwhelmed by
tourists among local populations. The overarching goals of the project are to:
1) systematically document, compare and interpret the ways in which cruise ships
in Arctic and adjacent waters are impacting coastal communities; and 2) work
together with local decision makers to develop a set of data-driven community-
defined indicators to determine policies to enhance local adaptive capacities
for identifying, monitoring, forecasting and responding to effects from cruise
ships. The project is developing methods to create a set of indicators to
measure the integrated social-ecological systems in which tourism functions and
assess trade-offs among developments that are likely to occur with various
scales and configurations of tourism. The stakeholders will include societal
groups (e.g., neighborhood associations, NGOs), government officials (e.g., city
department representatives addressing tourism issues), and the private sector
including representatives from the cruise-ship industry, its trade associations,
and small businesses working in the destinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within
the context of a warming Arctic, this project will address the challenges and
opportunities that expanded regional tourism poses to the natural, social and
built systems of coastal communities in Alaska (Juneau and Nome), Iceland
(Akureyri), Sweden (Visby), and Norway (Bergen). The project is advancing the
boundaries of science by examining methods to enable community policy makers to
make optimum use of data-based indicators to improve outcomes for local
communities using an Adaptive Policy Framework. This goal is being achieved by
analyzing the acquisition, assimilation, transformation and exploitation of
cruise tourism sustainability indicators in conjunction with a detailed analysis
of coastal community policy and budget-making processes. Specifically, the
research team and local stakeholders will use the Sustainometrics model,
applicable domains of the Arctic Social Indicators, and the Global Sustainable
Tourism Council destination-level criteria, to create a suite of indicators for
cruise impacts. This study is among the first to provide a holistic examination
of the interdependencies of the social, natural, and built systems of these
communities as they respond to changing environmental, economic, and social
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.