* 2022278
* CBET-EPSRC Efficient Surrogate Modeling for Sustainable Management of Complex Seawater Intrusion-Impacted Aquifers
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Alex Mayer, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 319,950.00

Water management in densely populated coastal regions is one of the most
pressing sustainability challenges worldwide. Coastal groundwater is especially
vulnerable to climate change and sea level rise due to the potential for
seawater intrusion into groundwater aquifers. Seawater intrusion has reduced
water supply in all coastal regions of the US. This has resulted in high costs
to society. Groundwater affected by seawater intrusion requires expensive
desalination processes to be made drinkable, while irrigation water could be
rendered unusable leading to the abandonment of farmland. Future climate
projections suggest the problem of seawater intrusion will worsen. However, the
scale of the problem is unclear, making it difficult to devise responses. While
computer models of coastal groundwater aquifers can be useful for predicting
seawater intrusion, these modeling efforts challenge the capability of even the
fastest computers. We propose to address this challenge by developing models
that are orders of magnitude faster than current models. This will allow for a
much broader consideration of potential solutions. These modeling advances will
be made in collaboration with water supply agencies, with the goal of increasing
the utility of groundwater modeling for coastal communities. Successful
development and adoption of these approaches will help agencies tasked with the
protection of coastal aquifers devise sustainable management strategies to
protect scarce water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions to seawater
intrusion problems involve combinations of more efficient pumping schemes,
demand reduction, and technological interventions such as desalination. However,
determining optimal solutions for these problems poses extreme computational
demands. This project will greatly advance the development and application of
simulation-optimization (SO) by developing computationally efficient, robust,
and accurate surrogate models for coastal groundwater systems. The limited
literature on SO and surrogate modeling in seawater intrusion problems has
focused on simplified hydrogeological settings and mathematical representations
of management strategies. However, realistic seawater intrusion problems involve
hydrogeological complexities, including discrete lithological facies, faults and
fractures, and saltwater-freshwater mixing zone dynamics. Solutions necessitate
nonlinear objective functions and continuous and discrete decision variables,
representing a wide range of engineering components. We hypothesize that these
hydrogeologic and management features determine the building of accurate and
efficient surrogates, and accurate surrogate SO models for seawater intrusion
problems can be at least an order of magnitude faster than full-scale models.
The reduction in computational effort will allow us to investigate a broader
range of potential sea level rise and climate change impacts and a wider range
of potential management responses to these impacts. To achieve this goal, the
specific project objectives are to: i) develop SO test problems to provide
robust evaluation of model surrogates; ii) formulate management objectives and
constraints based on management of the test case aquifers, and identify
scenarios relevant to the test cases; and iii) program, train, and evaluate the
performance of ?data-driven? and ?model-driven? surrogates to identify optimal
management schemes for the test case aquifers, a range of sea level rates,
climatology, and groundwater demand scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.