* 2022126
* BII-Design: Evolution of Oxygenic Photosynthesis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Ralph Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 09/30/2022
* USD 79,534.00

The evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis changed the trajectory of life on
Earth. By about 2.4 billion years ago, photosynthesis began to cause
accumulation of oxygen in Earthâ€™s atmosphere. This oxygen eventually allowed
multicellular animals to evolve. However, scientists do not know when or how
oxygenic photosynthesis evolved. Understanding its origin requires integrating
data and ideas from biochemistry, microbiology, evolutionary biology, and Earth
history. This project will bring together individual scientists with the breadth
of knowledge and diversity of skills to identify and address the key questions
for understanding oxygenic photosynthesis. Specifically, researchers will design
a cross-disciplinary Biology Integration Institute on The Evolution of Oxygenic
Photosynthesis. The team will include university students and early career
scientists who will learn cross-disciplinary techniques through participation in
project-related activities and as part of a graduate level course that
integrates appropriate sciences. Public outreach and education projects will
show others how scientists work together on complicated problems. The
researchers are committed to diversity, inclusivity, and academic excellence,
and they will apply best practices for broadening participation and integrating
educational components into the project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will establish a cross-disciplinary collaboration at UC Davis to investigate the
evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis. Through a series of workshops, they will:
1) assess current knowledge and hypotheses; 2) articulate outstanding questions
that transcend subdisciplines and can be productively addressed by an
interdisciplinary team; 3) identify additional key collaborators to address
research questions; 4) build an interdisciplinary and interinstitutional
research team to answer the target questions; and 5) host a writing workshop for
all collaborators to construct an Implementation proposal with active
participation from the full Implementation team. This project advances the
mission of the Biology Integration Institute and NSF by linking researchers
across biological and geological disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.