* 2022987
* Collaborative Research: Hurricane Sedimentation on Salt Marshes: Extent, Provenance, and Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christina Pondell, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 210,743.00

Salt marshes represent the interface between land and sea and are a vitally
important ecosystem that protects the mainland from storms while providing a
multitude of valuable services including nursery grounds for fish and shellfish,
filtering land-derived wastes, and exporting nutrients and food sources to the
coastal ocean. However, platform marshes are now endangered due to accelerating
sea-level rise and diminished sediment supplies, which together may lead to
their drowning. This project will study how major storms help the sustainability
of marshes by transferring sediment from the coastal zone and depositing it in a
widespread layer on top of the marsh. This sediment layer (an inch or more)
helps the marsh to accrete vertically, fertilizes the marsh with nutrients, and
enhances the productivity of the salt marsh grasses. This research will produce
an understanding of how storms source these sediments and how characteristics of
the nearshore and marsh system influence the direction of floodwaters and the
resulting distribution and deposition of the suspended sediment. As a broader
impacts activity, the investigators will design and facilitate a graduate-level
course on the Interaction of Storms with the Coastline, covering aspects of
hydrodynamics, sediment dynamics, geomorphology, ecology, human geography, and
economics as they relate to storm impacts. Additional broader impacts include:
1) fostering new and existing relationships with local stakeholders (including
the Georgia Coastal Ecosystems Long Term Ecological Research site) to facilitate
data exchange, cultivate collaboration, and disseminate findings, 2) maintaining
a project website presenting details of the motivation, progress, the graduate
course, and providing links to data products; 3) training one postdoctoral
researcher, one Ph.D. student, and at least two undergraduate students and two
high school interns; and 4) direct outreach to the public through development of
hands-on K-12 learning activities to be implemented at the Virginia Institute of
Marine Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study leverages a suite of sediment
cores and marsh surface samples collected behind Sapelo Island, Georgia, in
December 2017 to quantify the provenance of sediment deposits associated with
Hurricane Irma (supported by a RAPID grant from the NSF Geomorphology and Land-
use Dynamics Program). Post-Irma data will be supplemented with additional
samples from potential sediment sources within nearshore, backbarrier (channel;
bay floor; tidal flat; marsh-edge erosion), and fluvial environments. The
relative sediment contributions from each of these sources to the storm deposit
will be determined using a novel combination of sedimentologic (e.g., grain
size, loss-on- ignition, foraminifera content) and geochemical (biomarker
compositions, bulk-sediment and biomarker stable- and radio- isotopic
compositions) proxies analyzed through principal component analysis and non-
metric multi-dimensional scaling statistics. Relationships among storm-surge
elevation, local flow patterns, deposit thickness, and sediment provenance will
be analyzed using multi-dimensional statistical tools. These data will then be
used in conjunction with a Delft3D model, which can simulate hydrodynamics,
sediment transport, and resulting sedimentation patterns during Irma and other
storm conditions, to: 1) explore the source of storm deposits across a range of
backbarrier subenvironments, 2) determine the relative importance of nearshore,
backbarrier, and fluvial reservoirs in providing sediment to saltmarshes during
major storms, 3) quantify the processes, pathways, and mechanisms of sediment
distribution to the marsh platform (e.g., storm-surge level and duration, wave
exposure, local geomorphology, and river sediment discharge), and 4) evaluate
the importance of storm sedimentation relative to long-term vertical marsh
accretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.