* 2022429
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the role of dynamic strain fields in earthquake triggering processes by simulating full wavefield with 3D seismic velocity structures
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Guoqing Lin, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 189,132.00

Observations of earthquakes caused by perturbations from other earthquakes, both
close by and far away, are important for understanding how earthquakes happen
and the mechanisms that trigger them. Triggered earthquakes caused by passing
seismic waves suggest that earthquake processes are not completely random and
independent on disconnected faults. For example, the 2002 Denali magnitude 7.9
earthquake in Alaska triggered abundant earthquakes in the western US. Why do
earthquakes correlate with the passing seismic waves, and how do these tiny
ground motions cause earthquakes? A better understanding of such processes will
help our fundamental understanding of complex earthquake rupture processes and
will aid in mitigating seismic hazards by accurately assessing where and when
the next earthquake may occur. This project will take advantage of newly
developed computational tools and characterizing the relationships between the
patterns of the triggered earthquakes and the waves generated by distant
earthquakes. The project will develop a new statistical approach to identify
triggered earthquakes in southern California and the Caribbean region. The
spatial and temporal evolutions of these triggering responses will be examined
across multiple fault systems in these regions of interest. The project supports
a collaboration between scientists at the University of California, San Diego
and the University of Miami. Graduate students, undergraduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows will all participate in the project. The work will be of
broad interest to those who study earthquakes and their associated hazards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major earthquakes frequently dynamically trigger seismic
events at multiple disconnected faults up to thousands of kilometers away. The
correlation between the passing seismic waves and triggered seismicity is robust
yet puzzling. A key challenge in understanding dynamic triggering is
comparatively characterizing the realistic dynamic strain fields at seismogenic
depth and how the associated elevated seismicity evolves through time and space.
This project aims to systematically model dynamic strain fields of earthquake
sequences and their relation to dynamically triggered earthquakes within a
framework of heterogeneous 3D seismic velocity media. The primary goal of the
project is to investigate the time-dependent fault zone stress state and fault
zone material properties. The project will first identify dynamic triggering
cases in southern California and the Caribbean region by developing a new
statistical approach that uses distributions of statistics instead of the
statistics solely to find significant cases. The project will then simulate
realistic dynamic strain fields of these cases with high-resolution 3D velocity
models and the SPECFEM 3D algorithms. The project plans to develop a high-
resolution body wave velocity model and earthquake catalogs for the Caribbean
region. A central element of this work is using the spatiotemporal migration
patterns of regional seismicity as tracers of the evolving stress state and
material characteristics and cross-examining these patterns with characteristics
of the full dynamic wavefields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.