* 2022159
* Multi-Scale Experimental Investigations of Extreme Plasma Density Depletions in the Polar Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Geoffrey Crowley, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 560,312.00

This project will investigate a phenomenon called ‘polar holes’ in the polar
ionosphere, which is a region of atmosphere (80 to 1000 km above sea level) that
is highly ionized due to solar radiation, with high concentration of charged
particles, i.e. electrons and ions. The polar hole refers to the large reduction
of charged particles (called plasma) that appears from time to time in the so-
called F-region (150 to 500 km) and is believed to happen more often during the
solar minimum when the solar radiation is at its lowest level. The formation of
such holes is related to the complex interactions of the charged particles with
the electromagnetic field and atmospheric circulation that are unique in the
polar region. Understanding the formation and internal structures of the polar
holes fills the gap of our understanding of such interactions and helps improve
model simulation of the polar ionosphere. The current solar minimum provides a
good opportunity to study this phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will experimentally investigate the polar holes and the role of the plasma
convection in their formation and evolution. Polar holes are believed to be
formed during the periods of the very slow anti-sunward convection, when the
plasma is trapped just poleward of the statistical auroral oval in the absence
of any ionization sources. At the same time, fast convection with rapid vertical
plasma transport has also been associated with the polar hole formation.
Combining the multi-point capability of the Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter
Radar (AMISR) located in the northern polar cap, the state of art variational
data assimilation tool IDA4D developed at ASTRA, and the convection data from
the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) array, the role of plasma
convection in the polar hole formation will be investigated. The density in the
vicinity of the polar holes is thought to be very structured. This study will
explore the polar hole internal structure, analyze the gradients that are
present inside the polar hole and on its edges, and evaluate their effects on
high-frequency radar backscatter. Finally, to improve the predictability of the
electron density conditions in polar cap regions, which are most problematic for
modeling, a statistical analysis of the polar cap density during the solar
minimum conditions will be performed. Variability of the polar cap density will
be investigated using IDA4D runs and large amounts of collected radio
occultation data from COSMIC I mission in the northern and southern polar
regions to find the most problematic time periods where the model parameters and
data-derived parameters have the largest differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will improve our knowledge of the plasma depletions in the polar cap during
solar minimum conditions. The polar cap during the winter and during the solar
minimum is one of the most problematic zones for the ionospheric models used in
application areas, such as satellite communications, satellite-based navigation,
data links, and space situational awareness. This work will improve the ability
to model the electron density in the polar cap region by direct investigation of
its lowest extremes and by statistical investigation of its variability. This
project will support an early-career female researcher who has a strong track
record of outreach activities, including delivering Space Physics lectures for
senior people and developing the www.sheisaphysicist.com web space that promotes
and cultivates the success of women in physics by publishing stories about the
career path of female physicists. When a new interview is published, the website
reaches ~2000 independent views, inspiring high-school and undergraduate female
students to choose physics as their career path. This will contribute to
broadening of participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.