* 2022246
* NNA Track 2: Exploring The Benefits and Challenges of Community-Powered Connectivity In The New Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jason Young, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Liam Frink
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, and addresses important societal challenges, builds significant
educational opportunities, and engages internationally and with local and
Indigenous communities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic telecommunications has
emerged as a key tool in responding to the unprecedented changes being
experienced in the region, from environmental shifts to globalization.
Unfortunately, small rural and Indigenous communities are seldom included in
discussions of telecommunications, leaving them underserved and incapable of
leveraging technology advances to ensure their own resilience. This project is
developing a model that small Arctic communities can use to design and implement
community technology infrastructure to support their unique needs. Findings
advance understanding of how technology can be developed and used to support
rural and Indigenous communities as they manage a changing Arctic environment;
collaborate with environmental scientists; seek out education and sustainable
economic opportunities; and preserve their culture. This research is empowering
small Arctic communities and contribute to scientific understandings of how to
design more equitable and accessible forms of technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant gaps remain in understanding how digital
infrastructures and services can be best designed to support the unique needs of
Arctic communities. In response to these gaps, this project asks: (1) How can
telecommunications infrastructure be codesigned and architected for the rugged
and isolated conditions and communities in the Arctic? (2) How can
telecommunications infrastructure and digital services best support Arctic
communities in responding to rapidly changing environmental and social
conditions? (3) What are the social, cultural, and economic implications of
increased connectivity for Arctic communities and peoples? The project answers
these questions by studying the deployment of a community network in an
Inuvialuit community. Researchers, in collaboration with the Internet Society
and the Inuvialuit Regional Corporation, are holding a series of workshops that
involve the community in the development of the network, evaluate the long-term
operation of the network, and explore the socio-cultural and economic impacts of
connectivity for the community. Major outcomes of these activities include the
installation of the network in the community, measurement and evaluation of the
network’s performance, and increased social scientific understanding of how
Arctic Indigenous communities adapt technology to their own
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.