* 2022049
* BII-Implementation: GEMS: Genomics and eco-evolution of multi-scale symbioses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Carla Caceres, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2025
* USD 10,003,148.00

Humans, and the animals and plants around them, live in a microbial world. It is
now well-known that microbes and viruses infect, interact and move through the
genomes of every organism on Earth. Relationships among organisms, and with
their microbes, can dramatically change the traits, behaviors, and functions of
the host plant or animal. Sometimes these interactions are beneficial and
sometimes they can be detrimental by causing disease. Many influence host
function and can have hidden but important global scale impacts, driving the
rates of responses to climate change, health and disease, antibiotic resistance,
and more. Understanding how nested interactions within the microbial world occur
and influence our ecosystems is critical to controlling their impact. The new
Biology Integration Institute, Genomics and Eco-evolution of Multi-Scale
Symbiosis (GEMS), focuses on the classical species interaction between clover
and honeybee pollinators as a model to understand the impact and dynamics of the
myriad of microbes nested within them. The project takes an integrative approach
to understand how molecular interactions impact the ecosystem. As a $20 billion
US industry, the outcomes of the project studying clover/honeybee nested genomes
has practical value as well as being a model for addressing fundamental
questions in integrative biology. The researchers in GEMS are collaborative,
diverse, interactive scientists and educators who take an inter-disciplinary
approach to answer critical questions about how nested genomes interact and
affect the world. The project uses a shared leadership model with co-mentorship
between trainer and trainee and multisite educational activities. The
established institute is designed to integrate biological disciplines to
understand how nested genomes respond to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEMS will address the fundamental biological
question, How do symbioses unify biology, from molecule to ecosystem? The goal
of this project is to establish a framework for how the phenotypic variation
generated by the mobility of nested symbionts influences the adaptability of
traits and the strength and stability of species interactions. Ultimately, the
Institute aims to understand how this variation impacts ecosystem responses to
environmental change. The Institute is grounded in the canonical symbiosis
between flowering plants and insect pollinators (clover and honeybees),
expanding to include interactions nested in their microbial world. The research
leverages the extensive knowledge in multiple nested interactions
(plant–pollinator, legume–rhizobium, honey bee–microbiome) to build connections
within and across systems from the molecular processes that govern establishment
of symbiosis and extend phenotypic traits to define how they interact and evolve
together in the natural world. Data are integrated with ecological and
evolutionary theory to generalize beyond the focal systems to build predictive
models. Computer science, statistics, and mathematics expand both the range of
biological questions asked and the impact of their answers. Along with the
traditional academic silos dividing researchers into molecular and organismal
units that prevent a unified view of biology are many others, such as those
separating microbe from macrobe, plant from animal, student from faculty,
education from research, and diversity, equity, and inclusion from science.
Through K-12 education in Spanish and targeting excellence with Project Microbe
and the Jim Holland program in three urban and rural communities in the Midwest,
GEMS focuses on the intersecting goals of changing how biology is done and who
does it, unifying biology by including the small but powerful so often
overlooked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.