* 2022275
* IUSE/PFE:RED A&amp;I: Soft Wired Teaming for Creating Opportunities to Revolutionize the Preparation of Students (TCORPS) through Building, Testing and Sharing Pedagogical Improvem
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andreas Polycarpou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will revolutionize the culture of a traditional large mechanical
engineering department at Texas A&amp;M University. It will be focused on
creating a bottom-up participatory culture where faculty and students are
engaged in continuously building, testing, and sharing sequential innovations in
curricula and pedagogy. Studies have shown that academic departments are complex
systems with faculty who have different levels of acceptance of change, of any
sort, but especially in teaching styles and self-image. Teaching style and self-
image as a teacher are generally informed by their own experiences as to what
constitutes good teaching rather than the scholarly study of teaching. This
project will leverage these attitudes toward teaching, primarily based on
experiences by empowering faculty to create “loose-wired” teams that propose a
vision for change and a minimum viable product based on their interests. Rather
than focus on training them on “how to teach,” the project will train these
teams for implementing changes, measuring educational outcomes, and sharing the
results, all carried out through adapting and extending the additive innovations
model that was proposed by the RED program of Arizona State University. These
faculty changes cover a wide spectrum, ranging from changing the curriculum to
appeal to a more diverse group of students (especially underrepresented
minorities) by relating the subject matter to their experience, fostering a
collaborative versus competitive learning environment for students, to
identifying and using technology to enhance student learning. The teaching
approaches, outcomes, and change processes will be broadly disseminated to other
departments through informal discussion teams as well as the Institute for
Engineering Education and Innovation (IEEI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will operationalize a cultural change based on the Prochaska change model
composed of five steps: contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance with
continuous effort to overcome relapse. Interested faculty groups will be
provided with a framework for change based on developing a novel Educational
Value Canvas to systematically explore the implications of change, and they will
also be trained to use an iterative innovation approach. Both tools are based on
the NSF-developed ICORPS model, adapted to an educational innovation setting.
This project will address several key hypotheses: 1) that facilitation of small-
batch iterative experimentation and sharing among peers will lower risk and time
commitment and increase documentation and systematic incorporation of
innovations; 2) that change can be better achieved in a large department through
the distributed percolation based upon trained facilitators and change agents,
supported by departmental resources and revised faculty performance evaluation
criteria; 3) that an improved shared vision can be achieved through the use of
the new Educational Value Canvas facilitated using the Antigua Forum meeting
format; and 4) that if faculty model proactive innovation behavior in both our
research and teaching, then it will improve this capability in students as well.
The proposal will develop approaches for training on recognizing implicit bias,
inclusive projects, and pedagogy development, what motivates faculty to change,
how to make active classrooms work for different types of classes, how to use
the lean startup approach to change, and how to carry out pedagogical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.