* 2022614
* Transforming pool boiling into a pumpless self-sustained flow boiling system for efficient cooling at high heat fluxes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 322,588.00

Current trend of electronics miniaturization introduces higher heat generation
rates while substantially reducing surface area for heat dissipation. Phase
change cooling with pool boiling is an attractive cooling method. Flow boiling
is more efficient but requires a pump, which makes it more complex. This project
presents an innovative concept that transforms pool boiling into a self-
sustained pumpless flow boiling system and dramatically improves cooling
performance. It utilizes a tapered gap in which a bubble expands in a
preferential direction of increasing flow area and creates a self-sustained flow
over the heater surface. The proposed work will provide thorough understanding
of the underlying physics and enable optimal designs with different fluids for
dramatically improving heat dissipation. It will offer educational opportunities
to undergraduate and graduate students, while creating a new outreach activity
"TinkerEngLab" with hands-on experience to minority and women students. The team
will participate in an outreach activity called Beyond 9.8 for middle school
students from underprivileged schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the fluid flow and heat
transfer mechanisms that drive the self-sustained flow as a bubble grows and
expands in a tapered gap. It will be accomplished through â€“ 1) analytical work
to establish the link between heat transfer around a growing bubble, pressure
recovery and pressure drop in the tapered microgap, 2) numerical work to provide
insight into bubble growth and instantaneous pressure field, and 3) experimental
work for validation and practical data. Fundamental information on microlayer
formation under a bubble and pressure distribution at the wall at various stages
of bubble growth will be obtained. The numerical simulation of squeezing bubble
will utilize advanced code developed in the lab to predict pressure field in the
tapered microgap under dynamic conditions, and these will be experimentally
validated by pressure mapping using micro-electromechanical sensors and high-
speed visualization. The findings from the numerical study will be incorporated
in developing a theoretical bubble squeezing model for flow dynamics and heat
transfer. The knowledge and the model will provide design theories for
developing highly efficient cooling systems with different fluids under
different operating conditions. The work is expected to introduce a paradigm
shift as pool boiling will no longer be limited by a stagnant pool of liquid,
but will incorporate flow for achieving unprecedented cooling performance
without requiring a pump. Its main application includes electronics cooling, but
the work will open up new avenues in industrial and commercial applications as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.