* 2022897
* Symposium: Research Frontiers in Animal Behavior and Parasitism 2020
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Richard Hall, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2022
* USD 19,900.00

Host behavior and parasitism are inextricably linked. Behavior frequently
defines parasite transmission dynamics; at the same time, parasites can shape
complex host behaviors in ecological and evolutionary time. This award supports
participation in a conference on Research Frontiers in Animal Behavior and
Parasitism, to be held in May 2020 in Athens, GA, USA. The conference brings
together experts in infectious disease ecology and animal behavior for a two-day
event that will define new frontiers of research at the interface of these
important areas of study. Four major conference themes are: (i) links between
social behavior and pathogen infection; (ii) host movement behavior and pathogen
spread; (iii) pathogen-driven changes to host and vector behavior; and (iv)
mechanisms and evolution of behavioral defenses. Each of these sessions will
feature keynote talks from invited speakers, together with short contributed
presentations from conference attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
provides a platform for professional development and future collaboration
between established researchers and early career scientists. Organizers will
administer a science networking event, where more senior conference attendees
will meet with junior researchers to discuss research and professional
development questions. The conference especially encourages student
participation by keeping registration fees low, thus allowing early career
researchers to participate and meet leading scientists in the field. Early
career researchers will play an active role in shaping emerging perspectives
that develop from the conference, to map out frontiers of research in the field.
The conference will also include early career researchers who are members of the
Weaving the Future of Animal Behavior (WFAB) community which will help foster
the integration of ideas from animal behavior with infectious disease ecology
and evolution. Finally, ideas emerging from discussion at the symposium will
feature as short contributions to an upcoming edited volume on animal behavior
and parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program (Division of Environmental
Biology) and the Behavioral Systems Program (Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.