* 2022355
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Assessment Framework for Successful Development of Viable Ocean Multi-use Systems (Multi-Frame)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* John Walsh, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,973.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams to address critical issues in ocean
sustainability including, conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development. This complex challenge
required that the projects utilized integrated, transdisciplinary and cross-
sectoral approaches and bring together natural and social sciences as well as
policymakers, resource managers, industries, citizens and other societal
partners. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in
consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries to increase our knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways needed
to accelerate sustainable use of oceans and minimize the effects from global
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MULTI-FRAME will focus on evaluating pathways
toward a sustainable and equitable use of oceans by assessing the potential
impact of ocean multi-use in real world challenges. The multi-use concept refers
to intentional joint use of ocean space and resources by two or more users in
close geographic proximity. It represents inclusive sharing of resources by one
or more users which can contribute to a more sustainable use of ocean resources
by reducing spatial pressures, creating new opportunities for socio-economic
developments and providing environmental benefits. The project brings together a
transdisciplinary, international research consortium with expertise ocean
planning, ecology, stakeholder engagement, value chain and sustainability
analysis, conservation and decision analysis. The team of academics, non-
governmental and private sector researchers will work together to provide a
critical analysis of ocean multi-use, in 5 different geographic locations, to
identify potential pathways to promote simultaneous use of ocean areas by
services that may have conflicting interests. MULTI-FRAME will benefit a broad
range of local and national-level stakeholders, including local communities,
government, marine planning agencies, and local and national decision-makers by
increasing the knowledge base of sustainable ocean multi-use practices to help
improve and foster the blue (ocean) economy while preserving ocean space and
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.