* 2022216
* RAPID: Media Exposure, Objective Knowledge, Risk Perceptions, and Risk Management Preferences of Americans Regarding the Novel Coronavirus Outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Branden Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 124,990.00

The sudden observation in Wuhan, China, in December, 2019, of humans infected
with a new virus (officially 2019-nCoV virus and COVID-19 disease, publicly
known as “the coronavirus”) provides yet another example of scientists and
policymakers being surprised as a virus observed in animal and/or bird
populations, or transmitted by mosquitoes, became infectious and damaging in
humans (e.g., two coronaviruses: SARS 2002-2003, MERS 2012; recent major
outbreaks of Ebola virus, 2014-2016, and Zika virus, 2015-2017). Understanding
dynamics of public responses to such events under uncertainty is necessary to
learn how to avoid either undue apathy or undue panic. This project explores how
Americans’ views of and behavior towards the coronavirus change—or do not
change—over 9 months. This will serve the national interest in progress in
science by improving our understanding of how people’s beliefs, attitudes, and
behaviors interact both within the same person over time, and between people
with individual differences in attitudes at a given time. The research tests a
novel model of how views of personal and collective solutions to what appears to
be an emerging pandemic are affected by beliefs and attitudes, which builds upon
prior work including the Protection Action Decision Model. The research also may
improve public health and prosperity by revealing what factors are associated
with particular reactions that may make public health protection easier or
harder to implement. It thus affects whether quarantines, travel bans, and other
policies meant to be protective hamper or amplify economic growth as well. The
project also tests messages about false beliefs and flu vaccine efficacy that
may inform public health risk communication and thus improve public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A longitudinal study design surveys the
same Americans five times at 2-month intervals, thus over 9 months total. Each
wave of the project asks the same questions: perceived risk; emotional reactions
to the virus; reported personal protective behavior and support for actual or
potential government policies; and beliefs about those behaviors and policies;
trust in government; subjective and objective knowledge about the virus;
psychological distance from the virus; how much individuals are following news
about the virus; and which types of traditional and social media sources they
use and which outlets they use (e.g., different TV channels or different social
media sites). Repeating these questions over time allows the research team to
examine whether changes occur in these views and behaviors over time, or
relations between factors over time (for example, do risk perceptions actually
predict later protective behaviors). Certain other factors, such as culture,
conspiracy thoughts, and blatant and subtle prejudice—are measured during one
survey wave as a control. The survey is complemented by content analysis of mass
and social media information from sources that respondents report using, so the
researchers can test effects of that exposure on objective knowledge, risk
perceptions, and behaviors. An information manipulation experiment embedded in
the last survey will allow testing of whether vaccination intentions for the
influenza (“flu”) virus can be increased in light of perceived threat from this
coronavirus, and whether false beliefs about the coronavirus threat and
management can be diminished in the short-term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.