* 2022888
* Enhancing the Understanding of Nocturnal Convective System Morphological Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* William Gallus, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 555,029.00

Large thunderstorm clusters, known as “Mesoscale Convective Systems” (MCSs),
often occur at night in the central United States, bringing damaging severe
weather but also much of the rainfall needed for agriculture during the growing
season in this region. Forecasting of MCSs by computer models is often not very
accurate, especially when they are growing from a few intense thunderstorms,
often in early evening, to a much larger region of storms and steady rain during
the night, and again toward dawn when MCSs usually dissipate. The evolution of
MCSs is related to the pool of cool air that forms from evaporation of the rain,
and that cool pool is influenced by the temperature and humidity near the storm,
and the processes that form precipitation in the cloud. Other factors
influencing MCS evolution include changes in wind with height, the presence of
nearby weather fronts, and even smaller-scale atmospheric features like gravity
waves that interact with a current of faster wind that often develops at night
over this region, known as the low-level jet. The project will study how all of
these processes influence MCS evolution, and the improved understanding will
improve forecasting of MCS rainfall that often causes flooding and severe
weather. The research will support several graduate students, be incorporated
into undergraduate courses, and be presented in outreach to the public and
National Weather Service offices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate prediction of
nocturnal MCSs, particularly their rainfall and morphological evolution, remains
elusive. A refinement of horizontal grid spacing from 3 to 1 km has been found
to increase the number of linear systems simulated by WRF, agreeing better with
observations, but the lines were produced in the wrong cases, at the wrong
times, and usually with problems in the depiction of stratiform rain. Problems
are particularly abundant during the upscale growth period, and again toward
dissipation. The increase in number of lines occurs as more continuous zones of
higher reflectivity develop, possibly because of better resolution of lift along
cold pool boundaries. It is likely that several factors affecting the cold
pools, such as near-storm evening boundary layer characteristics and
microphysical processes within convection play an important role in the upscale
growth morphological evolution, along with the ambient wind shear and
positioning of boundaries. Gravity waves, bores, intrusion currents, and their
interaction with the low-level jet also influence evolution. Factors influencing
stratiform region formation may also play a role that could explain model
problems in simulating mode late in the life cycle of MCSs. The project will use
three models, WRF, FV3-SAR, and CM1, along with observations to improve
understanding of nocturnal morphological evolution and reveal the primary
problems preventing accurate simulation of some modes and transitions between
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.