* 2022878
* GP-IN: Geoscience Exposure and Training in Texas (GET Texas): High School through Undergrad
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* David Moss, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 345,773.00

Recruiting more geoscience undergraduates is vital to addressing projected
employment shortfalls and developing solutions for the complex problems that
society faces. However, many late high school and community college students
remain unaware about geoscience as a discipline and its promising career paths.
In many states (including Texas), geoscience and environmental science-related
courses are not required for graduation from high school, and many students,
their parents, and teachers are not aware of the variety of careers available in
the geosciences. If we are to address the geoscience employee shortfall and
increase geoscience workforce diversity, we must: 1) get geoscience concepts to
students earlier in their academic careers; 2) show those in transition to
colleges and universities how the geosciences are applicable and employable; 3)
recruit from a wider pool of potential students; and 4) develop lasting
relationships with students and educators. To meet these goals, Lone Star
College and Sam Houston State University will build relationships with a local
museum, a summer camp, and local high school teachers to increase geoscience
awareness. This project will train teachers and early-career geoscientists
during workshops and an abbreviated summer bridge program that covers active and
historical geologic processes and environmental issues in the local region.
Student participants will be supported with faculty and peer mentoring
throughout the project and the duration of their geoscience education at both
the community college and university levels. Given the importance of geoscience
careers for the Texas economy, the PIs expect many of the students and teachers
that this program reaches will help bridge future employment shortfall
projections while diversifying the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GET Texas
will increase geoscience awareness and help meet current and future employer
demand by creating a place-based geoscience learning ecosystem (GLE) that
includes informal institutions (Houston Museum of Natural Science and a local
YMCA), high schools, the largest Houston-area community college system (Lone
Star College), and a regional four-year, undergraduate-focused university (Sam
Houston State). This project provides geoscience training and exposure
opportunities through: 1) high school outreach and continuing-education teacher
workshops to introduce the relevance of the geosciences; 2) a place-based summer
bridge program focused on sediment and water issues in southeast Texas; and 3)
sustained teacher and student mentorship by offering continuing geoscience open
houses to maintain peer and faculty mentoring while promoting the many career
paths in the geosciences. The summer bridge program, one key for transitioning
students from high school into college and university geoscience programs, will
include a combined field and laboratory approach that covers geochemistry,
hydrology, geomorphology, and active and historical sedimentary processes in the
Gulf-Coastal Plain and Central Texas. While many STEM-related studies provide a
foundation for how to recruit and retain diverse students, This project goes
beyond the field experiences and builds a holistic teacher-student recruiting
GLE that engages participants in multiple forums and at events throughout the
entire year to maintain peer and faculty mentoring relationships. These
sustained relationships are key for both recruiting and retaining
underrepresented minority students at Lone Star College, a Hispanic-Serving
Institution, and Sam Houston State, an emerging Hispanic-Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.