* 2022885
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: PolyCone Project - An Integrated Approach for Sustainable Pathways of Marine Resources: Cone Snails in French Polynesia
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Thomas Duda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 01/31/2025
* USD 240,017.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams to address critical issues in ocean
sustainability including, conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development. This complex challenge
required that the projects utilized integrated, transdisciplinary and cross-
sectoral approaches and bring together natural and social sciences as well as
policymakers, resource managers, industries, citizens and other societal
partners. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in
consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries to increase our knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways needed
to accelerate sustainable use of oceans and minimize the effects from global
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing a model to
sustainably culture and harvest cone snails. Toxins of cone snails are an
important source of pharmaceuticals for treating human health and may have other
significant molecular properties with diverse applications. The potential
benefits and uses of cone derived pharmaceuticals are evident in current
clinical trials and the approval of one cone derived pain medication. This
project will focus on French Polynesia and seeks to provide critical information
to help communities develop integrated, ethical, and sustainable harvesting and
aquaculture practices. The project will develop a model for the maintenance and
enhancement of the sustainable wellbeing of these communities and their linked
marine environments and ecologies through an integrated approach to developing
new blue economics including significant advances in its aquaculture and venom
exploitation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.