* 2022435
* SCISIPBIO: Can consultation create a fairer scientific peer-review process?
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Daniel Jurafsky, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 03/31/2025
* USD 707,462.00

A growing body of research shows that bias can play a deleterious role in the
scientific review process and that underrepresented groups in particular receive
unfair treatment. Such bias undermines science’s central means of advancing
through the identification of high-quality science by peer review. It also
threatens a core scientific value: that it is the science that matters, not the
traits of the people involved. This project studies the fundamental process of
peer review to identify how bias may be diminished and how peer review can be
improved. Our findings will potentially inform journals across academic
disciplines, as well as conferences, prestigious award-granting institutions,
and grant-giving bodies. Bias can enter peer review at every decision juncture
of a submitted manuscript: at its initial screening, when reviewers make their
recommendations, and even when the final decision is made by the editor. Often,
these instances of bias unfairly favor authors from majority groups by virtue of
their status or self-similarity with reviewers. We propose to determine whether
certain editorial and review practices could diminish such bias by investigating
all aspects of peer review at an influential open access scientific journal for
the biomedical and life sciences, eLife. There, we have unprecedented access to
the content of all texts and discussions surrounding ~35K manuscript
submissions. We propose developing a variety of measures reflective of social
bias, manuscript quality, and the quality of reviews and consultations, and then
using those in predictive modeling to identify qualities of scientific review
that diminish bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advance of science in the life
sciences rests on a robust review process. The three projects we propose
conceptualize and measure the substantive qualities of submitted manuscripts,
reviews, and peer consultations using state-of-the-art techniques from natural
language processing. A central task is to identify whether the substantive
qualities of reviews and consultations — particularly dialogue qualities — can
create conditions for a fairer scientific process by reducing the influence that
social bias may have on decision outcomes. Our study of desk decisions will help
us understand whether and how the first view of manuscripts can be fraught with
problems and whether expanded consultation beyond the editor improves or worsens
those problems. Our study of reviewer recommendations will help us understand
the ways bias might creep into the review process and whether discussion among
reviewers diminishes or amplifies such bias. Last, our study of the qualities of
reviews and consultations will identify the sorts of reviews and discussions
that science needs to prevent the intrusion of bias. By studying these features
of scientific review, we will learn how scientific objectivity can be protected
from the intrusion of implicit social bias as well as the best practices that
may assist it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.