* 2022597
* Production and Fate of Fats in the Upper Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Van Mooy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,018,643.00

The Production and Fate of Fats in the Upper Ocean Phytoplankton, microscopic
photosynthetic organisms in the ocean, produce a type of fat called
triaclyglycerols (TAGs). A recent discovery in the North Pacific Ocean showed
that a significant percentage of primary production from phytoplankton is
devoted to producing TAGs. This suggests that TAGs may serve as a source of
energy for phytoplankton at night, when they are unable to generate energy from
photosynthesis. Phytoplankton are the base of the food web in the ocean.
Therefore, it is important to understand how they create and store energy. This
project will investigate the role of fats in the ocean. Specifically, this
research will look at: 1) factors that affect the production and use of TAGs by
phytoplankton and 2) how TAGs contribute to the global carbon cycle. This
project will support the training and education of graduate students. This
project will also provide resources for mentoring high school students, support
summer research experiences for high school and undergraduate students, and
offer field trips for 7th grade students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Triacylglycerols
(TAGs) are one of the most abundant classes of lipids in the ocean. A new
discovery suggests that TAGs are also a very dynamic class of biochemicals. A
recent study in the surface waters of the North Pacific subtropical gyre (NPSG)
showed that TAGs doubled in concentration between sunrise and sunset daily,
accounting for 16 to 42% of net primary production by eukaryotic
nanophytoplankton (Becker et al., 2018). These results show that TAGs are an
vital component of the physiology of eukaryotic phytoplankton and that TAGs
contribute significantly to the carbon cycle of the NPSG. Based on estimates
from this study, daytime production of TAGs in the subtropical gyres accounted
for 4 to 6 percent of total global primary production. Outside of subtropical
gyres, the production rates of TAGs are entirely unknown, particularly in
regions where primary production rates are higher and eukaryotic phytoplankton
are more dominant. Thus, the contribution of TAGs to the global ocean carbon
cycle is almost certainly underestimated. There are major outstanding questions
about TAGs. What environmental factors affect rates of net TAG production? What
fraction of net TAG production is exported in sinking particles? Do TAGs play a
role in the food web of the euphotic zone? How much of the TAGs produced during
the day do phytoplankton themselves consume at night? These questions will be
answered using state-of-the-art lipidomics, in situ observations, isotope-
tracing techniques, incubations, and on-deck experiments. This study will
provide significant advances in our understanding of TAG metabolism in
phytoplankton, elucidate the roles that TAGs play in the marine carbon cycle,
constrain their global importance by studying TAGs in multiple disparate
environments, and set the groundwork for future research on these fascinating
and vital molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.