* 2023847
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Identification of the critical length scales and chemistries responsible for the anti-fouling properties of heterogeneous surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Meagan Mauter, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2020
* USD 132,628.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professors Meagan S.
Mauter of Carnegie Mellon University and Ayse Asatekin of Tufts University
characterize the fundamental mechanisms of foulant adhesion to surfaces with
self-assembled chemical heterogeneity. This research leads to a novel class of
fouling resistant surfaces that enable energy savings and the use of membrane
desalination in highly fouling environments, such as wastewater reclamation. The
fundamental insights also inform approaches to fouling prevention in biomedical
and marine applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work involves polymer
synthesis, colloidal force and deposition experiments, and modeling to evaluate
the relative importance of domain size, domain hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity
contrast, and domain chemistry in determining foulant adsorption. A library of
copolymer films with surface heterogeneity on the length scale of 1 to 10 nm are
synthesized and characterized. The material properties are used to model the
attachment efficiency of colloids to these heterogeneous surfaces using three
models of increasing complexity. These models are validated using colloidal
force microscopy and mass-based deposition measurements using a quartz crystal
microbalance with dissipation monitoring. Finally, this project explores the
role of nanopatterning on colloidal release as a function of shear velocity. Two
graduate and several undergraduate students involved in this research gain
interdisciplinary knowledge and skills, and disseminate their work through
publications and presentations. Both Professors Meagan S. Mauter and Ayse
Asatekin are active advocates of broadening the participation of women in STEM
fields, and incorporate this research into their teaching, which covers classes
on environmental policy, polymer science, and separations.