* 2023664
* Collaborative Research: The effects of marine heatwaves on reproduction, larval transport and recruitment in sea urchin metapopulations
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Laura Rogers-Bennett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2024
* USD 386,150.00

Rapid and extreme warming events such as El Niño and marine heatwaves have had
ecological and economic impacts on nearshore marine ecosystems. These impacts
include reductions in biomass and collapses in commercial fisheries. For many
species, population booms and busts are controlled by shifts in reproduction and
juvenile dispersal related to warmer temperatures and ocean circulation.
However, how population fluctuations are shaped by interacting processes that
control adult reproduction and larval survival remains unclear. Marine heatwaves
often accompany major disruptions in ocean circulation, which can affect
survival and the distribution of species that produce free-floating, planktonic
larvae. As a result, species can be impacted directly by temperature effects on
organismal reproduction and survival, and indirectly by shifts in ocean
circulation that affect larval success. This project is examining how the joint
effects of temperature and ocean circulation are controlling populations of
purple sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus). To address project
objectives, the team is developing oceanographic models to predict dispersal of
planktonic larvae in combination with controlled experiments on adult
reproductive success. This project is advancing the understanding of how
ecologically important species respond to ocean temperature and circulation,
which are forecast to shift under future climate change scenarios. Broader
impacts of the project include training of students and post-docs in STEM and
educational outreach. Curriculum development and implementation is occurring in
collaboration with existing K-12 outreach programs that focus on underserved
communities and under-represented groups. The goal is to empower the next
generation of scientists to use integrative approaches to predict ecological
consequences of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purple sea urchins are an
ideal species for studying the coupled impacts of warming and ocean circulation
on recruitment and survival given a wealth of ecological and organismal data.
The species has a mapped genome, can be transported large distances as larvae by
ocean currents, and larval abundances in California exhibit orders of magnitude
variation with heatwaves and El Niño fluctuations. To quantify the processes
that shape spatial and temporal variability in larval supply, researchers are
applying a novel combination of biophysical modeling, experiments and
statistical modeling of long-term, high-resolution data on larval settlement
across the Southern California Bight (SCB). Research module 1 is quantifying
spatial and temporal patterns of larval transport using a 3D-biophysical model
of the SCB. The model is testing how interactions among historical changes in
ocean circulation and temperature, larval life history, and larval behavioral
traits affect variation in larval supply in space and time. Research module 2 is
focused on how temperature could affect spatial and temporal variation in egg
production. Experiments are characterizing reproductive thermal performance
curves and quantifying how these vary among populations and organismal history.
A novel assay is assessing epigenetic regulation of gene expression associated
with performance curves. Finally, Module 3 will integrate mechanistic models
from Modules 1 and 2 to statistically assess their ability to explain spatial
and temporal trends in a nearly three-decade dataset of larval settlement from
six sites in the SCB. This is one of the first studies that integrates models of
larval transport, reproductive performance and settlement data to empirically
test how physical and biological processes affect local recruitment patterns in
complex marine meta-populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.