* 2023545
* Collaborative Research: US GO-SHIP 2021-2026 Repeat Hydrography, Carbon and Tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2028
* Isabella Rosso, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2028
* USD 3,581,431.00

The Global Ocean Ship-based Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-SHIP) is a
systematic re-occupation of key global hydrographic sections that began in 2003.
The sections span all ocean basins and reach full ocean depth, with physical and
chemical measurements of the highest ‘reference standard’ accuracy. This level
of data quality is attainable only with research ships for the foreseeable
future. The U.S. GO-SHIP program is a major contributor to international GO-
SHIP, designed to monitor the ocean's response to climate change as part of the
World Climate Research Programme’s Global Ocean Observing System. This grant
will extend this unique climate data set over the next six years. The new
hydrographic data sets collected by U.S. GO-SHIP will contribute to overlapping
scientific and technical objectives related to: 1) heat/freshwater storage and
flux; 2) carbon system and biogeochemical studies; 3) water mass ventilation; 4)
model calibration, validation, and state estimation; and 5) autonomous sensor
calibration, including Core (2000 m T, S), Deep, and Biogeochemical Argo
profiling floats. Building on observations first made in the 1990's, this
program has been critical to developing our understanding of ocean-related
climate changes including: warming of the abyssal ocean that takes up ~10% of
the Earth's excess heat; changes in circulation and ventilation; increasing
anthropogenic carbon uptake and its impact on global carbon budgets and
acidification; declining oxygen concentrations; and expansion of oxygen minimum
zones. The U.S. GO-SHIP open data policy has resulted in rapid, widespread
availability and use of data. The program benefits society as it is the only
globally available source of information about changes in the deep (&gt;2000m)
ocean. The data will continue to be a resource for climate model validation.
Outreach for U.S. GO-SHIP data collection (cruise-based) and synthesis will
extend data usefulness and public awareness. The program will continue to
promote and expand scientific and leadership training for graduate students,
postdoctoral scientists, and early career scientists. Funds are budgeted for
graduate students, postdocs, and young scientists to participate in each cruise,
and for an annual postdoc program to entrain young scientists in use of these
invaluable observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourteen research cruises during
the period 2021-2026 are planned, with the continuing objective of
systematically quantifying global-scale changes in storage and transport of
heat, freshwater, carbon, oxygen, nutrients, and related parameters. Nine
cruises will be led by NSF/UNOLS, four by NOAA, and one will be joint. Included
measurements are: hydrographic/physical (CTDO2, salinity, oxygen, nutrients, U,
V and W from LADCP, U and V from underway ADCP, underway T and S, meteorology,
bathymetry), carbon system (DIC, pCO2, TAlk, pH, DOC, TDN, underway pCO2), and
transient tracers (CFCs, SF6). U.S. GO-SHIP will continue to cooperate with
separately funded investigators: examples include measurement of 14C, Fe/trace
metals, 3H/3He; microstructure turbulence measurements, as well as floats and
drifters. This grant includes funds to collect data and perform quality control
to achieve reference quality, with limited synthesis through support of
postdoctoral researchers. Data will be released using the successful approach in
place since 2003, with a stringent data policy of rapid and open dissemination,
including transfer to recognized data centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.