* 2023772
* Career Development Workshop and Forum: Spring Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute, Columbia, SC - March 8-11, 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2020
* Tanvir Farouk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 09/30/2020
* USD 4,000.00

This award is to partially support the travel expenses of graduate and
undergraduate students in attending the 2020 Spring Technical Meeting of the
Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute. This conference, to be held
at the University of South Carolina, is a gathering of combustion researchers in
academia, industry, and government from the East Coast region of the United
States. The technical program of the conference consists of a series of plenary
lectures, contributed oral presentations, workshops for young faculty/students,
and information social gatherings. Experiences in attending technical
conferences are extremely beneficial to students. These experiences will not
only help with the students' professional development, but also stimulate their
critical thinking in formulating future research directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its effect on energy conversion and
environmental quality, the understanding of combustion processes and practical
combustion systems is of paramount importance to society. Exchange of
information at conferences increases the rate at which research breakthroughs
can be made to make combustion more efficient and cleaner with fuel-flexibility.
A particular focus of this conference is on graduate and undergraduate students
by providing an opportunity for these students to present and get feedback on
their research. This award will be used to offset the travel expenses of non-
local students in an effort to increase student participation at the meeting,
particularly students from underrepresented institutions that may not have the
financial means to fully support student travel to conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.