* 2023154
* GP-UP: Applied Geosciences at the Soil, Water and Energy Nexus
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gregory Wiles, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,878.00

Some of the most critical issues facing society are related to the geosciences,
yet the future U.S. geoscience workforce is expected to be insufficient to meet
demand and not representative of the Nation’s diverse talent pool. Individuals
from racially and ethnically diverse groups face barriers to entering and
remaining in the geosciences; this, in part, is due to a lack of mentoring and
knowledge of geoscience careers. This program addresses these barriers by
providing undergraduate students with authentic, career-based experiences that
address local, community-oriented geoscience problems. The College of Wooster
Department of Earth Sciences is partnering with regional government agencies,
non-profit organizations, and employers in the environmental geoscience industry
to provide students with hands-on summer internships and professional
development opportunities. The primary goal is to build a bridge from the first
year of college to a geoscience major. The PIs hope to establish a program that
can be readily transferred to other colleges and increase the numbers students
from underrepresented groups majoring in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a geoscience
learning ecosystem (GLE) that addresses local community-oriented problems and
increases the number of underrepresented students earning Earth Science degrees
at The College of Wooster. The GLE focuses on local needs at the nexus of soil,
water, and energy within our rural, agricultural community. This framework
provides a societally-relevant driver for community-oriented student research
projects while supplying relevant workforce experience for our students. As
students interact with the GLE at critical points in their educational
development, they can begin to imagine themselves in successful careers as
geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;Students will participate in a coordinated program of
summer internships, geoscience career exploration experiences, and peer
mentoring that provides an intentional pathway to the major, develops students’
geo-STEM identities, increases students’ awareness of geoscience careers, and
equips students with skills and professional networks that are directly
transferrable to the geoscience workforce. By integrating evidence-based
strategies for broadening participation with a framework that leverages many
structures existing at predominantly white and primarily undergraduate
institutions, our transferable program has the potential to transform how these
institutions approach broadening participation of racial and ethnic minorities
in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.