* 2023093
* SaTC: Student Travel Support for 2020 Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security (GameSec)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Quanyan Zhu, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2023
* USD 8,000.00

This proposal supports student travel for 10 students to attend the 2020
Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security (GameSec) to be held in
University of Maryland, College Park, October 28-30, 2020. The GameSec is a
leading venue for quick and wide dissemination of cutting-edge research results
in on the analytical models based on game, information, communication,
optimization, decision, and control theories that are applied to diverse
security topics. This travel grant will enable career development and learning
opportunities for US-based and/or US citizen graduate students. Attending
conferences is an important component of graduate school education for our
society's future computer security researchers. Students will have the
opportunity to discuss leading edge research with world-class computer security
researchers, and establish networks, connections, and mentoring relationships
that will serve them well during their research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support to encourage
participation in the 2020 GameSec by students who would normally find it
difficult to attend. Criteria for selection include evidence of a serious
interest in the field, as demonstrated by research output, coursework and/or
project experience. Organizers encourage participation of women and students
from other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.