* 2023178
* Collaborative Research: Management and Implementation of US GEOTRACES GP17 Section: Amundsen Sea Sector of the Antarctic Continental Margin (GP17-ANT)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Peter Sedwick, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2023
* USD 498,943.00

This project will support the management and implementation of a 60-day research
cruise to the Amundsen Sea sector of the Antarctic continental margin to collect
samples for measurements of a broad suite of trace elements and isotopes
(“TEIs”), as part of the U.S. GEOTRACES program. GEOTRACES is a global effort in
the field of Chemical Oceanography, the goal of which is to understand the
distributions of trace elements and their isotopes in the ocean. Determining the
distributions of these elements and isotopes will increase the understanding of
processes that shape their distributions and also the processes that depend on
these elements. Key TEIs include essential micronutrients such as iron and zinc;
“tracers” such as aluminum, manganese, and isotopes of nitrogen, thorium and
neodymium that can be used to investigate modern and ancient ocean processes;
and elements such as lead that are indicative of human activities. In the
Southern Ocean, the Antarctic continental margins are important as sources of
micronutrient trace elements such as iron, which is required to support
biological production and carbon export over the Antarctic shelf and in offshore
waters of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Moreover, these regions are
experiencing rapid environmental changes that are expected to impact oceanic
circulation and biogeochemical cycles, for which TEIs provide crucial data
needed to test and refine numerical models of the Earth system. The Amundsen Sea
sector holds particular interest because of the pronounced, decadal-scale
increases in the melting rates of glacial ice shelves that border the region,
driven by intrusions of warm Circumpolar Deep Water onto the continental shelf.
This melting has potentially major impacts on global sea level, on the formation
of Antarctic Bottom Water in the Ross Sea, and on the regional ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cruise will comprise essential sampling operations
(collection and shipboard processing) and ancillary measurements (hydrography,
nutrients, algal pigments) in support of multiple, individual science projects,
following the successful model of previous U.S. GEOTRACES cruises in the
Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic ocean basins. The cruise will sample the ocean
region between 100°W and 135°W, with stations ranging from 67°S in the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current southward to the Amundsen Sea continental shelf, including
stations adjacent to several rapidly melting ice shelves and in highly-
productive shelf polynyas. Water column samples will be collected using
conventional and trace-metal clean CTD-rosette systems, in-situ high-volume
pumps, and a towed fish sampler or small boat, using established methods.
Sampling time will also be provided for collection of sea ice, floating glacial
ice, and seafloor sediments. To facilitate coordination with a complementary
open-ocean cruise and ensure access to the study region to document the impact
of biological processes, the cruise is planned for late austral summer (late
January-late March). Beyond the disciplinary contributions, the proposed
research will contribute knowledge concerning the cryosphere and its impacts on
global sea level and ocean circulation, regional ecosystems and biological
processes, ocean-atmosphere interactions, and past and future environmental
change. The project will contribute to STEM education and outreach through the
participation of an NSF-funded PolarTREC education professional, and a K-12 STEM
program for students from underserved and underrepresented schools run by
Rutgers University education specialists. To foster public engagement, the
investigators will partner with the UCSC Science Communication Program to engage
freelance science journalists to profile research in this spectacular and harsh
Antarctic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.