* 2023175
* Collaborative research: Characterization of Synechococcus-cyanophage interactions across phylogenetic and temporal scales
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Nathan Ahlgren, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 724,781.00

Viral infection influences the flow of nutrients in the oceans and the diversity
and structure of ecologically important microbial communities. Understanding
which viruses infect which hosts is critical to understanding the exact impact
of viruses, but there are still critical gaps in knowledge about how widely
viruses can infect specific bacteria types and how this can change over time.
This project includes the isolation and characterization of hundreds of co-
occurring photosynthetic bacteria (cyanobacteria from the genus Synechococcus)
and viruses that infect them (cyanophage) from Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island to
assess the degree to which they can infect each other and identify specific
genes that control cross-infection. DNA collected for over 10 years from
Narragansett Bay is used to track Synechococcus and cyanophage communities to
determine how virus-host interactions play out in shaping the diversity of
natural Synechococcus and cyanophage communities over seasonal cycles and from
year to year. This work provides knowledge of how individual viral-host
interactions in a natural community can lead to the stable co-existence of
particular species of viruses and bacteria in a coastal ecosystem over time.
This project supports 15 undergraduate student researchers, a graduate student
and a postdoctoral fellow who also receives training in effective practices in
science teaching. Integration of the study’s results into undergraduate courses
and outreach activities facilitates authentic opportunities for students to
contribute to research and engagement of local junior and senior high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of scientists and students are
conducting a phylogenetically-informed study of natural communities of co-
occurring Synechococcus and cyanophage, a model tractable system in Narragansett
Bay, to characterize phage-host interactions across different scales of
diversity and time. The team’s goal is to isolate a large collection of ~100
Synechococcus and ~200 cyanophage from Narragansett Bay and to conduct infection
assays and comparative genomics on these isolates. They employ amplicon
sequencing of highly variable loci for both Synechococcus and cyanophage to
characterize community dynamics across broad to fine genetic scales—ecotypes to
within-species variants—for 10 years of archived monthly samples and a new
weekly time-series over two years. These studies address the following three key
questions: 1) Are there inherent boundaries of genetic relatedness (i.e.
ecotype, species, or finer levels) at which the patterns of infection networks
fundamentally shift from being mostly nested to mostly modular? (2) What are the
underlying mechanisms and genetic loci that determine the boundaries of
infection, i.e., host range and phage susceptibility? and, (3) How do host-phage
interactions at different phylogenetic levels influence community structure over
short (weeks to months) and long (year-to-year) time scales? Results from this
project help to better understand how phytoplankton and bacterioplankton
communities are shaped by viral predation and how host and phage diversity is
created, maintained, and structured in the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.