* 2023032
* Collaborative research: polynomial optimization and its application to power systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cedric Josz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 385,782.00

Operators of electric power systems face the difficult task of continuously
balancing the supply and demand of power by managing the outputs of thousands of
generators and the power flows through tens of thousands of transmission lines.
To maintain a reliable and low-cost power supply, system operators rely on
algorithms from the field of mathematical optimization. To obtain more tractable
mathematical formulations, existing industry practices linearly approximate the
nonlinear models which best represent the physics of electric power systems.
Optimization problems that use these linear approximations provide operating
points which inherently suffer from approximation errors, thus reducing the
reliability and efficiency of power system operations. Recent advancements in
optimization theory hold significant promise for avoiding these approximation
errors by directly solving nonlinear optimization problems. For instance, the
Department of Energy and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission estimate that
improved optimization algorithms could save billions of dollars annually in the
US electricity markets alone. Modeling power networks as systems of polynomial
equations, our preliminary work demonstrated that polynomial optimization theory
can reliably provide solutions to challenging nonlinear problems. Building on
our preliminary work, this project will develop and analyze new optimization
algorithms that provide significant computational speed improvements and
additional modeling flexibility. These algorithms and their associated rigorous
guarantees on convergence and solution quality are key enabling tools for
reliably operating power systems, especially during heavily stressed
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new semi-algebraic
techniques for solving large-scale polynomial optimization problems arising from
the operation of electric power systems. Given the increasing complexity of
power systems, operational decision-making tools crucially require innovative
solutions in the coming years. To achieve this, we propose to design tractable
and rigorous algorithms using a powerful tool from polynomial optimization
theory known as the moment/sum-of-squares hierarchy. Contrary to local search
algorithms, the moment/sum-of-squares hierarchy has global convergence
guarantees and cannot get stuck in undesired local minima or saddle points.
However, making this hierarchy tractable for practical large-scale problems is a
major challenge. We thus propose new semi-algebraic techniques for globally
solving an important and generic instance of large-scale polynomial
optimization, namely the so-called optimal power flow problem. This problem
seeks the minimum cost operating point for an electric power system while
satisfying engineering limits on the line flows, voltage magnitudes, etc. as
well as the power flow equations which model the network physics. In addition to
being an important problem in its own right, optimal power flow is a key
building block of more complex problems, including bilevel optimization problems
used to model competitive electricity markets and to identify critical power
system components. Our preliminary results show that moment/sum-of-squares
relaxations can solve practical optimal power flow test cases coming from
industry on an unprecedented scale, with thousands of variables and tens of
thousands of non-convex constraints. We plan to design new ways to exploit power
system specific characteristics (particular symmetries and sparsity) to enable
large-scale computations, as well as new hierarchies for solving polynomial
optimization problems. Our specific objectives for this project include 1)
substantially improving the computational speed of the moment/sum-of-squares
hierarchies using recently proposed Lagrange multiplier expressions that
systematically strengthen the relaxations, 2) developing methods for quickly
checking whether a candidate local solution is, in fact, globally optimal, thus
leveraging decades of research in local search algorithms, 3) applying
polynomial optimization tools to industrially relevant bilevel optimization
problems, where the relaxations global optimality certificates are essential to
ensuring feasibility of the overall bilevel problem, and 4) creating new
relaxation hierarchies that are tailored to power system specific
characteristics while simultaneously exploiting the efficiency of computational
methods developed for machine learning applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.