* 2023849
* ASCENT: BioNet: A distributed network of bioelectronic devices for closed-loop control of physiological processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jacob Robinson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,300,000.00

Bioelectronics promises to dramatically improve human health and performance by
sensing and affecting local tissue and organ function in a personalized and
highly controlled manner which is not possible with traditional materials and
medications. Furthermore, the way that biological systems of the body
communicate requires sensing and/or stimulation at physically separated
locations, necessitating a “distributed” network of bioelectronic components. To
achieve this vision key barriers must be overcome, including unreliable wireless
communication with implanted devices through tissue, rejection of engineered
devices by the body, and integration. This project will realize a distributed
bioelectronic network, or “BioNet”, of miniature, free-standing devices to
overcome these challenges, and will demonstrate its utility for repairing nerve
injuries. BioNet will develop new electrically conducting biomaterials, and
miniaturized tools for powering and transmitting data wirelessly. This project
will contribute to societal needs through improved quality of life and well-
being and will result in reduced pain, faster functional recovery from
peripheral nerve injury, and reduced loss in productivity due to injury. Beyond
tissue regeneration and functional restoration, BioNet could contribute more
broadly to other areas of medicine, for example, the long-term treatment and
therapy of neurological disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
develop a biohybrid bioelectronic distributed network bridging scales
(materials, devices, circuits, and systems) and disciplines. The BioNet, with
millimeter-scale magneto-electric motes (MagMotes), will seamlessly integrate
into regenerating tissues to provide functional biomarkers and therapeutic
stimuli in order to affect physiological states. This project thus creates new
knowledge and technology towards the bioelectronic system by bringing together
diverse disciplines in a convergence research framework. A co-design strategy
enables rational for material iteration/discovery, balances physical and
practical limitations with hardware/software limitations and reconciles design
constraints with application/end user needs. The project will advance materials
and methods for tissue-integrated conducting polymer allograft composites. It
will deliver a novel approach towards wireless power and low-power data transfer
using magnetoelectrics and custom CMOS circuits. These ultra-low-power CMOS
circuits and systems will enhance robustness and stability, reduce calibration
efforts, and improve fabrication yield. The co-designed BioNet will result in a
peripheral nerve injury bioelectronic system capable of biohybrid stimulation
and real time diagnostics of nerve regeneration progress, needed in order to
form the basis of a closed loop system. The broader impacts for the scientific
and engineering community are the establishment of a platform that can be used
as a tool to study biological mechanisms underlying disease and dysfunction. By
developing the hardware platform for distributed sensors and actuators the
project will create a new paradigm for physiological control which will open new
opportunities to develop and test concepts for distributed control
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.