* 2023047
* GP-GO:  The Scripps Institution of Oceanography Geosciences Education and Opportunities (Scripps-GEO) Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Emily Chin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,403.00

While demographic trends in the United States indicate ever-growing minority
populations, minorities remain under-represented in geosciences, even relative
to other STEM fields. Thus, recruitment and retention of minority students a
high priority and is necessary to maintain and enhance the intellectual health
and workforce in the geosciences. This project builds a regional partnership in
San Diego, California between Scripps Institution of Oceanography at University
of California, San Diego, three local two-year colleges, i.e. San Diego City
College, San Diego Mesa College, and Southwestern College, and geoscience
professionals in the region. This partnership will bring increased awareness of
geoscience education and career applications to first and second year
underrepresented undergraduate students in our academic institutions through a
combination of seminar courses and paid internship opportunities. The
partnership will also build strong mentoring relationships between students,
faculty and employers that will support students at critical junctures
throughout their education; for example, as community college students consider
transferring into four-year degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Scripps
Institution of Oceanography Geosciences Education and Opportunities (Scripps-
GEO) Program, is a three-year project that leverages outstanding geoscience
educational and internship opportunities at Scripps to establish a regional
geosciences learning ecosystem (GLE), dedicated to building a framework and
sustainable mechanisms for increasing the pathway of diverse and talented
students that pursue careers and graduate school in geosciences. The proposed
GLE will include faculty and students from UC San Diego and three local Hispanic
Serving Institutions (San Diego City College, San Diego Mesa College and
Southwestern College), in partnerships with local and regional geoscience
professionals. The proposed project is foundation building and will focus on
three main areas: (1) establish the Scripps-GEO Program to strengthen faculty,
institutional and public partnerships in geoscience workforce applications in
our region, (2) initiate student-focused project components, specifically
career-focused seminar courses and academic-year internship opportunities at
Scripps, targeted at recruiting students early in their undergraduate education,
i.e. first or second year students, and (3) critically evaluate our results and
identify strategies that are most effective in preparing, advancing and
retaining diverse students in degrees and careers in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.