* 2023263
* GP-IN: Graduate soft skills development through mentoring pre-university students through diverse geoscience experiences
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Tracy Davis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,982.00

The Geosciences are particularly suited for nurturing and diversifying a STEM
workforce and promoting STEM literacy on account of the diverse applications to
real-world problems related to humanity’s only home: the Earth. This
interdisciplinary field prepares geoscience students for successful STEM careers
within and beyond geoscience. Yet, the geosciences are faced with a talent gap
and suffer from a serious underrepresentation of minoritized groups. Recruiting
more and more diverse students into undergraduate geoscience programs of study
is a necessity for future prosperity. By exposing rising high school seniors to
the importance of a particular science before they enter college could have
long-term benefits in favor of STEM career choices. Recruiting and training
diverse students into the field will help to ensure that sustainable and
inclusive future geoscience workers will be representative of America’s
multicultural society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs propose a two-pronged approach
that targets students at distinct critical junctures in the geoscience talent
pipeline: 1) high-school students deciding on colleges and majors, and 2)
graduate students working towards academic and non-academic careers in
geoscience. The two main goals of this program are 1) to increase the number and
diversity of college-bound high-school students who intentionally choose
geoscience as a major, and 2) to solidify graduate students’ attitudes, skills,
and identities as geoscience leaders and lifelong mentors. High-school students
are preferentially recruited from three partner high schools with large
populations of students from traditionally minoritized groups. Each high-school
summer intern completes an individual project under supervision and mentorship
from a graduate student in conjunction with organized and cohort-based exposure
to and mini-training in computing and data science, field work and
instrumentation, and communication. The graduate student mentors are formally
trained and advised in the practice of mentoring via a series of workshops and
individual feedback sessions. They also help design and deliver authentic
exposure to and mini-training in geoscience to the interns. The interns’
projects are guided by project proposals written by the graduate students and
revised with coaching from the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.