* 2023571
* Investigating mechanisms underlying adaptive capacity to ocean warming
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lisa Komoroske, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 978,658.00

Understanding how marine life copes with drastically different environmental
conditions now and into the future is essential for the management and
conservation of biodiversity in the ocean. One complicating factor is the
observation that populations within a given species are often fine-tuned to the
environment that they live in. Yet, it is often unclear what components of the
environment create these differences across populations. This project focuses on
Atlantic oyster drills, a predatory snail that consumes farmed and wild oysters
on the Atlantic coast of North America, the location of one of the strongest
temperature gradients in the world. The investigators combine field and
laboratory studies to understand how differences in temperature affect the
growth and survival of oyster drills sourced from populations throughout their
range. This information is paired with molecular analyses to help determine
genetic and physiological differences among populations. In addition to
benefitting oyster reefs, this information broadly contributes to the
understanding of how marine life will respond to rapidly changing environmental
conditions. The project also supports the education and marine science training
of students at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral level. In
partnership with the non-profit organization Waterstrong, the investigators will
provide marine science and swimming skills training to thirty girls from
historically underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting how
marine communities will respond to rapid environmental change is difficult
because species responses can vary across populations and because organisms may
evolve over time. Knowledge of how such evolutionary potential arises and is
maintained is limited. A useful approach for examining species response to
environmental change is to investigate how species have locally adapted to
environmental differences across their range. This project tests competing
mechanisms that can generate countergradient variation (CnGV; a widespread form
of local adaptation) in an ecologically important marine species (Atlantic
oyster drill, Urosalpinx cinerea). The objectives of this integrative research
are to 1) quantify the strength of seasonality and mean temperature in
generating CnGV and to 2) identify if these responses are correlated across
biological traits using a combination of field sampling and common garden
experimentation. These objectives are complemented with a molecular approach
that 3) quantifies neutral genetic structure across populations and 4)
identifies the roles of genetic adaptation and transcriptional plasticity in
facilitating physiological adaptation to environmental change. The proposed work
is significant because it provides a novel test for different environmental
drivers of a commonly observed form of local adaptation. This research also
reveals the genetic underpinnings of how such local adaptation arises and will
give insight into the adaptive capacity of organisms to rapid
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.