* 2023372
* Collaborative Research: Zooplankton mediation of particle formation in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Leocadio Blanco-Bercial, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 407,159.00

The purpose of this collaborative project is to advance understanding of the
role of marine planktonic animals (or zooplankton) in the biological pump, or
transport of carbon from surface to deeper ocean waters. This movement of carbon
from surface to deep ocean water can ultimately affect carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, with implications for global climate. Many marine zooplankton,
including species of copepods and krill, play a direct role in the biological
pump both because they are abundant and because they can migrate from surface
waters at night, where they feed, to depths of more than 500 m at night. At the
same time, some organisms called flux feeders will remain at depth and do not
migrate. Instead, they rely on particles produced by other zooplankton feeding
in surface waters. In this project, the investigators are focusing on
populations of flux feeders in the deeper ocean waters of the Sargasso Sea. They
are leveraging an ongoing long-term research program, conducting field
collections using specialized nets and particle traps, as well lab experiments,
as a way to understand how these organisms modify the particles around them.
This project is supporting a postdoctoral scientist and providing research
experiences for undergraduates at two institutions. An education specialist is
creating lesson plans for an award-winning Ask-A-Biologist website, designed for
public and K-12 audiences. Images of zooplankton will be disseminated to the
public and scientific community via EcoTaxa (a web platform devoted to plankton
biodiversity, with images and taxonomic annotation) and physical samples will be
archived as part of a teaching library. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceanic
biological carbon pump refers to the export of dissolved and particulate organic
carbon to the deep ocean, and it is a significant driver of atmospheric carbon
uptake by the oceans. Evidence from long-term research carried out at the
Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS) site suggests that the spectrum of
particles collected by gel-traps below the euphotic zone changes drastically
below 150 m, which is attributed to resident populations of zooplankton that
feed on vertically migrating zooplankton as well as sinking particles. The goals
of this study are to investigate the role of different zooplankton taxa on both
particle aggregate formation and in particle transformation, and to compare and
characterize the particles generated by the zooplankton communities with those
collected by particle traps. The investigators are combining field collections
with experiments onboard ship and in environmental chambers. They are collecting
samples over two years, with three cruises a year to capture distinct seasons.
They are assessing high-resolution vertical distribution of zooplankton in the
upper 600 m using Multiple Opening-Closing Net and Environmental Sensing System
(MOCNESS) tows during day- and night-time, to distinguish diel vertical
migrators from resident populations and to quantify contributions to particulate
organic carbon flux via fecal pellet production. On each cruise, sinking
particles are being collected using gel trap tubes attached to the particle
traps deployed monthly at BATS. In addition, roller tank experiments are
determining how individual zooplankton mediate aggregate formation. Particle
types and fecal pellets are being characterized using image analysis and DNA-
based analysis of microbial communities. Finally, ongoing data collection from
the long-term BATS program is providing invaluable environmental context and
will ensure results from this study contribute to ongoing community efforts to
observe and predict the fate of carbon in our global
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.