* 2023961
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Laminar Flow Inlet and Inertia Navigation System  Innovation for the NSF/NCAR G-V Aircraft
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Rainer Volkamer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 323,999.00

This EAGER project supports the development of a new inlet for the NSF/NCAR G-V
aircraft that will enhance the ability of scientists to measure ambient ions,
condensable vapors, and short-lived reactive species in the atmosphere. These
types of compounds typically exist in the atmosphere at very low levels, are
highly reactive, and are typically lost upon first contact with a surface.
Therefore, sampling becomes a critical factor in their measurement. The new
inlet will become an important community resource for air sampling from the G-V
aircraft. Society will benefit from the improved tools for predicting the sinks
of greenhouse gases, the sources of aerosols, and the impact of these on air
quality and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort includes the early stages
of the design, construction, and assessment based on computational fluid
dynamics simulations, and the Federal Aviation Authority certification of a
laminar flow inlet that is pre-requisite for quantitative sampling of
condensable vapors and ambient ions; and this effort also explores the
feasibility for autonomous startup of an inertia navigation system using
differential GPS for inlet-free remote sensing detection of radical species in
the open atmosphere. Currently, certified inlets on the G-V aircraft use
turbulent air flow regimes that are subject to wall losses, and suitable for the
sampling of longer lived species. The autonomous remote-sensing and laminar
inlet design will enable the sampling of a multitude of organic and inorganic
radical and short lived species not possible with the currently available inlet
designs. The new inlet will provide the potential to fill gaps in our
understanding of oxidative capacity, and those condensable vapors that add to
the early growth of nanoparticles. This research includes the participation of
two graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
this EAGER proposal is exploratory and is a high-risk, high-reward effort, the
extensive experience of the participating scientists and their existing
analytical capabilities reduce both the risk and the required
investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.