* 2023644
* CCI Phase 1: NSF Center for the Mechanical Control of Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Batteas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,040,432.00

The NSF Center for the Mechanical Control of Chemistry (CMCC) is supported by
the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry.
This Phase I Center is led by James Batteas of Texas A&amp;M University. Other
team members include Jonathan Felts, also from Texas A&amp;M University, Adam
Braunschweig of the City University New York-Advanced Science Research Center,
Robert Carpick and Andrew Rappe of the University of Pennsylvania, Danna
Freedman of Northwestern University, and Ashlie Martini of the University of
California - Merced. The effects of light, electric potential, and heat on
chemical reactions are reasonably well studied. Chemists use these to control
chemical reactivity and to direct reactions toward desired products. Though less
well understood, and less studied, mechanical force can also influence chemical
reactions, as compression and shear forces can be used to drive chemistry. To
harness this, the CMCC will develop quantitative models for mechanochemical
reactions that can be applied to industrial scale processes, by combining new
reactors, measurement tools, and theories, to enable the understanding of
mechanochemical effects on chemical bond making and breaking, across multiple
length scales (atomic, meso, macro). The broader impacts of this work include
the prospect of a new perspective on chemical reactivity, with the potential to
enable new technologies such as solvent-free chemical processing and new non-
traditional mechanically-promoted synthetic pathways. Undergraduate researchers
will join graduate students in the center activities. High school students will
participate in a mechanochemistry-themed STEM summer camp. Broad engagement of
students in STEM will include the recruitment of military veterans, women, and
students from traditionally underrepresented groups. Student lab exchanges and
entrepreneurship activities enhance the student experience, while contributing
to the innovation potential of the center. Technology transfer strategies and
training in public policy are in place to ensure the promotion of the innovative
science developed by CMCC members. Science history exhibits and a youth
adventure camp on mechanochemistry round out the informal science communications
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMCC sets out to establish a broad and
fundamental understanding of how mechanical forces can be used to alter chemical
reaction rates and pathways at surfaces and interfaces. To enable this, the
center team is developing an Integrated Toolset Program (ITP) that blends
approaches for the controlled application of force on reactants with in situ
spectroscopies to study mechanically enhanced reactions from the atomic scale to
the macroscale. The ITP includes: atomic force microscopies with integrated
electron microscopy, Raman and IR (infrared) spectroscopies, along with thermal
and multi-tip probes; high-pressure diamond anvils; and novel ball mill reactors
with integrated force control and spectroscopy/diffraction capabilities.
Complemented by state-of-the-art electronic, atomic, kinetic, and data-driven
modeling, the ITP will offer unprecedented, atomically-resolved views of
interfacial mechanochemical reactions across a range of environments (vacuum,
gas, liquid). These tools are being applied to a set of well-defined,
mechanochemically active organic and inorganic systems, namely pericyclic
reactions and perovskite syntheses. The in situ experiments inform computational
studies to predict how reaction pathways depend on force, which then feed back
into the design of reaction conditions needed to obtain desired products.
Building from this, in concert with industry partners, the work aims to provide
a new understanding of force-dependent selectivity and reactivity to ultimately
enable the design of new mechanochemical reactors with integrated force control
for at-scale syntheses. This translational knowledge of atomic-scale
mechanochemistry can have substantial technological and economic benefits
globally, including leading to the development of reliable low-temperature,
simplified, energy-efficient, safer, and more selective syntheses. The CMCC also
provides convergent training for a diverse set of students in chemistry,
physics, mechanical and materials science and engineering, with exposure to
innovation and public policy. Finally, the research outcomes will be
disseminated to a broad audience, with the CMCC functioning as a
mechanochemistry hub, with a strong focus on enhancing research and promoting
diversity while engagind in outreach to K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and
veteran students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.