* 2023656
* Hydrothermal and microbial controls on organic carbon mobilization from Guaymas Basin sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sunita Shah Walter, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 538,390.00

Organic carbon stored in marine sediments and sedimentary rocks are a critical
component of the global carbon cycle. Buried organic carbon balances atmospheric
CO2 concentrations over long timescales and is linked to the regulation of
Earth’s climate. Microbial activity is a key driver of processes that break down
and release carbon from sediments. This project investigates organic carbon in
marine sediments and examines its bioavailability to microbes. The setting for
the project is the Guaymas Basin of the Gulf of California which receives
organic matter inputs from land during seasonal rains and from marine
phytoplankton at the sea surface. Guaymas Basin is also a site of active
seafloor spreading and hydrothermal heating (i.e., the transfer of heat from
magma to sediments and ocean water), which will allow the effects of heating on
the bioavailable portion of organic carbon to be investigated. Results from this
project will improve our understanding of how microbes reintroduce this buried
organic carbon back into the “active” carbon cycle, as well as how this
microbial activity is influenced by hydrothermal heating and organic carbon
composition. The project also incorporates an international collaboration and an
educational cross-border exchange of students between the US and Canada. Results
will be shared broadly through videos produced by the Delaware Sea Grant and a
content created by the Canadian podcast, Broad
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the gradients available in the context of
Guaymas Basin sediments, we will investigate the effects of hydrothermal
heating, burial depth (physical factors), sedimentary organic carbon composition
and oxygen availability (geochemical factors) and microbial community
(biological factors) on the bioavailability and mobilization/utilization of
sedimentary organic carbon. Guaymas Basin features several advantages that make
it uniquely suited for our proposed studies including the fact that 150 meters
of sediment thickness are within the analytical window of radiocarbon dating
which will allow us to take advantage of 14C (radiocarbon) as a natural tracer
of marine carbon sources. Large gradients of temperature and geochemistry are
also created by widespread emplacement of magmatic sills at varied depths in the
sediment column. Such hydrothermal heating transforms sedimentary organic carbon
in some locations from freshly synthesized photosynthetic biomass to petroleum
hydrocarbons on a compressed, 14C-friendly timescale. Analyses will include: (1)
carbon isotopic analysis of biomarkers representative of marine-derived,
terrestrial and hydrothermal organic carbon reservoirs within sediments, (2)
carbon isotopic measurements on biomolecules representative of natural microbial
populations, (3) aerobic bioreactor incubations of sediments with their natural
microbial population and analysis of the isotopic composition of CO2 released by
respiration, and (4) aerobic bioreactor incubations of sediments that have been
pre-heated to promote organic carbon transformations and isotopic analysis of
CO2 respired by a bacterial isolate. Our results will provide an exceptionally
detailed view of the dependence of organic carbon bioavailability on burial
depth, heating history, in situ temperature, oxygen availability, organic carbon
composition, and microbial functional capabilities that, to our knowledge, will
be unprecedented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.