* 2023689
* Collaborative Research: The Emergence of New Capital Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Hannah Appel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,593.00

Capital markets finance domestic infrastructure projects and national
enterprises. They include stock and bond markets that channel wealth from savers
and investors to borrowers, such as large corporations and governments. Capital
markets also move financing across national borders, as when investors buy bonds
originated outside their countries of origin. But domestic capital markets are
not evenly developed across different market contexts. Various factors impact
the development of these markets in any one context, such as the generation of
large pools of capital, the relative ease of currency convertibility, and
standardized methods for rating credit and risk. The research supported by this
award will advance our understanding of these factors as either facilitating or
impeding the development of capital markets in specific contexts. This is
significant, since reductions in aid and multilateral funding have led to a rise
in new forms of debt-financing. By analyzing the development of debt instruments
and their mobilization across borders, the research will provide insights for
policy debates regarding the aims of financial regulation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This study hypothesizes that the successful development of new
capital markets depends on: 1) the generation of large pools of capital in local
currencies and ease of currency convertibility; 2) the production of
standardized data sets for credit-scoring, risk-pricing, and asset-class
creation; and 3) the role of regulatory policy. This hypothesis contrasts with
approaches to global finance that assume the frictionless movement of finance
capital. Instead, the research provides an empirical account of how
financialization happens in new markets so as to document the ways it is both
achieved and constrained. The field sites for this study represent a soft-
currency context in which hypotheses about the development of cross-border
financial markets can be readily tested. The hypothesis will be tested through a
multi-sited ethnography of constituent building blocks: banks and fintech
platforms that collect the local currency deposits of savers; institutional
investors that mobilize deposits into financial markets; and the exchanges on
which financial instruments are traded. The research results will provide a
detailed account of these emergent capital markets by examining the extent to
which they generate investment-grade financial products that motivate
investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.