* 2023018
* Collaborative Research: Environmental and biological controls on carbon uptake phenology in permafrost affected boreal forests
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Parazoo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 132,000.00

Rapid warming in boreal forests has driven diverse ecosystem changes in recent
decades, including permafrost thaw, longer non-frozen seasons, and warmer
summers. The impact of these changes on the carbon balance of boreal forests
remains highly uncertain. A growing body of evidence indicates that boreal
forests are shifting toward being a net carbon dioxide source due to increases
in soil respiration. To offset this loss of carbon, ecosystems rely on sustained
vegetation uptake and accumulation of carbon through plant photosynthesis.
However, it is unclear how environmental conditions, particularly moisture and
temperature, affect the timing, duration and magnitude of photosynthetic carbon
uptake (i.e., photosynthetic phenology) across boreal plant functional types. To
address these important knowledge gaps, this study focuses on a leaf-to-
watershed analysis at the Caribou-Poker Creek (BONA) Watershed in Alaska.
Specifically, the study seeks to answer the question, “What are the
environmental and biological controls of photosynthetic phenology in permafrost-
affected boreal forests?” This research will provide training to undergraduate
and graduate students in field and laboratory research practices. The project
will also partner with science educators within the PolarTREC program to develop
informational StoryMaps, educational videos, and learning activities to raise
public awareness of the important ecosystem services that boreal forests provide
to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a novel approach that
incorporates high-frequency observations of solar-induced chlorophyll
fluorescence (SIF) as an indicator of vegetation gross primary productivity
(GPP), and L-band microwave backscattering intensity as an indicator of canopy
water content. These measurements will be complemented by a suite of
observations including leaf and ecosystem gas exchange, and environmental
measurements (e.g., soil temperature, soil moisture, water flow velocity) along
a soil-to-vegetation continuum. The observation will be used to identify the key
functional relationships between GPP and environmental conditions occurring at
the stand and watershed levels through statistical analyses (e.g., multivariate
adaptive regression splines). Newly gained insight will be used to optimize a
data and process-model integration framework using the remote-sensing driven
CARbon Data Model (CARDAMOM) and to extend from the BONA watershed to the boreal
forests of Alaska and northwestern Canada. The CARDAMOM framework will allow us
to: (1) obtain new, observation-constrained, regional estimates of GPP; (2)
assess the regional sensitivity of boreal carbon dioxide uptake under various
climate scenarios; and (3) identify the sink potential and trajectory of GPP in
boreal forests, given the state of climate warming, a lengthening growing
season, and changes in soil water conditions. The study results will be an
important step forward in reducing uncertainty in GPP budget estimates for
boreal forests, and will help set priorities for future model improvements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the OPP Arctic Natural
Sciences Program and DEB Ecosystem Science Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.