* 2023069
* Gradient Exchange Mass Spectrometry (GEMS) for Quantifying a Suite of Dissolved Gas Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Matthew Long, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2024
* USD 839,219.00

Coastal ecosystems are highly active regions of cycling of vital elements, but
due to their proximity to human populations, are often significantly impacted by
human-induced stresses. The pressure of human activities, directly through
pollution or indirectly through temperature and carbon dioxide levels, has
created severe water health quality issues worldwide, including nutrient
pollution, low oxygen levels and ocean acidification. Here, recent advances in
measuring vertical water transport and the vertical distribution of gases
dissolved in seawater are combined in a new technological platform to measure
the rates of these vital nutrient and element cycles. This Gradient Exchange
Mass Spectrometry (GEMS) system uses measurements of the gradient, or vertical
distribution, of water mixing and transport, with mass spectrometry measurements
of dissolved gases to measure the exchange of vital elements under natural
conditions. Deployment of the GEMS system in two coastal locations, one heavily
impacted by human activity, and one relatively pristine, will allow real-time
assessments of, and comparisons between, natural and polluted coastal
ecosystems. The GEMS technology developed through this proposal represents a
transformative tool for refining a wide suite of element exchanges that has an
unparalleled potential in long-term deployment and application to a variety of
important elemental cycles (for example Oxygen, Carbon, Sulfur and Nitrogen).
This integrated perspective on multiple, simultaneous processes (e.g. primary
production, respiration, nutrient cycling, sulfur cycling, methanogenesis, etc.)
is expected to yield novel and significant insights on the dynamics, drivers and
interactions of these processes that are unparalleled by any other technique or
technology. A major goal of this project is the training of young scientists
including two early career scientists and undergraduate students. Undergraduate
students will gain technological development and field experience through
programs including the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Summer Student
Fellowship and the diversity-focused Woods Hole Partnership in Education
Program. The local monitoring and outreach group, the Buzzards Bay Coalition
(BBC), have identified element and nutrient cycles as a major knowledge gap in
their understanding of the bay’s health and water quality. This research will
examine natural seagrass environments with that of a degraded system and provide
specific metrics, data, and results that can be used by the BBC in their
education and outreach programs as well as their frequent interactions and
advocacy with coastal managers and local governments. Finally, the data
communication integrated in the GEMS system allows for a unique opportunity to
share our results in real-time via a web interface. This web interface will
provide graphical plots of the GEMS data, that continuously update, and be
hosted on both the BBC and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution websites to
reach a wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sediment-water interface is a
region of large physical, biological and chemical gradients, resulting from the
dynamic biogeochemical cycling of critical elements between the sediment and the
overlying water. Measuring these physical and chemical gradients in the benthic
boundary layer allows for the determination of exchange rates of solutes; rates
which are fundamental for determining global biogeochemical cycling. This
research proposes an innovative technology for the quantification of exchange
rates of a suite of biogeochemically relevant volatiles by developing the
Gradient Exchange Mass Spectrometry (GEMS) technique. Through targeted
improvement of components used in a prototype system and assembly of a second
generation system, this project will culminate in a robust, high-endurance,
biogeochemical sensing system allowing unprecedented examination of benthic flux
dynamics. This system combines two cutting-edge techniques, turbulent boundary
layer gradient exchange and the multiple-tracer capabilities of in situ mass
spectrometry, thereby allowing undisturbed observation of natural systems while
simultaneously quantifying exchange rates of oxygen, carbon dioxide, methane,
hydrogen sulfide, and dinitrogen. All components of the proposed GEMS have been
independently validated and applied in marine systems, though never in
combination. The PIs’ collective experience with turbulent boundary layer
exchange and in situ mass spectrometry uniquely poises this collaborative effort
to be transformative in the quantification of exchange processes across the
benthic-water interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.