* 2023721
* Measuring Mesoscale Mixing: Developing New Spatial Statistics to Analyze Ocean Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Roger Samelson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 417,220.00

Mesoscale ocean dynamics play a critical role in the Earth system by moving and
mixing properties within the ocean and providing essential feedback mechanisms
for the ocean's large-scale thermodynamics. This project will (1) use a
hierarchy of numerical models to quantify the benefits of these novel statistics
under different flow regimes and under sampling patterns consistent with
observational platforms, (2) develop new structure functions (statistics that
depend on spatial differences and cross-correlations of data) which increase the
accuracy of mesoscale flux measurements and assess them in models, and (3) apply
these statistics to a range of observations to explore their additional insights
into mesoscale fluxes. This project will provide unprecedented quantification of
mesoscale ocean fluxes and prepare scientists with the optimal tools to analyze
future data sets. These observations will inform us about the energy pathways
through the Earth system and will aid the evaluation of the fidelity of
conceptual and numerical models, and the accuracy of their forecast
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use an array of structure
functions to more accurately quantify mesoscale ocean fluxes of energy,
enstrophy, and other dynamic properties. It result in optimal tools to analyze
future data sets. These goals will be achieved through three concurrent research
threads. First, a range of numerical models will simulate various dynamical
regimes to identify and compare the utility of different structure functions for
assessing both the full model fields and emulated observations from a range of
measurement platforms. These models span from idealized two-dimensional dynamics
to primitive equation models that include ocean-atmosphere coupling and the
effects of dynamics outside of the mesoscale. Their hierarchy will diagnose the
conditions under which different structure functions can quantify mesoscale
fluxes, and the limitations of structure functions that result from sampling or
measurement biases, or from multi-scale physical processes. Second, new
structure functions will be developed which are tailored to maximize information
from models and specific ocean data collection methods. As they are developed,
these new structure functions will be included in our analysis of numerical
models. Finally, the results of the numerical model analysis will guide a
diagnosis of mesoscale fluxes from observational data sets by applying
appropriate structure functions to these data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.