* 2023155
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the genomic basis of key performance traits to quantify the evolutionary potential of coral populations under climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrew Baker, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 223,168.00

Facing an onslaught of environmental stressors, tropical coral reefs around the
world have declined dramatically in recent years, particularly in the Caribbean.
To help restore the structure and function of coral reef ecosystems, managers
have established in-water nurseries specializing in the propagation of several
coral species, particularly the endangered staghorn coral, Acropora cervicornis.
With support from the Biological Oceanography Program, Integrative Ecological
Physiology Program, and the NSF 2026 Idea Machine Fund Program in the NSF Office
of Integrated Activities, this project aims to fill critical knowledge gaps in
our understanding of the adaptive capacity of staghorn coral by studying how
interactions between genetics and environment influence coral performance and
thermal resilience. Insights into these interactions, the genes involved in key
health traits, and the impacts of nursery rearing on coral performance inform
managers attempting to conserve and restore reef ecosystems. Results are
communicated directly to stakeholders and practitioners through communication
with conservationists, aquariums, and government agencies. The instruments for
field-testing coral thermotolerance are built and programmed by high school
students in Shedd’s Teen Learning Lab, and the proposed research directly
involves graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Southern
California, the University of South Florida, and the University of Miami.
Broader public engagement is facilitated through additional outreach activities
at the California Science Center in Los Angeles, Shedd Aquarium in Chicago, and
Frost Science Museum in Miami. This project represents one of the most
comprehensive investigations into the adaptive capacity of a reef-building coral
species to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term persistence of Caribbean
reefs will ultimately be determined by whether there is sufficient genetic
diversity and phenotypic resilience in remaining natural and restored coral
populations to survive and reproduce in a rapidly changing climate. This project
aims to quantify variation in performance among colonies, determine potential
trade-offs between thermal tolerance and other traits, and identify coral
genotypes that are most likely to survive under climate change and contribute to
adaptive potential. Heritability, plasticity, and trade-offs among key
phenotypes are being evaluated using a first-of-its-kind reciprocal transplant
experiment across a network of Bahamian coral nurseries spanning a large thermal
gradient over 450 km. The relationship between thermal resistance and resilience
and the extent to which these traits are environmentally flexible are quantified
in a series of heat stress experiments on translocated corals. Following one
year of acclimatization to common garden conditions both in situ (at the Cape
Eleuthera Institute, The Bahamas) and ex situ (at the University of Miami’s
Experimental Hatchery, Florida), a suite of phenotypes are assessed to determine
whether, and to what extent, thermal tolerance is a fixed effect of host and
symbiont genotype or can change in response to transplantation to different
sites. Finally, custom-built Coral Bleaching Autonomous Stress Systems (CBASS)
are used to quantitatively and precisely field-test the thermal tolerance of
~260 genets of A. cervicornis spanning the entire ~900-km thermal cline of the
Bahamian archipelago and nearby Miami-Dade and Broward Counties in Florida.
Shallow whole-genome resequencing is used to identify loci associated with
thermal tolerance, in addition to assessing fine-scale population structure
within hosts and symbionts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project directly addresses
two of the top thirty-three Idea Machine entries: “Imagine a Life with Clean
Oceans” and “Saving Coral Reef Ecosystems."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.