* 2023712
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the Dynamics of Microbial Mercury Methylation in Two Meromictic Lakes in Central New York, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Charles Driscoll, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 314,981.00

Mercury is a widespread pollutant and its impacts on human and ecosystem health
have spurred domestic and international policies and regulations that aim to
limit its release and transport. Anthropogenic mercury contamination results
from emissions to the atmosphere and releases to land and water. Aquatic
ecosystems are the ultimate recipients of atmospheric and terrestrial mercury.
They play a central role in the transformation of mercury to its most
biologically accumulative form, methyl mercury—a known neurotoxin affecting
brain development and reproductive, immune, and cardiovascular systems in humans
and wildlife. Therefore, a critical need is to advance the understanding of
factors influencing in-situ production of methylmercury. This project will
improve the prediction of methylmercury concentrations in lakes and other inland
systems. It will distinguish the effects of chemical interactions from the roles
of microbial transformations in controlling methylmercury production and
accumulation. The study will be conducted in Central New York, at two nearby
lakes with distinct vertical chemical and biological structure: Glacier Lake and
Fayetteville Green Lake. The proposed work will provide training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students from diverse and non-traditional
backgrounds. Scientific hand-on exploration will engage K-12 students from
different age groups, culture, ethnical and racial identity. The results of this
study will be disseminated through conferences and scientific publications. The
principal investigators will impart the scientific findings to the broader
scientific and policy community through policy briefs and short presentations at
the meetings of the Conference of the Parties, expert working groups, and the
intersessional consultations of the Minamata Convention on
Mercury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methylation of mercury is the critical process
linking the atmospheric mercury emissions, deposition to the landscape, and
mercury bioavailability in aquatic ecosystems. Methylmercury poses a risk to
human and wildlife health and may require management interventions. This project
will investigate the dynamics of mercury in the water column of two proximal
meromictic lakes with well-defined redox profiles and a transitional chemocline
of over a meter. The clear natural geochemical gradient combined with discrete
thin-layer sampling will enable the distinction between geochemical and
biological regulators of mercury methylation in the lakes. The team will perform
fluorescence and molecular characterization of dissolved organic matter
compounds that sequester mercury. Depth profiles of major elements (S, C, N),
speciation of mercury, determination of dissolved organic material and its
complexation with mercury, and dissolved low-molecular weight acids and alcohols
will be integrated to evaluate factors driving in-situ mercury availability and
methylmercury production. In addition, molecular analysis will be used to
determine the nature, taxonomic identity, and spatial position of organisms
capable of methylating mercury. Genome-centric metagenomics will enable the
linkage of mercury methylation to other metabolic traits and provide a scaffold
for metatranscriptomics, which will reveal the physiological conditions under
which microorganisms methylate mercury absent substrate
limitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.