* 2023483
* Collaborative Research: Coupling of Trade Winds with the Ocean's Subtropical Cells
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Lutsko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 528,816.00

Energy transport in the tropics is a coupled phenomenon, with both the
atmosphere and the ocean playing important roles. While the atmospheric
component of cross-equatorial energy fluxes has been well studied, the dynamics
of oceanic cross-equatorial energy fluxes are much less well understood. It is
known that heat is primarily transported in the ocean at low latitudes by the
Subtropical Cells (STCs), which are driven by the trade winds. These push
surface waters away from the equator, where they are subducted at higher
latitudes and then return at depth via complex pathways. This research will
advance knowledge of the coupling between the STCs and the trade-winds, and the
responses of these to high latitude energy imbalances. Improved understanding of
this coupling will improve knowledge of how energy is transported by tropical
oceans, the processes governing variability of tropical precipitation and the
relationship between perturbations to the global ocean circulation and the
STCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a study to investigate the coupling between
the oceanic subtropical cells (STCs) and the trade-winds, and how that coupling
modulates the migration of tropical precipitation belts. The work includes both
analysis of observations and investigations of key processes using a hierarchy
of coupled atmosphere-ocean models, to be developed as part of the study. The
project focuses on the regional scale of ocean basins, seeking to better
understand how arguments made in idealized, zonally symmetric situations apply
to more realistic settings. It will also investigate how the dynamics of the
STCs are affected by perturbations in the global ocean
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.