* 2023647
* Workshop on High Energy X-ray Techniques 2020, HEXT-2020
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 02/28/2023
* USD 34,636.00

The proposed workshop on High Energy X-ray techniques, HEXT, at the Cornell High
Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) is unique in its goal to provide participating
students, primarily from institutions in the NSF Partnership for Research and
Education in Materials (PREM) program, the knowledge and skills needed to
strategically plan, conduct and interpret synchrotron experiments to answer
questions specific to their research interests in material science. The PREM
institutions are Minority Serving Institutions with a student population largely
underrepresented in the field of materials research. The workshop will consist
of three main components: 1) Lectures by CHESS staff scientists that cover the
fundamentals of synchrotron methods and how these can be applied to materials
research; 2) Hands-on demonstrations where participants will collect and process
data on CHESS beamlines; and 3) Instruction and coaching on how to write a
successful proposal for beamtime, with the opportunity for personalized feedback
from CHESS scientists. At the conclusion of the workshop, the participants will
have the knowledge and demonstrated skills to be productive members of the CHESS
user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HEXT-2020 workshop will occur as part
of the CHESS Users’ Meeting in June 2020. Workshop participants will be able to
attend sessions of the Users’ meeting featuring updates of the facility
operation, strategic planning and science presentations, as well as social
events (meeting dinner, tour of CHESS). Attendees of the workshop will also
participate in a poster session to share their scientific interests and learn
about research at CHESS. There they will also have the opportunity to network
with students already using synchrotron facilities, with the CHESS staff scien-
tists who are responsible for x-ray beamlines, and with PIs who are facility
users (from early career scientists to world-renowned distinguished researchers,
all working in diverse fields). The targeted audience for this workshop will
have diverse scientific interests and will be new to the synchrotron community.
Therefore, the workshop will cover a broad range of synchrotron methods—such as
diffraction, spectroscopy, and imaging—that can be applied to many materials
systems. Both lectures and hands-on sessions will focus on the fundamentals of
the methods, with a special emphasis on how these techniques can be applied to
materials systems. The experiments using CHESS beamlines will give participants
firsthand experience with what it takes to conduct research at a synchrotron. By
combining these educational activities with practice in preparing proposals,
this workshop will uniquely equip participants to become active members in the
CHESS user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.