* 2023723
* Collaborative Research: Species delimitation in North American lizards
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2024
* USD 472,470.00

Species are a fundamental unit of diversity in the natural world. Therefore,
accurately documenting species diversity has important implications in life
sciences, habitat management, and conservation. Yet, despite the importance of
species in understanding biodiversity, it is often difficult to identify
unambiguous species boundaries in many taxonomic groups. Lizards are one such
example of a taxonomic group with genetically-different populations that often
look very similar. What appears to be one lizard species is often a species
group of several possible lizard species. In this project, the researchers will
collaborate with scientists across 15 different institutions to determine
species boundaries in 30 species groups of North American lizards. Doing so will
(1) connect scientific understandings of how species form to the practice of
naming species and (2) model an intellectual and methodological framework for
naming species consistently in other taxonomic groups. The researchers will
share their research findings at community events across three metropolitan
regions, engage undergraduate students in authentic research, and guide
taxonomic revisions to promote stable species names.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use an integrative approach to delimit species. First, the project
team will collaborate with taxonomic experts to generate range-wide genetic,
ecological, and morphological sampling for each focal species group. These data
will then be analyzed consistently to characterize levels of genetic and
phenotypic divergence within each species complex. Then, the project team will
assay levels of reproductive isolation between candidate species by using
genetic data to measure the extent of hybridization and introgression between
them. By comparing data on divergence and isolation, the team will characterize
the rate and pace at which reproductive isolation evolves. Using these
estimates, the team will then define the population-species boundary and apply
it to the 30 focal groups to identify taxonomic units that show the highest
levels of durability through time. Finally, using the revised taxonomy, the team
will evaluate species delimitation methods that define taxonomic units based
solely on genetic data. While efficient, these methods can be biased, and this
analysis will identify the potential causes for these
biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.