* 2023186
* 3D seismic investigation of upper plate deformation above a region of Slow Slip along the Hikurangi subduction margin of New Zealand
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gregory Moore, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 280,844.00

Subduction zones are the locations where one tectonic plate is forced beneath
another. A geologic fault marks the boundary between the two plates. Frictional
processes mean that motion along this fault is imperfect and may result in
strain build-up. A sudden release in this strain build up causes earthquakes.
Subduction zones are the locations of the greatest magnitude earthquakes and may
be accompanied by tsunamis, making them particularly destructive. However,
recently scientists have discovered that strain may be released in a variety of
ways and over a range of time scales. One example of this is slow earthquakes,
which rupture over weeks or months instead of seconds. It is important to
understand what may cause a margin to release strain in different ways in order
to estimate the hazard potential of the margin. This study will focus on the
conditions that produce slow earthquakes. The Hikurangi Margin in New Zealand
was chosen because it has unusually shallow slow earthquakes, which can be
imaged using geophysical instruments and by drilling. This project provides
training for a female graduate student and a Native Hawaiian undergraduate
student. The project will promote a broader understanding of how ancient
Hawaiian chants and legends were influenced by geologic events (volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis). The project fosters international
collaboration and cooperation by strengthening ties with colleagues in New
Zealand, Japan and the U.K. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon
the successful Community Project to investigate fault property controls on slow-
slip events (SSEs) along megathrust of the Hikurangi subduction margin, New
Zealand. The highly successful seismic acquisition cruise, carried out during
early 2018, acquired a 3D volume of 14.7 x 60 km. The volume has undergone
preliminary processing through 3D stack, post-stack time migration and depth
conversion and is undergoing industry processing. Initial interpretation of the
shallow trench slope basin that was drilled by IODP Expedition 372 was performed
and now the commercially processed volume will be used to extend the
interpretations in order to understand the potential role that subducting
seamounts play in the generation of SSEs. The research will be concentrated on
understanding the geologic history of Tuaheni Basin, a mid-slope basin that
formed on top of thrust packages of trench strata that were originally accreted
at the toe of the subduction zone. The investigators will (1) trace prominent
horizons throughout the basin; (2) document offsets along faults that cut those
horizons; and (3) tie the horizons to the IODP Site to determine their ages and
lithologies. The timing and patterns of deformation will be inferred within the
basin to investigate possible interactions with subducting seamounts.
Collaboration with colleagues who are concentrating on the deeper parts of the
subduction system will allow constraints to be placed on the effects of seamount
subduction on SSE generation. This project will provide significant support for
fundamental understanding of the frontal region of the Hikurangi accretionary
prism, a region currently undergoing a period of slow slip in its shallow
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.