* 2023031
* Collaborative Proposal: Unravelling the Oceanic Dimethylmercury Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Carl Lamborg, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 292,913.00

Collaborative Proposal: Unravelling the Oceanic Dimethylmercury
Cycle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study how dimethylmercury is formed
and removed in the oceans. Dimethylmercury is a naturally occurring compound. It
is thought to be formed when man-made mercury is converted into
monomethylmercury, a toxin that accumulates in fish. Despite representing a
large fraction of mercury in the oceans, the origin and fate of dimethylmercury
is not known. This research will use state-of-the-art analytical, genomic and
modeling tools to address this information gap. It will also train graduate and
undergraduate students to use field, experimental, and modeling methods. The
results will be used in predictive models to forecast future trends in the
oceanic mercury cycle. These models are needed to evaluate the effectiveness of
international actions that seek to reverse increasing trends in the
bioaccumulation of monomethylmercury in fish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methylated
mercury species in the ocean are formed in sediment and the water column from
inorganic divalent mercury delivered from the atmosphere and rivers. The
putative mechanism is a two-step process during which monomethylmercury is
formed first, followed by slow methylation into dimethylmercury. The first step,
biomethylation of divalent mercury into monomethylmercury, is relatively well-
studied in sediment and known to be driven by sulfate- and iron-reducing
bacteria and methanogens. The mechanism for monomethylmercury formation in the
water column is less well understood, and the process of dimethylmercury
formation in sediment or seawater is essentially unknown. Until recently, it was
assumed that dimethylmercury represented a small enough fraction of the
methylated and total mercury (the sum of all mercury species) pools to be
insignificant in the global mercury cycle. Recent measurements, however, show
that dimethylmercury levels in seawater can be in the same range as the other
mercury species. This project will identify the biological and chemical
methylating agents involved in the formation of dimethylmercury. Further, it
will test the impact of varying biogeochemical conditions on dimethylmercury
production. Results will be used to update the mercury module of the MIT General
Circulation Model (MITgcm, a global biogeochemical model, and analyze the
impacts of dimethylmercury production and degradation on monomethylmercury
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.