* 2023102
* I-Corps:  A Super-Sensitive, Real-Time Sensor for Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Dong-Shik Kim, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sensor for the real-time detection of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), which are free radicals that can lead into aging, cancer, and
neurodegenerative diseases. Currently, there is no standard measuring protocol
for ROS, causing mixed interpretation and clinical diagnoses of biomarkers. A
highly sensitive, real-time sensor for ROS was developed with significant
advantages over existing methods. This sensor may improve current clinical and
cosmetic practices and help in the prevention of diseases associated with free
radicals. This technology also may provide an industrial standard protocol for
measuring free radicals, which would contribute to more reliable results. This
technology also may be used in food packaging and food distributing industries
for monitoring chemical and microbial contamination in food. In addition, it
also may have environmental applications, as the sensor could help to provide
better control of the free radicals in the advanced oxidation process for
contaminated groundwater remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a super-sensitive sensor for the detection of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). The technology consists of an electrode modified
with a composite comprising ultra-small cerium oxide nanoparticles anchored to a
highly conductive carbon support. The strong affinity of cerium oxide toward
hydroxyl free radicals was used to develop a composite sensor for real-time
detection. The impedance signal generated from the interaction between the
sample and the sensor is used to detect the type and concentration of ROS, with
a limit of detection (LOD) as low as 0.006 mM of hydroxyl free radicals, as
compared to LODs of 0.1-10 mM with other methods. A hand-held detection device
has been designed and fabricated using a 3D printer, and this has been
successfully tested in various liquid and tissue samples in
vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.