* 2023837
* GRC Defects in Semiconductors: Defect Formation, Characterization, Control and Utilization
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Kai-Mei Fu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 03/31/2023
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide partial support for students, early career researchers
and under-represented sectors of the scientific community that are engaged in
research related to defects in semiconductors, to attend the 2020 Defects in
Semiconductors Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar. The
Conference and Seminar will take place August 15 to 21, 2020, at Colby-Sawyer
College, New London, New Hampshire. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defects in
semiconductors are playing an increasingly important role in quantum sensing and
quantum information science, and the conference program shows ample evidence of
this, with sessions devoted to. e.g., single photon sources and magnetometry in
diamond devices using NV centers. In addition to the conference itself, graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers can benefit from the two-day Gordon
Research Seminar, designed by and for their peers. Attendance at both the GRS
and GRC can provide young scientists with a unique opportunity to actively
engage in this important area of research for the development of present and
future quantum technologies. The training of a future quantum workforce has been
recently recognized as an important strategic goal for U.S. science
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.