* 2023275
* Design and Development: NSF Engineering Research Centers Unite: Developing and Testing a Suite of Instruments to Enhance Overall Education Program Evaluation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Adam Carberry, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 07/31/2024
* USD 855,971.00

The NSF Engineering Research Centers Unite project aims to develop and test a
comprehensive set of instruments designed to enhance the evaluation of education
and diversity programs offered by NSF-funded Engineering Research Centers (ERC).
ERC education and diversity programming, including academic year activities with
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars plus summer
programs for undergraduate students, high school students, K-12 teachers, and
community college instructors, is a mechanism to disseminate emerging knowledge
from center activities. It is critically important that programs offered by
these large, multi-institutional centers be evaluated for effectiveness to
ensure their impact beyond ERC technical research. The resulting suite of
instruments supplemented by an evaluator toolbox will fill an existing void and
allow centers to collaborate in ways previously not possible. This will enhance
our understanding of ERCs and their overall impact on skill development, climate
of inclusion, and future STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is led by the Arizona State University Tri-ERC Education Consortium
(TEEC), which consists of education leaders, researchers, and evaluators
associated with three currently funded ERCs - Center for Bio-mediated and Bio-
inspired Geotechnics (CBBG), Nanosystems Center for Nano-Enabled Water Treatment
(NEWT), and Center for Quantum Energy and Sustainable Solar Technologies
(QESST). The goals to be undertaken by this team include: 1) identifying the
evaluation needs of currently funded ERCs, 2) creating a suite of evaluation
instruments, 3) creating an evaluator toolbox, and 4) making our resources
broadly available. We will create quantitative (e.g. survey) and qualitative
(e.g., interview, focus group, and lab observation protocols) measures informed
by the needs and perspectives of current ERCs. These instruments will be field-
tested across TEEC ERCs and other participating ERCs who have indicated an
interest in using the suite of instruments. These instruments will be
accompanied by an evaluator toolbox designed to support and guide evaluators in
the use of these instruments. These resources will doubly serve as a means of
creating an ERC community of practice around evaluation. The resulting resources
will be made broadly available electronically through currently used ERC
websites/hubs. Additionally, the quantitative Multi-ERC Instrument (MERCI) will
be converted into an online ERC Evaluation System easily accessed by evaluators.
The proposed system will specifically streamline quantitative evaluation, which
will provide for greater flexibility and creativity in the selection of
qualitative evaluation approaches used by center evaluators. The adoption of
these shared resources by numerous ERCs will open up never before seen
opportunities for cross-ERC comparisons. The findings will significantly impact
how ERCs evaluate their education and diversity programming and presents a
potential suite of instruments for effectively evaluating any large center that
offers similar education and diversity programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.