* 2023585
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Assessing the influence of sub-annual variability in the AMOC on the Gulf Stream and the atmosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* William Dewar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 592,089.00

This study is built on the hypothesis that the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) is a control on weather and climate in the Northern
Hemisphere. The causal link is envisioned to be through the strong air-sea heat
exchange near the Gulf Stream (GS) and influence of that on the atmospheric
extreme events. The role of the GS in modulating the weather and climate of the
Northern Hemisphere has received considerable recent support. Interest in part
lies in the relative persistence of GS variability compared to the atmosphere,
which offers the potential for increased predictability of extreme weather
events. Observations show significant variability in GS meandering on monthly
timescales. A high degree of variability in the AMOC has been observed
experimentally on the same monthly time scales. This provides a potential
connection between the AMOC and mid-latitude weather via the GS. Modelling
studies, however, have yet to agree on the relationship between the AMOC and the
GS. There are many causes for these discrepancies, but an overarching
explanation appears to involve (the lack of) eddy-scale resolution (less than
0.1 degree). Under prior NSF funding, this team of investigators have generated
an ensemble of eddy resolving North Atlantic simulations that appear to be
ideally suited to address these issues. In fact, this is currently the only
eddy-resolving ensemble suite of North Atlantic model simulations in the United
States. These model results will be used to systematically evaluate the
relationship between the AMOC and GS variability with the influence of ocean
eddies explicitly resolved. This research will lead to a better understanding of
the relationship between the AMOC, the GS, and the atmosphere, on sub-annual to
interannual time scales. Specifically, it will provide clarification on the
mechanisms by which they interact and determine whether a robust relationship
exists between the AMOC and the atmosphere on monthly timescales. Comparison
with previous non-eddy resolving studies will aid in evaluating how well the
current generation of models reproduce these mechanisms, whilst an improved
understanding of ocean influence on the atmosphere may provide a source of
untapped predictability. The AMOC has a critical role in modulating the global
climate and is widely projected to change significantly in the 21st century. As
such, a more complete understanding of how AMOC variability influences
influential currents such as the GS, and imprints onto the atmosphere will
improve both near-term forecasts and long-term projections of climate
variability under warming scenarios. Comparison of results with previous studies
will contribute to regional and climate model development through identifying
what is required to properly capture the relevant processes. This project
supports STEM education through training of two graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher in the modelling and analysis of both the ocean and the
atmosphere, as well as general climate dynamics. The PIs have a strong record of
commitment to mentoring undergraduates in research, and have a record of
presenting seminars and meeting with undergraduate students at smaller
universities that are less research-focused, to bring a broader educational
experience to those students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reasoning leading from the
cause (AMOC) to effect (weather/climate control) consists of three components
which, in turn, are the foci of this proposal. (1) Extreme atmospheric events
control mean atmospheric fields through anomalously large, but rare,
contributions to the storm track. (2) These extreme atmospheric events are
governed by heat exchange with the Gulf Stream (GS), and are sensitive to
whether the GS is in a meandering or non-meandering state. (3) The
(non)-meandering state of the GS responds to AMOC variability. The focus of the
study will primarily be on those Gulf Stream attributes that have been shown to
significantly influence the atmosphere locally and globally. Furthermore,
additional modelling work will assess how changes in the AMOC, through its
influence on GS variability, imprint on the atmosphere. This will be achieved by
prescribing GS conditions in high-resolution atmosphere-only model simulations
to systematically assess the dependence of atmospheric variability and surface
heat fluxes on the underlying ocean. Lastly, coupled high-resolution runs will
be conducted to elucidate the contribution of atmospheric feedbacks on the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.