* 2023349
* Planktonic Omnivores and Stable Isotopes: Developing, Validating and Field-testing a Multi-species Functional Response Model
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Pierson, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 955,157.00

Diagrams of food webs are typically drawn as boxes that show linkages between
predators and prey. While these are useful models of how energy is transferred
along a food chain, real food webs are more complex. Predator diets are often
variable making it difficult to establish predator-prey links in marine
communities. This project is investigating prey switching in a key member of
coastal food webs, the shrimp-like mysid, Neomysis americana. Prey switching
affects community structure and an organism’s resilience to environmental
perturbation, but it is not easy to quantify. This project is using a
combination of laboratory experiments and field sampling to develop a food web
model that predicts mysid feeding patterns in the environment. This realistic
and predictive food web model uses traditional gut analysis and analytical
techniques that follow carbon and nitrogen as it is incorporated into the bodies
of the mysids. In addition, mysid food preferences are being determined in the
laboratory across a full range of diet possibilities. The calibrated gut
analysis and chemical marker data in combination with feeding experiments are
incorporated into the model, which then predicts mysid feeding on mixed diets
under different environmental conditions. These predictions are validated
against field data. Broader impacts include benefits to society for a better
understanding of how coastal food webs work. Doctoral students and undergraduate
students are being trained in experimental and field research. Increasing
diversity in STEM fields is occurring through a partnership with two community
colleges (College of Southern Maryland, Chesapeake College) to recruit summer
interns for research experiences. Outreach activities include the development of
educational materials for grade-appropriate hands-on laboratory experiments and
training opportunities for middle and high school teacher groups in the use of
these materials in their classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing and field-testing a generalizable approach to understand and predict
complex predator-prey relationships in marine food webs. The research plan
involves building and validating a multispecies functional response (MSFR) model
for an omnivorous consumer, the mysid Neomysis americana. These models predict
diet for consumers that feed on multiple types of prey under differing prey
concentrations and identify conditions under which prey switching occurs in the
environment. Recent and time-integrated diet tracking with gut contents, bulk
stable isotope (SI) and compound-specific amino acid stable isotope (AA-CSI)
analysis are validated in the lab and used to reconstruct diet of Neomysis in
the field. The proposed research is testing specific hypotheses about Neomysis’
consumption rates and prey preferences and the effectiveness of integrating SI
and AA-CSI into MSFR models. Laboratory experiments are determining prey-
specific functional response curves by Neomysis under varying prey
concentrations and environmental (temperature) conditions using grazing
experiments. Experimental results are incorporated into a temperature-dependent
MSFR model for a 5-compartment simplified food web (Neomysis, adult copepod,
copepod nauplii, phytoplankton, detritus). A complementary element of the
project is the experimental determination of bulk SI (𝛿13C and 𝛿15N) and AA-CSI
(𝛿15N) equilibration rates and trophic enrichment factors for Neomysis and each
prey type. The predator-prey dynamics of Neomysis in the environment are being
modeled using the lab-validated MSFR approach and field data, including prey
concentrations, gut contents, and prey and Neomysis SI and AA-CSI
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.