* 2023456
* The Speed, Signature, and Significance of Barium Transformations in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tristan Horner, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 689,092.00

The biological cycling of carbon in the oceans entrains many other elements,
some directly (like nutrients that are essential for life) and some indirectly,
as they become chemically involved in the processes that are affecting carbon.
One such element is barium (Ba). Particles of the mineral barite (barium
sulfate) have been found to form in association with microbial consumption of
organic material in the ocean’s “twilight zone.” These particles settle to the
ocean floor, and their presence in sediments has been used to infer changes in
the conditions in the ocean back in time. Both the amount of barite in sediments
and the isotope composition of Ba in barite are potentially sensitive to
processes occurring in the twilight zone. However, several long-standing
questions remain about Ba cycling in the oceans, which complicates the
interpretation of barium-based proxy records. Examples of remaining questions
include how much barium enters the oceans at mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal sites,
and what controls the precipitation and dissolution of barite in the water
column. This project seeks to tackle these questions using new approaches, on
three scheduled research expeditions in the Pacific and Southern Oceans. In
doing so, this project will support the education, training, and career
development of a graduate student, postdoctoral researcher, and junior
investigator. Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be
recruited to conduct complementary shore-based experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to answer four questions
central to the utility of barium-based proxies in oceanography: What are the
major inputs of new Ba to the ocean? What are their isotopic compositions? What
controls the amount of pelagic barite precipitated during the remineralization
of organic matter? What influences its isotopic composition? These questions
will be addressed using a field-centric approach combining: in situ and
shipboard tracer-incubation experiments, AUV-led adaptive sampling of Ba cycling
‘hotpots’, and section-based surveying of the surrounding oceanographic
features. This multi-pronged approach will be used to investigate: the flux and
isotopic composition of Ba released from the largest hydrothermal fields in the
ocean, the Southern East Pacific Rise, with a focus on low-temperature venting;
rates and signatures of pelagic barite precipitation associated with different
phytoplankton assemblages in the Southern Ocean; and, the importance of
environmental conditions, such as low ambient oxygen concentrations, in setting
the efficiency of barite precipitation in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. The
significance of each transformation will be assessed, which may lead to ruling
out the importance of certain processes, or identifying new dependencies that
could form the basis of new proxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.