* 2023618
* Counter-gradient Flow of Fatty Acids in Marine Food Webs Through Egg Boons
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Parvathi Nair, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 574,840.00

Marine animals release extremely large numbers of eggs when they spawn. Most of
these eggs are eaten by animals ranging from microscopic plankton to fish. Many
egg consumers are smaller than the animals that released the eggs, representing
a reversal of the usual food web. The consumption of eggs provides animals with
highly nutritious molecules called essential fatty acids which are very
concentrated in eggs. These essential fatty acids are important for the health
of animals and the health of the whole ecosystem. When marine fishes form
spawning aggregations to coordinate the timing and location of spawning, they
release trillions of eggs. This results in an “egg boon” – an immense but
temporary concentration of highly nutritious fatty acids. This project combines
field-based sampling with laboratory experiments to assess how fatty acids in
the egg boons affect food webs. The project is determining whether consumption
of eggs is beneficial to the condition of the egg consumers. New findings from
this project are advancing the understanding of aquatic food webs and
contributing to improved management of marine resources. For example, commercial
harvest of fish can remove tons of fatty acids from an ecosystem by reducing egg
boons and leading to cascading and unforeseen effects on those biological
communities. The project is fostering the participation of women in science by
substantially advancing the professional training of a female postdoctoral
fellow. The project is supporting K-12 STEM education through inquiry-based and
place-based programs for teachers and youth. Findings are being communicated to
the public locally and nationally through participation in public lectures and
contributions to the Science and the SeaTM radio program, podcast, and
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Super-abundances of eggs released in temporally
and spatially discrete patches create pulsed nutritional resources for egg
consumers, called “egg boons,” which are potentially important components of
marine food webs. While various marine animals have been shown to consume eggs,
the role of egg boons in energy transfer through food webs has received little
attention. Three hypotheses are being tested: 1) egg boons provide a pathway
through which essential fatty acids (EFAs) are redistributed counter to the main
direction of trophic flow; 2) stores of EFAs in egg consumers increase during
egg boons and remain elevated after the spawning season; and 3) egg boons are
beneficial to the condition of egg consumers. The proposed research takes
advantage of an annual egg boon produced by a spawning aggregation of the marine
fish, red drum (Sciaenops ocellatus) near Port Aransas, Texas. In a combination
of field sampling and laboratory experiments, fatty acid profiles, lipid
content, and bulk stable isotope ratios are measures used to define trophic
links between the egg boon and a selection of lower-trophic-level taxa. Egg
boons are simulated in laboratory feeding experiments that are designed to
enhance interpretation of data collected from field based sampling by comparing
taxa that consume fish eggs with those that do not. A nucleic acid biomarker
(RNA/DNA ratios) is being used to assess changes in condition that can be
attributed to egg consumption in target taxa. In the environment, the importance
and persistence of counter-gradient flow of fatty acids in the food web is being
gauged through comparisons of samples taken inside and outside the spatial and
temporal extent of the egg boon. The effects of egg consumption on consumers is
being quantified in controlled experiments to identify dietary biomarkers of egg
consumption in consumer tissues that can be applied to field samples. The
proposed research examines how egg consumption redistributes EFAs within food
webs and provides a context for considering potential controls and trophic
bottlenecks that cannot be explained from the traditional element-limitation
models. The integration of fatty acid and stable isotope approaches is expected
to provide greater resolution for tracking organic matter through food webs and
to advance the application of multi-tracer techniques in trophic investigations.
Further, if egg boons are indeed an important nutritional subsidy to select
groups of consumers, then subsequent studies investigating the energetic
contribution of egg boons to secondary production in marine food webs are
warranted. An analysis of how reduction or removal of egg resources through the
harvest of fishes in spawning aggregations changes nutrient flow in food webs
could have implications for ecosystem-based fisheries
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.