* 2023211
* Application of acoustical remote sensing techniques for ecosystem monitoring of a seagrass meadow
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kevin Lee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 851,568.00

This research focuses on the design and testing of a system capable of long-term
field deployment that uses sound to monitor seagrass biomass and productivity
with significantly improved temporal resolution compared to traditional
techniques. Long-term continuous measurements of relevant parameters of
ecosystem production are of primary importance for ecosystem health assessment
and sustainable management. Dissolved oxygen measurements made with optical
sensors are the most widely used method for estimating seagrass photosynthesis
in relation to underwater irradiance. Oxygen evolution is also critical in
maintaining aerobic conditions for below ground seagrass roots and rhizomes that
constitute 60-80% of total plant biomass. However, under oxygen saturation
conditions, which occurs frequently in summer under high light conditions, free
gas bubbles are continuously released by the plants. Optical sensors are unable
to detect bubbles under such supersaturated conditions, leading to
underestimates in seagrass photosynthetic carbon production. Since oxygen
saturation occurs more readily at higher temperatures and light conditions that
are most prevalent from the late spring to early fall months, accurate
determinations of productivity are only possible under low light conditions or
in the early morning hours. Since sound propagation in water is very sensitive
to the presence of bubbles, acoustic methods provide an alternative measure of
true photosynthetic oxygen production in seagrass meadows with high temporal
resolution. The researchers will engage in outreach activities including the
Freshman Research Initiative (FRI) at University of Texas at Austin (UT), which
gives first-year students the opportunity to initiate and engage in real-world
research experience with faculty and graduate students. The project will also
engage grades K-16 through the development of a Data Nugget based on the long-
term data set collected through the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
stand-alone field-deployed system will use broadband acoustic measurements to
remotely sense both seagrass biomass and gas ebullition. The system will consist
of three main components: 1) an acoustic source projector and a set of receiving
hydrophones, 2) an instrumentation pressure vessel (IPV) that houses the
electronics controlling the acoustic data acquisition and data storage, and 3) a
suite of environmental sensor-loggers. The proposed measurement system will be
made compact and lightweight enough that it can be hand-deployed in the seagrass
meadow from a small watercraft that is capable of accessing the shallow bays of
the Texas Gulf of Mexico coast. The target deployment water depth is 2-3 m,
which reflects the maximum depths of seagrass distribution in Texas coastal
waters. Geoacoustic inference techniques will be applied to quantify the void
fraction of gas in the seawater as well as the gas volume present within the
seagrass tissue. Bayesian techniques will be used to assess parameter
uncertainties and reveal parameter correlations. Low-frequency sound (&lt;3 kHz)
is most sensitive to gas entrained within the seagrass tissue, and an effective
medium model which accounts for the seagrass tissue elasticity and structure of
seagrass leaves is being developed to quantify the gas volume present within the
seagrass leaves, roots, and rhizomes. Mid-frequency sound (3.5 to 35 kHz) is
most sensitive to free bubbles in the water resulting from seagrass
photosynthesis. The void fraction of gas in the water can be related to oxygen
production by accounting for vertical transport of oxygen bubbles to the sea
surface. The data from this system will be used to build new connections between
seagrass condition indicators and environmental stressors. This research will
lead to predictions of seagrass responses to climate change by accounting for
both trend- and event-driven perturbations that affect physical forcing factors
such as light transmission, water circulation, temperature, and
salinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.