* 2023676
* Understanding the Dynamics of Wave- and Current-supported Turbidity Currents via High-performance High-fidelity Numerical Simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Celalettin Ozdemir, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 271,986.00

The continental margin is a major reactor of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and other
geochemically important material. In the coastal ocean some of this material is
associated with particulate matter the movement of which depends on the
resuspension and transport of sedimentary particles by waves and currents.
Understanding and quantifying the physical processes that route sediments across
the shelf are therefore central to accurately estimating global budgets of such
geochemically important material. In the continental shelf, surface waves and
coastal currents mobilize benthic sediments and cause resuspension. This creates
a mixture of turbid (sediment / water) water with an effective density higher
than that of pure seawater due to the weight of the sediment. The denser turbid
waters tend to flow downslope, creating the so-called wave- and current-
supported turbidity currents (WCSTCs), which are among the processes that route
sediments from the inner to the outer shelf. WCSTC development is a relatively
small-scale process that cannot be resolved by regional-scale numerical models
and their inclusion requires the development of accurate parameterizations.
Recent field observations, laboratory experiments, and numerical simulations
have provided evidence that some of the assumptions in conventional
conceptualization of WCSTCs perhaps do not hold, which may have significant
impacts on the amount of cross-shelf particulate matter transport. In light of
these observations, this effort will investigate the role of alongshore currents
and sediment size distribution on WCSTCs and will develop improved
parameterizations suitable for regional-scale numerical models. The latter will
help in more accurately estimating geochemical budgets at both regional and
global scales. In addition, this effort will provide insights on the transition
of slow-moving WCSTCs to auto-suspending or self-accelerating turbidity currents
which impose hazard risk to submarine infrastructure (cables, pipelines). One
graduate student will be supported by this project and will receive well-
balanced training in coastal processes, environmental fluid mechanics, and high-
performance computing. One undergraduate student will be recruited and will
receive basic training in using high-performance computing platforms, data
visualization, and physical oceanography. The developed numerical models will be
publicly available for use by the scientific and engineering
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis of this project is that
along-shelf currents play a major role in massive cross-shelf transport when
combined with waves. The study will be built on Large-Eddy Simulations (LES)
using high-performance computers capable in simulating fine-scale processes and
producing high-fidelity results. The simulations will focus on assessing the
role of sediment settling velocity on sediment concentration inside the wave
boundary layer. Also, the non-linear interaction between waves, currents and
WCSTCs downslope velocity will be assessed. The simulation data will be used to
develop WCSTCsâ€™ parameterizations in regional-scale models. The intellectual
merits include the quantification of cross-shelf particulate matter transport
that is based on physically consistent conceptualization, identifying the key
parameters that affect WCSTC dynamics, and data synthesis to provide better
parameterization of WCSTCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.