* 2023087
* CSBR: Rescuing and Sharing a Unique and Irreplaceable Fossil Collection at the Duke Lemur Center
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gregory Dye, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 442,704.00

The Duke Lemur Center is responsible for two unique and irreplaceable
collections: the largest living population of lemurs outside of their native
Madagascar and a natural history collection that includes one of the most
diverse primate fossil collections in the United States. The fossil collection –
with specimens from the United States, Egypt, Madagascar, and Colombia – helps
researchers use the tree of life to connect lemur research to other primates,
including humans. Unfortunately, some of the most important fossils at the DLC,
including some of the oldest lemur fossils and some of the oldest monkey
fossils, are actively breaking down because unstable salt minerals were embedded
in the specimens during fossilization. This project is a rescue mission to
stabilize and preserve these fossils in physical and digital form. Highly
trained fossil technicians will remove salt minerals from the most endangered
specimens and store the revitalized fossils in new specimen cabinets that better
control the temperature and humidity around the specimens. The team will also
create 3D scans of the specimens using x-rays. The scans create a back-up record
of the fossils in case they continue to deteriorate. The scans will be uploaded
to MorphoSource, an online repository that allows educators, students, and
researchers to examine fossils in 3D from any device with internet access. With
a better-stabilized collection, the DLC fossil collection can open to the public
for in-person and virtual tours, and online exhibits and curriculum guides will
be created by the DLC education team using scans and 3D prints.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The most unstable fossils in the collection come from Locality 41 in
the Fayum Depression in Egypt. The site is one of the most fossil-dense
terrestrial Paleogene localities in Africa. Along with primates like
Catopithecus and Plesiopithecus, the site preserves giant hyraxes, rodents,
bats, snakes, birds, and carnivores. The tennis-court sized fossil deposit in
the Western Desert of Egypt was actively quarried in the 1980s through 2010s.
The most fossil-rich sections were targeted by the excavation teams. This makes
the collection at the DLC irreplaceable through additional fieldwork. This
project partially supports a Fossil Preparator who will focus on the Egyptian
collection as well as other unstable materials in the collection. It also
partially supports a Digital Tomographer who will use the Duke microCT scanner
to generate scans of the most at-risk specimens, and the DLC Data Manager who
will work with the Tomographer to backup and upload scan data to MorphoSource.
The data manager will lead the effort to add higher resolution specimen data to
the DLC Specify database, which will integrate with iDigBio (idigbio.org) and
the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (gbif.org). The project also
supports microCT scanner access and new specimen storage cabinets. The DLC
education team will use these newly stable specimens to create curriculum-
targeted tours and guides for North Carolina K-12 students and visitors to the
DLC. Ultimately, exceedingly fragile fossil specimens will be available in-
person and online to researchers, students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.