* 2023425
* LTER Palmer, Antarctica (PAL):   Land-Shelf-Ocean Connectivity, Ecosystem Resilience and Transformation in a Sea-Ice Influenced Pelagic Ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 01/28/2020,03/31/2022
* Hugh Ducklow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,726,837.00

The Palmer Antarctica LTER (Long Term Ecological Research) site has been in
operation since 1990. The goal of all the LTER sites is to conduct policy-
relevant research on ecological questions that require tens of years of data,
and cover large geographical areas. For the Palmer Antarctica LTER, the
questions are centered around how the marine ecosystem west of the Antarctica
peninsula is responding to a climate that is changing as rapidly as any place on
the Earth. For example, satellite observations over the past 35 years indicate
the average duration of sea ice cover is now ~90 days (3 months!) shorter than
it was. The extended period of open water has implications for many aspects of
ecosystem research, with the concurrent decrease of Ad√®lie penguins within this
region regularly cited as an exemplar of climate change impacts in Antarctica.
Cutting edge technologies such as autonomous underwater (and possibly airborne)
vehicles, seafloor moorings, and numerical modeling, coupled with annual
oceanographic cruises, and weekly environmental sampling, enables the Palmer
Antarctica LTER to expand and bridge the time and space scales needed to assess
climatic impacts. This award includes for the first time study of the roles of
whales as major predators in the seasonal sea ice zone ecosystem. The team will
also focus on submarine canyons, special regions of enhanced biological
activity, along the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current award's overarching research question is: How do seasonality,
interannual variability, and long term trends in sea ice extent and duration
influence the structure and dynamics of marine ecosystems and biogeochemical
cycling? Specific foci within the broad question include: 1. Long-term change
and ecosystem transitions. What is the sensitivity or resilience of the
ecosystem to external perturbations as a function of the ecosystem state? 2.
Lateral connectivity and vertical stratification. What are the effects of
lateral transports of freshwater, heat and nutrients on local ocean
stratification and productivity and how do they drive changes in the ecosystem?
3. Top-down controls and shifting baselines. How is the ecosystem responding to
the cessation of whaling and subsequent long-term recovery of whale stocks? 4.
Foodweb structure and biogeochemical processes. How do temporal and spatial
variations in foodweb structure influence carbon and nutrient cycling, export,
and storage? The broader impacts of the award leverage local educational
partnerships including the Sandwich, MA STEM Academy, the New England Aquarium,
and the NSF funded Polar Learning and Responding (PoLAR) Climate Change
Education Partnership at Columbia's Earth Institute to build new synergies
between Arctic and Antarctic, marine and terrestrial scientists and students,
governments and NGOs. The Palmer Antarctic LTER will also conduct appropriate
cross LTER site comparisons, and serve as a leader in information management to
enable knowledge-building within and beyond the Antarctic, oceanographic, and
LTER communities.