* 2023687
* Resolving sources of marine DOM via novel sulfur isotope analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Alex Sessions, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 302,764.00

Resolving sources of marine organic matter using sulfur isotopes
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic molecules that contain sulfur in the ocean are
poorly understood. Organic sulfur is abundant, and likely helps stabilize
dissolved organic matter, binds important trace metals, and provides trace
nutrients to phytoplankton. However, it is not known whether organic sulfur
molecules derive from biological processes, or from non-biological
“sulfurization” reactions involving hydrogen sulfide (H2S). Existing knowledge
predicts that the two pathways should generate very different -- and easily
measurable -- distributions of sulfur isotopes (i.e., elemental sulfur with
varied atomic mass). This study will use a new, highly sensitive method to
measure the sulfur isotope values of dissolved organic molecules to distinguish
between the two formation pathways. If successful, this method will be used to
calculate how much dissolved organic sulfur results from each pathway. This
project will provide an opportunity for a local high school student to engage in
laboratory research during a one year internship, in partnership with a local
all-girls high school. Additionally, the graduate student supported by this
project will host a “Day in the Life” information session on the Women Doing
Science Instagram social media platform. She will answer questions about
oceanography and marine science careers from followers of this Instagram account
while on a research cruise collecting samples for the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several lines of evidence have recently converged to focus
interest on marine dissolved organic sulfur (DOS), including the recognition
that many heterotrophic bacteria require exogenous sources of ‘fixed’ organic
sulfur; that organosulfur molecules -- particularly thiols -- play a major role
in binding and sequestering trace metals; and that at 6700 Tg S, DOS is the
second largest (after dissolved sulfate) sulfur pool in the oceans. Perhaps most
importantly, DOS is thousands of years old, implying that it is not rapidly
recycled and challenging the expectation that DOS derives mainly from labile
biomolecules such as cysteine, methionine and dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP).
A plausible alternative is that abiotic sulfurization reactions with H2S from
anoxic porewaters and the water column is a source of recalcitrant marine DOS.
Distinguishing between these formation pathways is critical for understanding
DOS dynamics, but thus far has been difficult. Based on existing data, it is
thought that DOS formed from marine phytoplankton should have a sulfur isotope
value (δ34S) near +20‰ (VCDT). Alternatively, DOS formed from abiotic
sulfurization should be more variable, with average values of-20‰. Because these
isotope values are distinct, they should be able to distinguish between the two
pathways. The primary obstacle to analysis has been the low (µM) concentration
of DOS, and difficulties associated with concentrating it in seawater. This
study will use new analytical techniques developed at Caltech to measure the
δ34S values of DOS at several locations, and compound-specific δ34S values for
cysteine and methionine from the Bermuda (BATS) and Hawaii (HOT) time series
locations. This work will contribute new information about the marine sulfur
cycle, and improve understanding of the role that DOS plays in stabilizing
carbon in the deep oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.