* 2023004
* An interdisciplinary Graduate Certificate in Bioimaging &amp; Biophotonics to strengthen research and doctoral training
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Harbinder Dhillon, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 999,522.00

HBCU-RISE: An interdisciplinary Graduate Certificate in Bioimaging and
Biophotonics to Strengthen Research and Doctoral
Training&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) program supports
the development of research capability at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering disciplines.
Supported projects have a unifying research focus in a research area supported
by the National Science Foundation, a direct connection to the long-term plans
of the host department, institutional strategic plan and mission, and plans for
expanding institutional research capacity, as well as increasing the production
of doctoral students, especially those underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Delaware State University will establish an
interdisciplinary Graduate Certificate Program in Bioimaging and Biophotonics to
enhance the education and training of doctoral students at Delaware State
University. The unifying research focus for the project is the integration of
bioimaging and biophotonics. Five interdisciplinary research projects are
offered for HBCU RISE PhD students. Faculty research capacity is enhanced by
funding doctoral students and supporting studentsâ€™ interdisciplinary training in
neuroscience and optics. The vision of this project is to increase the number of
underrepresented scientists in the interdisciplinary field of bioimaging and
biophotonics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This HBCU-RISE project focuses on the
technological development of optical technology and techniques. This
interdisciplinary project combines modern optical imagining theory and
development with their potential applications in molecular and cellular systems.
The integration of imaging and science may potentially transform a broader
understanding of these systems and have biomedical implications. This project
will: (1) advance interdisciplinary research and promote faculty productivity;
(2) focus on graduate education providing four fellows per year mentored by an
interdisciplinary team from life sciences/physics/optics or computational
sciences; (3) establish a doctoral-level certificate program; (4) and revise one
course and create two new courses focusing on the application of tools and
analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages existing
resources to provide new pathways for Delaware State University students to
participate in research. The project broadens the scope of the existing doctoral
program, making it accessible to students from a wider range of disciplines and
by transforming the program into a more comprehensive multidisciplinary research
program that will prepare students for an increasingly competitive research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.