* 2023113
* GP-IN:Teaching for Resilience in a Museum Youth Program
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Andrea Motto, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 308,121.00

________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
study and break down the barriers that prevent young people of color from taking
on leadership roles in geological and environmental sciences. Students from
historically marginalized communities are ready to take on these roles and have
an important part to play in finding solutions to the urgent environmental
challenges that our society faces, and in bringing new and diverse perspectives
to science. Unfortunately, the university departments that will provide this
training are often poorly-prepared to welcome them. Students of color face
systematic challenges that are deeply embedded in the structure of their
universities. The project will apply critical frameworks in educational research
to better understand barriers faced by young men and women of color who pursue
earth and environmental science majors. The PIs will develop programs for high
school and undergraduate students that offer exposure to careers, opportunities
for leadership, and training on strategies that will help them overcome the
ever-present barriers that they will encounter as students in predominantly
white geoscience departments. The project builds on the work of an existing, and
very successful museum youth program at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural
History (YPM). It will directly impact 40-50 high school students in New Haven,
Connecticut, and numerous graduate student and faculty mentors. As students
progress into their undergraduate environmental science programs, they will be
better positioned to recognize and challenge the existing power dynamics within
their university communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This initiative will build
upon an existing museum youth program, EVOLUTIONS, which serves 100 high school
students each year at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History (YPM). PIs Dr.
Andrea Motto and Dr. Chris Norris will work with two cohorts of 20 EVOLUTIONS
alumni along with staff from the Yale Peabody Museum, Dinosaur State Park, and
the New Haven Climate Movement to create a network of support and resources for
students during the formative years in which they select a college major. Using
a critical pedagogy and Community Cultural Wealth framework, the PIs will
construct a geoscience learning ecosystem for high school that will call out
oppressive practices and encourage resilience and persistence in environmental
science fields. Activities will include workshops, field trips, and intensive
internships in geosciences with mentorship from BIPOC graduate students, and the
research will use qualitative methods to investigate barriers to participation
and tools for resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.