* 2023166
* TRIPODS: Institute for Foundations of Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Maryam Fazel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,010,315.00

Data science is making an enormous impact on science and society, but its
success is uncovering pressing new challenges that stand in the way of further
progress. Outcomes and decisions arising from many machine learning processes
are not robust to errors and corruption in the data; data science algorithms are
yielding biased and unfair outcomes, as concerns about data privacy continue to
mount; and machine learning systems suited to dynamic, interactive environments
are less well developed than corresponding tools for static problems. Only by an
appeal to the foundations of data science can we understand and address
challenges such as these. Building on the work of three TRIPODS Phase I
institutes, the new Institute for Foundations of Data Science (IFDS) brings
together researchers from the Universities of Washington, Wisconsin-Madison,
California-Santa Cruz, and Chicago, organized around the goal of tackling these
critical issues. Members of IFDS have complementary strengths in the TRIPODS
disciplines of mathematics, statistics, and theoretical computer science, and a
proven record of collaborating to push theoretical boundaries by synthesizing
knowledge and experience from diverse areas. Students and postdoctoral members
of IFDS will be trained to be fluent in the languages of several disciplines,
and able to bridge these communities and perform transdisciplinary research in
the foundations of data science. In concert with its research agenda, IFDS will
engage the data science community through workshops, summer schools, and
hackathons. Its diverse leadership, committed to equity and inclusion, proposes
extensive plans for outreach to traditionally underrepresented groups.
Governance, management, and evaluation of the institute will build on the
successful and efficient models developed during Phase
I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address critical issues at the cutting edge of data
science research, IFDS will organize its research around four core themes. The
complexity theme will synthesize various notions of complexity from multiple
disciplines to make breakthroughs in the analysis of optimization and sampling
methods, develop tools for assessing the complexity of data models, and seek new
methods with better complexity properties, to make complexity a more powerful
tool for understanding and inventing algorithms in data science. The robustness
theme considers data that contains errors or outliers, possibly due to an
adversary, and will design methods for data analysis and prediction that are
robust in the face of these errors. The theme on closed-loop data science
tackles the issues of acquiring data in ways that reveal the information content
of the data efficiently, using strategic and sequential policies that leverage
information gathered already from past data. The theme on ethics and algorithms
addresses issues of fairness and bias in machine learning, data privacy, and
causality and interpretability. The four themes intersect in many ways, and most
IFDS researchers will work in two or more of them. By making concerted progress
on these fundamental fronts, IFDS will lower several of the barriers to better
understanding of data science methodology and to its improved effectiveness and
wider relevance to application areas. Additionally, IFDS will organize and host
activities that engage the data science community at all levels of seniority.
Annual workshops will focus on the critical issues identified above and others
that are sure to arise over the next five years. Comprehensive plans for
outreach and education will draw on previous experience of the Phase I
institutes and leverage institutional resources at the four sites.
Collaborations with domain science researchers in academia, national
laboratories, and industry, so important in illuminating issues in the
fundamentals of data science, will continue through the many channels available
to IFDS members, including those established in the TRIPODS+X program.
Relationships with other institutes at each IFDS site will further extend the
impact of IFDS on domain sciences and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.