* 2023289
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying regional variability in abyssal mixing from Ship-based Chi-pod measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sarah Purkey, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 307,755.00

Despite its large climatic importance, the dynamics controlling the strength of
the meridional overturning circulation remain poorly understood due to limited
observations. In particular, the heterogeneity of deep mixing and the cause of
spatial variability is still poorly understood due to a lack of direct
observations. This project will conduct a global analysis of full ocean-depth
microstructure measurements to explore the magnitude, patterns, and physical
processes underlying turbulent mixing rates across different physical and
dynamical regimes. The work will capitalize on over 1000 new microstructure
full-depth profiles collected on nine GO-SHIP repeat hydrography cruises,
including zonal and meridional sections across the Indian, Pacific and Atlantic
oceans. The work will build on existing robust processing techniques for this
novel type of microstructure data, making all results available to the
oceanographic research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the
new GO-SHIP chi-pod data set, which offers the largest comprehensive dataset of
deep turbulence measurements to date, to advance understanding of deep ocean
mixing. The project will evaluate the application of fine scale
parameterizations in the deep ocean compared to microstructure; explore the
magnitude, patterns, and physical processes underlying observed turbulent mixing
rates across different physical and dynamical regimes; and calculate mean basin
and global rates of diffusivity from measurements of mixing from the chi-pods
and finescale parameterizations. The analysis will lead to a better
understanding of the limits and applicability of widely used finescale
parameterizations which are based on assumptions of turbulence driven by
internal wave-wave interactions. The results will improve understanding of the
processes underlying observed patterns of mixing. Finally, the project will
investigate the role of processes that set deep turbulent mixing rates for which
the finescale technique does not apply, including internal-wave mean flow
interaction and double diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.