* 2023474
* Collaborative Research: Patterns, causes, and consequences of synchrony in giant kelp populations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Daniel Reuman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 358,592.00

Populations of organisms located in different, often far-apart places can change
over time in similar ways. This natural phenomenon, known as synchrony, is
important to many issues affecting societal well-being, such as those in
medicine, public health, conservation, and natural resource management. For
instance, synchrony is critical to the persistence, stability, and resilience of
plant and animal populations, and can have cascading effects on biodiversity,
ecosystem function, and associated benefits to society. However, many aspects of
synchrony are poorly resolved. For example, understanding the influence of
multiple potential drivers of synchrony—such as climatic events and
predators—has been a longstanding challenge in ecology. Moreover, the causes of
synchrony may change over space, time, and timescale (e.g., annual vs. decadal
synchrony), but this potential is rarely explored, especially in marine
ecosystems. The consequences of synchrony for the dynamics of diverse ecological
communities, and the potential for synchrony to have cascading effects across
ecosystem boundaries (e.g., from sea to land), are also understudied. Addressing
these gaps is especially pressing because growing evidence indicates that
climate change may alter patterns of synchrony, potentially leading to
diminished spatial resilience of ecosystems. This project studies coastal kelp
forests and sandy beach ecosystems to address several current gaps in the
understanding of synchrony. The project generates knowledge to improve the
understanding of these economically-valuable environments and the many organisms
that they sustain. Broader impacts extend through the mentorship of researchers
across career stages and student training in coastal ecology and data science.
To improve educational opportunities for students from groups underrepresented
in science, the project creates a Coastal-Heartland Marine Biology Exchange, in
which undergraduates from the Midwest travel to California to carry out coastal
field research, and undergraduates from Los Angeles interested in marine biology
travel to Kansas to learn biostatistics. To benefit the management of kelp
forests in California that have suffered dramatic declines in recent years,
workshops will be hosted with coastal managers, conservation practitioners, and
other stakeholders to identify restoration sites to enhance regional recovery,
stability, and resilience. Methods, software, and data that are useable across
scientific disciplines are published online following reproducible and
transparent standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
investigate the patterns and causes of synchrony in giant kelp (Macrocystis
pyrifera) forests and the consequences for coastal ecosystem structure and
function. By integrating and leveraging numerous long-term, large-scale datasets
and analyzing them with new statistical techniques, the investigators assess how
oceanographic conditions, propagule dispersal, and sea urchin herbivory interact
to structure the synchrony and stability of giant kelp populations over the past
36 years across 10 degrees of latitude in the northeast Pacific Ocean. New
wavelet modeling tools and other statistical techniques are used to quantify the
drivers of synchrony and how they operate across geography, time, and
timescales. Using a 20-year spatial timeseries of reef biodiversity, it will be
determined how giant kelp and other factors induce synchrony in a speciose
community of understory algae through ‘cascades of synchrony’. Moreover, the
team tests the degree to which giant kelp synchrony propagates across ecosystem
boundaries to sandy beaches through the transport and deposition of
allochthonous organic matter (kelp wrack), and how such spatial subsidies
produce bottom-up cascades of synchrony to beach invertebrates and
shorebirds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.