* 2023536
* Nutritional ecology of climate change: Impacts on Northwest Atlantic fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Katherine Mills, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 559,348.00

Warming oceans are changing the distributions of fish populations worldwide.
However, observed shifts in distribution differ from one species to the next,
which lead to changes in the marine community and the biological interactions.
Altered predator-prey relationships could force a switch in diet, which might
influence growth and affect a fish’s ability to persist in the environment. This
project aims to predict how fish behaviors contribute to responses of species,
populations, and ecosystems to continued environmental change. The study is
focused on the distribution and diets of fishes in the Northwest Atlantic Ocean,
one of the most rapidly warming marine systems on the planet. An existing long-
term data set (1973 – present) forms the basis for a retrospective analysis of
how fish populations and their diets have changed over the past five decades.
The model developed from these data is testing how observed changes in
distribution and diet are related to species-specific behaviors and movements.
This information is incorporated into predictions of the nature and quality of
fish diets in the year 2055 using different climate projections. The broader
impacts are focused on broadening participation in STEM careers, which includes
training of students and a post-doc. To advance the recruitment and education of
future scientists, project results are being integrated into the Gulf of Maine
Research Institute’s LabVenture program, which serves 10,000 elementary students
in Maine annually. In parallel, the project is partnering with the Seacoast
Science Center in New Hampshire to develop and test educational modules.
Research findings are being communicated to fisheries managers locally and
nationally and are contributing to science-based resource management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased water temperatures impact the energetics of
individual organisms directly by increasing metabolism and indirectly by
altering overlap with prey as a result of taxon-specific shifts in population
distributions. Species-specific shifts in spatial distributions and diets could
mediate or exacerbate the metabolic consequences of warming waters. Furthermore,
food web structure, and any temporal shifts in its composition, could affect
ecosystem stability. Behavioral flexibility in diet and space use could confer
resilience of individual species to climate change, but empirical evidence is
lacking. This project combines spatial statistics, multivariate analyses, and
food web models to understand how warming waters impact individuals, species
interactions, and community stability, as well as identify taxon-specific
behaviors that could confer resilience. This project is conducting retrospective
analyses to quantify both decadal-scale shifts in fish distributions and diet,
and species-level flexibility in diet and movements. From these analyses,
spatially explicit predator-prey interactions are being projected into the
future (2055) using three climate change scenarios to predict novel interactions
and changes in diet for important predatory fishes. Linkages between behavior
and resilience to warming waters are being tested by comparing the energetic
consequences of diet shifts between behaviorally flexible and inflexible
species. Quantifying interaction strengths among food web components is
providing insight into how flexibility of individual taxa affects broader food
web structure and how community stability is maintained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Biological
Oceanography Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.