* 2023174
* GEOPAths-UP: Recruiting and  Retaining Non-geoscience Minority STEM Majors for Geoscience Service Learning and for the Geoscience Workforce.
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Janet Liou-Mark, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 294,354.00

There is a preponderance of well-established recent studies that sound the alarm
concerning the nation’s STEM workforce in general and its geoscience workforce
in particular. These studies highlight: 1) the importance of STEM to the
nation’s well-being, security, and global competitiveness; 2) the need for
equity, access, increased enrollment, and diversity in STEM disciplines; and 3)
the current and projected increase in STEM workforce shortage. The sustained
capacity of the current and future STEM workforce to meet the nation’s
scientific and technological needs is threatened by a sharp decline in the
number of available STEM professionals. At current rates, the geoscience
workforce is rapidly depleting, and its future shortfall is approaching a state
of crisis. There are simply not enough new geoscience personnel entering the
geoscience workforce to replace retiring geoscience employees – hence there is a
gap that is expected to widen over time. This project seeks to help in
ameliorating the nation’s geoscience plight by creating a year-round geoscience
workforce preparation, geoscience service learning, and geoscience career
mentoring program for non-geoscience minority STEM students beginning at the
critical juncture of their senior year. The overall goal of the program is to
construct an innovative, viable, and sustainable pathway to the dwindling
geoscience workforce by tapping into a non-traditional and diverse pool of
students. The program has added values in that it not only replenishes the
geoscience workforce, but it also supports geoscience education, promotes
diversity and inclusion, and benefits society as a whole by producing geoscience
literate citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to achieve the
following two primary goals: 1) to broaden the geoscience workforce pathway for
non-geoscience minority STEM majors; and 2) to create a multi-sector geoscience
workforce development infrastructure. The objectives of the first goal are
delineated in the following EPA–E theme of the geoscience transitional workforce
program: EXPOSURE: Expose undergraduate seniors to the geosciences, PREPARATION:
Provide undergraduate seniors with critical geoscience workforce skills and
professional networks, APPRENTICESHIP: Engage undergraduate seniors in
meaningful real-world, service and experiential learning via geoscience
applications, and EXPERIENCE: Culminate into/with a geoscience internship-
workforce experience. The objectives of the second goal are associated with the
Apprenticeship component above: a) Create a student-faculty-industry paradigm of
mentoring for the geoscience workforce; b) Create a professional workforce
development structure among participating organizations, and c) Design peer-to-
peer mentoring support structures. Twelve students will be recruited each year
to participate in the structured geoscience workforce model program mentioned
above – Exposure, Preparation, Apprenticeship, and Experience. The students will
not only be supported with cohort-building activities, but they will also
participate in two geoscience internship programs that will equip them with
geoscience knowledge and workforce skills, service learning experiences, summer
internships at a federal, local, or private geoscience facility, mentoring by
geoscience practitioners, and networking opportunities with geoscience companies
and geoscience professional societies. The expectation through this initiative
will be that many underrepresented minority (URM) students who would otherwise
not pursue a geoscience career may now choose to follow a geoscience corridor
that could not only lead to lucrative geoscience careers, but could also help to
improve the nation’s grave geoscience workforce
dilemma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.