* 2023674
* Collaborative Research: How fast do tidewater glaciers melt? Quantifying the processes that control boundary layer transport across the ice-ocean interface
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Eric Skyllingstad, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,963,346.00

Sea-level rise will affect millions of people in coastal communities within the
next several decades. Accurate predictions of how quickly it will rise is
challenging because it depends on many different processes and how these
processes interact with and feedback on each other. One process that may play a
surprisingly large role is the effect of small swirls and eddies (only a few
feet across) of warm water that control the rate of ice melt at the near-
vertical cliff faces of the world’s marine-terminating (tidewater) glaciers. At
these glaciers, ice flows directly into the ocean and melts underwater or calves
icebergs. Melting of the ice produces freshwater that flows out near the ocean
surface and drives a return flow that draws in deep warmer ocean water toward
the glacier. According to current theory, increasing the rate of ice melt
increases the strength at which warmer ocean water is pulled in towards the ice
face, which further enhances the melting. The details of this process -
particularly the small-scale dynamics near the ice face - have never been
measured because the calving ice cliffs are too dangerous to make measurements.
Here we propose to use a highly specialized underwater robot (a remotely
operated vehicle, or “ROV”) with state-of-the-art optical and acoustic
instruments to observe the melt rate and the processes that control it. One of
the novel aspects is the use of “melt stakes” - 6 ft long rods that will be
driven into the glacier face by the ROV and monitored continuously to determine
the melt processes. These stakes then provide a frame of reference for our ROV
to make a suite of detailed measurements of the shape of the glacier face, the
dynamics of the currents adjacent to it, and how the ice-water interface
evolves. At the same time, we will observe the local ocean environment in the
fjord - the currents, salinity and temperature - which are the main ingredients
we need to predict ice melt in larger-scale and climate models. Our analyses
will combine field data with a high-resolution fluid-flow model that recreates
the conditions along the ice with realistic water properties. The combination of
model and data will be used to refine our melt predictions and verify these
directly using our observed measurements. At the end of the project, we will be
able to extend our results to estimate how much melt is occurring for tidewater
glaciers around the globe, and how this may change in time. Beyond this
importance to society and the scientific community, this grant provides broader
impacts across several levels: (1) mentorship and support for two early career
women (2) support for three graduate students in interdisciplinary ice-ocean
studies, (3) experiential opportunities, funding, and mentorship for 45 senior-
year undergraduate students, whose capstone projects will directly contribute to
this project while being supervised by our gender and culturally diverse team of
engineers and technical staff, (4) classroom experiments showing buoyancy and
convection to engage K-12 students and the general public, and (5) two teams of
high-school women will additionally be involved and make observations through
Girls in Icy Fjords expeditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melting at the ice-ocean
interface of marine-terminating glaciers influences the rate of mass loss from
the world's ice sheets. In addition to contributing to sea-level rise, details
of the melt process dictate the depth at which fresh meltwater enters the ocean
(which in turn affects ocean circulation on a variety of scales) and alters
calving rates. Existing theory suggests that the rate of submarine melting along
these ice faces is set by the strength of subglacial discharge. However, recent
observations find unexpectedly high melt rates over broad sections of glacier
termini, even outside discharge plume areas. The observed order of magnitude
discrepancies between observed and predicted melt rates suggests the presence of
energetic dynamics elsewhere along the ice face that drive near-ice turbulent
flows. We hypothesize that this discrepancy arises from differences in the rate-
controlling physics within the boundary layers. Current turbulent transfer
coefficients were derived from stable boundary layers. Yet on vertical glacier
ice faces, boundary layers have strong buoyant forcing and marginal stability
that likely produce dynamics not captured by laboratory or idealized models.
Because buoyant meltwater fluxes provide kinetic energy for near-boundary outer
flows -- and because enhancement of those flows leads to enhanced melting --
there is potential for strong positive feedbacks in the dynamics. As a result,
small errors in the melt parameters or the parameterization functional form can
have significant consequences to the total melt calculation. No studies have yet
to make observations immediately next to near-vertical ice faces, or measure
melt dynamics with the resolution necessary to investigate these dynamical
feedbacks. This grant supports the development of a first-of-its-kind network of
coordinated underwater acoustic, optical and in-situ unmanned sensors to be
deployed at LeConte Glacier, Alaska. Using methods that meld glaciology,
oceanography, and robotics, these systems will collect the first geophysical
observations of the turbulent boundary layer at a near-vertical glacier face.
Specifically, we will directly measure velocity, salinity and temperature
through a buoyancy-forced near-vertical boundary layer and relate these to
observations of the subsurface ice morphology (e.g., slope, roughness) across
several spatial scales. By combining these data with high-resolution realistic
simulations, we will characterize the dominant contributions to boundary layer
turbulence and explicitly relate these to local melt rates. Our ultimate goal is
to determine what parameters need to be measured (e.g., fjord u,T,S) over what
time and space scales, as well as what assumptions can be made in order to
connect dynamics from the small-scale ice interface to the large-scale ocean and
glacier forcing. This grant builds an observational capacity that does not exist
at present. Measurements will span a sufficient range of the parameter space (in
ocean temperature, velocity variance and ice morphology) for us and others to
test existing and advance new melt models that underlie many ice-ocean community
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Arctic Natural
Sciences Program and the Physical Oceanography
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.