* 2023077
* Mechanobiology of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Tobin Sosnick, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

This research will probe how our body’s mechano-sensors perceive pressure and
send signals that enable us to feel pain, hear, and sense when our muscles are
moving, our lungs are filling, and even when our stomachs are full. A failure in
sensing can lead to deafness as well as pulmonary and respiratory diseases. Our
body’s perception of force at the atomic level is a complicated process. Our
pressure transducing mechano-sensors are proteins that are embedded in the outer
layer, or membrane, of a cell. How the sensors and other membrane-imbedded
proteins respond to force provides information on how they move and function.
Computer simulations are an integral part of modern biological research as they
augment many experimental studies and provide a test bed for our ideas on how
biological molecules function. Computer simulations will be developed in this
project to model the pressure sensing of different types of sensors and
generally, the response of membrane proteins to force and pressure. The goal is
to produce computational tools that have the detail, flexibility, and accuracy
to conduct realistic simulations of the “mechanobiology of membrane proteins.”
This project will enhance the training of a diverse STEM workforce, including
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, and extend our nation’s leadership
in biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Force, tension, and pressure are the major
ingredients in mechanobiology. These quantities are often thought of
macroscopically, but they are equally applicable at the molecular scale. The
goal is to advance the unique computational capabilities of the researchers so
as to accurately simulate the force-induced unfolding of membrane proteins and
identify the factors that govern the open-to-close transition of mechano-sensing
ion channels. The capabilities are centered around the researchers' new
molecular dynamics program “Upside”, an algorithm that can cooperatively fold
small proteins with an accuracy comparable to all-atom methods but in CPU-hours
using only physical principles. Upside employs 6 atoms per residue with the side
chains being represented by directional-dependent beads whose packing
probabilities have the lowest free energy. The use of this innovative, instantly
equilibrated global side chain packing calculation at every step smooths the
energy surface as side-chain friction is nearly eliminated. This largely
explains the 103-104 fold speed up compared to standard MD and our ability to
tackle the study of larger proteins. Critical to the success is the proper
balancing of energy terms, achieved by training all force field parameters
simultaneously. To conduct realistic simulations of mechano-sensing channels,
the lateral pressure imposed by the membrane or “force-from-lipids”, will be
incorporated into the Upside algorithm as this factor is key to controlling the
opening of the mechano-sensing ion channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences in Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.