* 2023179
* Mechanics of Active Slide-Ring Networks: from Molecular Motors to Molecular Machine
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Carson Bruns, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2024
* USD 493,044.00

This grant will focus on understanding how the molecular structure of novel
polymers affects their ability to contract - similar to how natural muscles
contract and lengthen to generate motion and force. Most soft biological
materials rely on the efficient transfer of mechanical work from nanoscopic
molecular motors to the macroscale. This is ensured by a sophisticated and
architected internal network. That network consists of molecular machines that
cooperatively “pull” on polymer “ropes”. This action is a microscopic tug-of-war
that drives contraction. This project will focus on the replication of such
mechanisms by combining artificial molecular machines (rotaxanes). For this, the
project will develop a multiscale model, complemented by experiments, that can
bridge active molecular mechanisms and the macroscopic response. Outcomes of
this research will enable the creation of active materials/machines with a
myriad of biomechanical applications. It will also promote collaborations and
inspire a new generation of researchers at the edge of mechanics and materials
science. Planned activities include active learning modules for high-school and
undergraduate students, the involvement of these students in research, and the
dissemination of research findings in social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of the research is to understand the relationship between
molecular mechanisms in slide-ring gels, the energy input in molecular motors,
and the emergent contraction of the macroscopic gel. For this, the research
project will integrate theoretical/computational mechanics, chemical synthesis,
and mechanical characterization in a feed-back loop, where model and experiments
will learn from one-another. The model, based on statistical mechanics, will
provide a clear connection between molecular processes (ring sliding, ring
collapse, …) and the macroscopic rheology, elasticity, and contraction. In turn,
experiments will be guided by the model so that a rational design can be
achieved. The objectives of the project are specifically to (a) develop a model
for isotropic topological gels to connect molecular architecture and mechanical
response, (b) use this model to explore the mechanics of anisotropic slide-
ring/cellulose networks, and (c) investigate and identify conditions that
amplify the force transfer across scales during contraction. Through these aims,
the project will advance the inner workings of slide ring networks to be used as
molecular machines and enable the rational development of a biomimetic material
capable of contracting as does natural muscle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.