* 2023116
* GP UP: Undergraduate Preparation through Multidisciplinary Service Learning  at Utah Lake (UP?Utah Lake)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Eddy Cadet, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2024
* USD 414,351.00

Critical issues facing geoscientists are complex and increasingly require
professionals with the ability to work with others from diverse backgrounds and
fields to resolve them. Utah Valley University’s GEOPAths program will
facilitate undergraduate geoscience preparation and awareness through
multidisciplinary service-learning projects focused on Utah Lake. Utah Lake,
bordered by the Provo-Orem metropolitan area and the towering Wasatch Mountains,
is a valuable ecological and recreational resource, compromised by invasive
species and degraded water quality. The lake is undervalued and underutilized
because of its perception of being contaminated, which causes a strain on
related businesses and the community’s quality of life. Efforts have been
hindered, in part, by the need for research that crosses disciplinary
boundaries. For this project, faculty and undergraduate students in the fields
of hydrology, environmental science, biogeochemistry, geography, communication,
and business management are collaborating with professionals in the community to
address complex issues surrounding the lake. Student service learning projects
will be directed toward research that informs policy makers’ efforts to
rejuvenate Utah Lake to benefit the community. The project is preparing
geoscience professionals from diverse backgrounds with essential experience in
research skills, multidisciplinary collaboration, and real-world problem
solving, while preparing professionals in intersecting fields with an awareness
of geoscience concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UP-Utah Lake project
facilitates geoscience preparation of diverse undergraduate students at Utah
Valley University through multidisciplinary service learning about Utah Lake
that enhances professional skills, increases access to professional networks,
and deepens knowledge of geoscience career pathways. Major activities include:
1) implementing the UP-Utah Lake service-learning project embedded in an 8-week
summer course for cohorts of 12 students annually; 2) creating a learning
environment within the summer course to meet the mentoring needs of participants
and provide STEM workplace skill building and career-relevant experience; 3)
developing a geoscience learning ecosystem (GLE) among stakeholders in the Utah
Lake community to create enhanced learning opportunities for students; 4)
integrating related UP-Utah Lake service learning in other courses during the
academic year; and 5) deepening students’ interest and knowledge of geoscience
careers by activities with the GLE such as career presentations, field trips,
and job shadowing opportunities. The UP-Utah Lake project is grounded in
evidence-based practices that address the needs of students, including those
from underrepresented groups, such as mentoring from faculty and near-peers, and
partnerships with area professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.