* 2023605
* Collaborative Research: Greater New York (NY) Oxidant, Trace gas, Halogen, and Aerosol Airborne Mission (GOTHAAM)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Glenn Wolfe, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,906.00

The New York City (NYC) region has the highest level of ozone (O3) pollution in
the United States outside of California, adversely affecting more than 20
million people. In this collaborative field campaign, 14 investigators from 9
institutions intend to study air quality in the greater NYC region using NSF’s
C-130 research aircraft loaded with state-of-the-art instrumentation. Gases and
particles will be collected during summer when air masses are influenced by
emissions from nearby forests, ocean surfaces, and human activities. This new
information will help increase understanding of formation of O3 and particulate
matter (PM) pollution. By sharing and disseminating results, air quality
agencies in the region and other similar mega cities can take action to mitigate
harmful pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 4-pronged scientific approach is
suggested to study processes that produce O3 and PM, and that focus on volatile
organic compound (VOC) speciation, secondary organic aerosol (SOA) evolution,
oxidant concentrations, and nighttime chemistry. Of particular interest is the
emission of volatile chemical products (VCPs) that have received recent
attention as potentially dominant sources of VOCs in urban environments where
they contribute to aerosol formation. A combination of aircraft descents and
missed approaches over the ocean and at designated airports, respectively, are
designed to provide vertical profiles of measured species, many of which are
surface-emitted and have short lifetimes. Weather and chemistry forecasting
models will inform flight plans. Results will be directly comparable to those
gathered by a subset of the research team during the WINTER campaign that took
place over the NE US in February-March 2015. Of significant difference will be
the higher biological input of VOCs and increased photochemical activity during
summer. Observations will be combined with regional and chemical modeling to
improve understanding of O3 and SOA formation in a coastal mega
city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.