* 2023152
* GP-UP: Geo-Bridge Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 390,883.00

To support the retention of recent undergraduates during a gap year, the GEO-
Bridge program proposes the development of a post-baccalaureate bridge program,
which brings together six Monterey Bay institutions to provide gap year students
research and, professional development opportunities in geoscience. California
State University, Monterey Bay (CSUMB), a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI)
with a strong undergraduate research program, serves as the hub of this
geoscience bridge program. In addition to working with faculty at CSUMB, we will
place participants at five partner institutions: Hopkins Marine Station of
Stanford University (Hopkins), the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS), Moss Landing
Marine Laboratories (MLML), Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI),
and Elkhorn Slough National Estuarine Research Reserve (ESNERR). Geo-Bridge
provides a model for the geoscience community on how to cast the geosciences
within the cultural value system of underrepresented groups and support post-
baccalaureate students with no research experience. A rigorous summative and
formative evaluation plan will help the project team identify gaps in
participantâ€™s understanding of geoscience and, assist them in taking lessons
learned to continue to improve Geo-Bridge. Beyond providing participants with
guidance on how to pursue academic and professional careers in geoscience, the
Geo-Bridge program can help them understand how their talents and perspectives,
can contribute to a scientific workforce that looks to address the emerging
needs of 21st century geoscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social
context of the proposed program is the demographics of the U.S, whose
composition is rapidly changing, with little reflection of this change seen in
the ranks of geoscience institutions of the U.S. The Geo-Bridge program forms an
alliance among geoscience professionals to help recruit, engage and retain
underrepresented groups in geoscience through a comprehensive mentoring and
bridge program. To meet this need, a vigorous recruitment and outreach effort
leverages campus-based resources, connections with diversity-focused programs of
professional societies, and the experience of the PI in engaging with
individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM. This outreach model will allow
the PIs to continue to recruit, engage and retain diverse individuals who can
provide the unique perspectives required to engage in 21st century geoscience
research. The proposed 22-week summer through fall bridge program leverages the
scientific and educational assets of the Monterey Bay region to increase the
number and diversity of individuals in geoscience. The program will support
training and retention in overlooked populations. To accomplish this goal, the
PIs will: 1) recruit 6 recently graduated undergraduates per year, with an
emphasis on individuals from underrepresented groups and those with limited STEM
research experience; 2) engage participants in research in Atmospheric, Earth,
Ocean and Polar Science; 3) provide participants with faculty mentoring; and, 4)
provide professional development training for participants to ensure continued
involvement in geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.