* 2023857
* The New Traffic Microscope- Measuring Microscopic Traffic Dynamics to Model and Control Freeway Traffic Congestion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Coifman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,204.00

This NSF grant will produce a deeper understanding of freeway traffic dynamics
that will be used develop the next generation of traffic models and ultimately
targeted interventions to reduce the negative impacts of traffic congestion.
Traffic congestion was estimated to cost the US $179 Billion in 2017. If this
research can reduce those costs by only a few percent it will have a high payoff
with a broad impact to society. Traffic is inherently difficult to study because
one needs fine measurements over a large scale, somewhat akin to being able to
read a newspaper in a satellite photo of an entire city. The current state of
the art in traffic dynamics and control is based on low resolution data that
only provide information about the "average vehicle." Recent results from NSF
sponsored research has shown that it is critical to push to higher resolution
and understand the individual vehicle interactions to advance both theory and
control. This research will (1) essentially develop a "microscope" to see these
individual vehicle interactions across large scale empirical data sets, (2) use
the newfound dynamics to improve or replace current traffic flow models, and (3)
use these traffic flow models to develop targeted interventions that will
improve the effectiveness of traffic control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microscopic details of freeway traffic dynamics are below the resolution of
conventional vehicle detectors. This research will use new measurement
techniques to empirically study the microscopic nature of how traffic actually
flows, with the ultimate goal of building more robust traffic flow models and
more effective traffic controls. The new measurement techniques extract
microscopic relationships from common loop detectors, thereby using a collection
of old sensors in new ways to achieve a level of resolution is unrivaled at this
scale. The massive amount of high resolution data allow the research to isolate
microscopic traffic dynamics that heretofore were obscured by noise. With the
new clarity the microscopic relationships will lead to fundamental discoveries.
The research will progress on three levels: (i) Empirically investigate
suspected deficiencies of conventional traffic flow models. (ii) For the
deficiencies explore the bounds of influence and the structure of the underlying
mechanisms to develop a deeper understanding of the dependencies and how they
impact traffic dynamics. (iii) Finally, act on the findings by developing
traffic flow models to accurately capture the dynamics and explore ways in which
these insights can be used to improve traffic control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.