* 2023038
* GP-IN: GLOBE Youth Geoscientists Program
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Ardice Hartry, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2023
* USD 315,000.00

The GLOBE Youth Geoscientists (GYG) project will produce an innovative model for
informal STEM education that can support transitions for diverse underserved
high school students to postsecondary education and careers in the geosciences.
It will provide hands-on, project-based science experiences using scientist-
developed data collection protocols from the GLOBE program — Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment — to engage youth as young professionals
contributing to scientific knowledge. These experiences will be coupled with
interactions with adult STEM professionals, career exploration, college
preparation, and self-reflection activities, all within a safe and supportive
setting. The program will help close a critical gap for students to obtain a
real geosciences experience as a means to build competence, confidence,
motivation, and belonging in the sciences. In addition, college exploration and
preparatory activities will support students at a critical and vulnerable
transition point in their education — bridging from high school to college — by
providing college and career navigation skills, tours to college campuses,
opportunities to interact with college students, and links to organizations that
can assist with college and financial aid applications. The aim is to support as
well as inspire. The partnership will facilitate engagement with scientists,
industry professionals, and colleges, and will connect with the students’
school-year teachers by supporting senior projects and college application
processes that build on the students’ summer
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WestEd, together with its partners, the
Lawrence Hall of Science (the Hall) and the College and Career Academy Support
Network (CCASN), both at the University of California, Berkeley, will implement
this project. The program will combine Global Learning and Observations to
Benefit the Environment (GLOBE), career development experiences, college
preparation, and youth development/leadership strategies to build a replicable
summer geosciences experience for rising seniors in the East Bay region of the
San Francisco Bay Area in California who are traditionally underrepresented in
STEM careers and who might otherwise not receive important support at this
critical juncture in their educational careers. GYG leverages GLOBE’s student
driven approach to science to expand past work into an informal summer learning
setting. It will also create an explicit college preparation component,
consistent with the goals of the IUSE: GEOPATHS initiative. The GYG program will
take an ecosystem approach to supporting youth, engaging scientists and STEM
professionals as critical participants in the ecosystem. The goals of the
project are as follows: 1) Create a GLOBE-infused learning-rich geoscience
research experience for local students from populations underrepresented in the
sciences to support their college entry and career readiness. 2) Expand the
close collaboration between WestEd and CCASN to include the Lawrence Hall of
Science and build capacity at the Hall to sustain GLOBE-infused programming
beyond this grant. 3) Provide a model for a learning-rich geoscience experience
for underserved youth that can be replicated by other informal learning
organizations, in support of their local schools, offering summer learning and
postsecondary preparation as well as fulfilling the policy goals of schools that
promote college and career readiness. The evaluation component will help
document the model’s components and processes and contribute to the knowledge
base about engagement of youth from populations underrepresented in STEM, STEM
career development and college-going, industry engagement, and program features
that contribute to positive student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.