* 2023108
* Eddy Effects on the Biological Carbon Pump
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Laure Resplandy, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,899.00

The oceans play a critical role in the global carbon cycle, currently absorbing
approximately one-quarter of the carbon dioxide emissions each year. This carbon
is moved from the surface waters to the deep ocean by physical and biological
processes. The first is by physical movement, or subduction, of water from the
surface to the deep ocean. This is referred to as the solubility pump. The
second mechanism, called the biological pump, starts with phytoplankton that
take up carbon through photosynthesis in the surface ocean. A small fraction of
this material then sinks to the deeper ocean. In a third mechanism, swimming
organisms can actively transport material from surface to deeper waters. A
current challenge is to understand how all three of these processes interact in
smaller patches of the oceans, and to incorporate this knowledge into ocean and
climate models. This project will examine these processes using a high-
resolution ocean model and comparisons to real-world observations. The project
will support early career female scientists, a graduate student, and
undergraduate interns. The project will also contribute to the summer
Questioning Underlies Effective Science Teaching (QUEST) hands-on program for
elementary and middle school teachers, and to a course taught at Princeton
University by the lead investigator that uses models developed in her research
to teach students how to think critically about ocean and climate models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations show that the ocean carbon pump is
modulated by eddies, fronts and filaments, but the integrated effect of these
ubiquitous ocean features on the global carbon export is poorly constrained. The
proposed effort will harness a high-resolution bio-physical model and existing
observations to advance the mechanistic understanding of the biological and
physical pumps occurring at small-scale. This project will add to previous works
that studied small-scale subduction (from the PI and other groups) and examine
how eddy-driven ecosystem patchiness and trophic interactions influence the
subduction and sinking pumps (Objective 1). The project will also bring new
mechanistic insights in the migration pump (Objective 2). Specifically, how eddy
effects modulate the interplay between mesozooplankton abundance, grazing and
diurnal migration amplitude. This project excludes the effects of migrations on
seasonal scales, larger mesopelagic animals, and some biological factors (e.g.
body-size). Yet it will provide a much-needed baseline for future work to
explore this pump in more realistic cases, such as the interpretation of high
resolution in-situ measurements and the analysis of global model results. This
project will also provide, for the first time, a synthesis of the ocean carbon
pumps response to small-scale dynamics in a regional framework over a full
seasonal cycle (Objective 3). This project will use an idealized double gyre
model but the contrasted regions will give a broad perspective, relevant to the
understanding of the global ocean carbon pump and how it might respond to
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.