* 2023020
* Air/Sea Energy Fluxes Mediated by Waves and Pressure Work
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Edson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,603,700.00

This study will investigate the exchange of energy between the atmosphere and
the ocean and the role that ocean waves play in this. Unprecedented measurements
of the mean, wave-driven and turbulent motions on both the air and water side of
the sea surface will be made from a fixed tower with a vertical array of high-
resolution velocity and pressure sensors, and complemented by wave measurements,
high-resolution sea-surface imagery, and an array of wave buoys. The deployments
will be in Pamlico Sound, NC, a shallow fetch-limited basin that is protected
from oceanic swell and has weak tides, which will serve as a natural laboratory
for this research. A comprehensive data set will be collected during two three-
month long deployments in the fall of 2021 and 2022, when strong winds produce
energetic young waves that are the focus of this study. The data collected will
be used for the development of air-sea interaction parameterizations for use in
models that couple the atmosphere, waves, and the ocean. These parameterizations
are used in models that span a large range of research, engineering, and
planning applications including physical oceanography, meteorology, climatology,
coastal and estuarine engineering and sciences, polar research, and others. Data
collected in this study will be used for student data analysis projects in a new
air-sea interactions class taught in the WHOI/MIT joint program. The PIs will
also participate in the Skype a Scientist program, which will provide
opportunities to communicate with middle and high school students from around
the world about basic topics related to science. A graduate student will receive
interdisciplinary training in oceanography and boundary layer meteorology and
this project will support an early career scientist who will lead the project
and gain valuable experience working with two experienced
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of kinetic energy between the
ocean and atmosphere figures prominently in weather systems and global climate,
as well as controlling the exchanges of heat and gases, and driving currents and
waves. These air-sea transfers take place in the oceanic and atmospheric
boundary layers, which are significantly different from rigid boundary layers
due to the presence of surface gravity waves. Although progress has been made in
understanding these wave-affected boundary layers, the specific processes
governing wave-mediated transfers of energy and momentum are not well
understood. Studies have suggested that there is a deficit of turbulent
dissipation in the atmosphere, which is assumed to be balanced by energy input
to the surface waves by pressure work. Similarly, there is a turbulent
dissipation surplus in the ocean due to wave breaking, and recent research
suggests this surplus is the result of a convergence in energy flux also driven
by pressure work. However, we lack a detailed mechanistic understanding of how
these fluxes occur across the interface, including the extent to which the
atmosphere and oceanic response is coupled under breaking waves. This project
will make contemporaneous measurements in both the ocean and overlying
atmosphere to: 1) test the hypothesis that the TKE dissipation deficit in the
atmosphere balances the dissipation surplus in the ocean; 2) identify the
mechanisms that drive these energy transfers from the atmosphere into the waves
and from the waves into the ocean, and, 3) test a new model for the magnitude
and vertical structure of TKE dissipation in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.