* 2023833
* Collaborative Research: Magnetically Assisted Self-Assembly for Facile 2D Membrane Protein Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Meagan Mauter, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2022
* USD 277,552.00

Non-Technical &lt;br/&gt;Membrane proteins are cells' primary mechanism for
interacting with the external environment, and thus demonstrate exceptionally
fine-tuned capabilities in sensing, selective transport, and catalysis. This
award to study Magnetically Assisted Self-Assembly for Facile 2D Membrane
Protein Crystallization will support fundamental research on the magnetic
properties of these membrane proteins, and biological materials more generally.
The PIs will leverage their knowledge of membrane protein behavior in magnetic
fields to support the development of two-dimensional crystals from these
biological materials. Finally, these crystals will be deployed in devices for
highly selective sensing and separation applications. In parallel, the project
will fund the expansion of an undergraduate research training and mentorship
program that includes a formal 3-hour training process for PhD student
supervisors of undergraduate students, a formal goal-setting process for
incoming undergraduate researchers, and a 360-degree evaluation process for
undergraduates, PhD supervisors, and the PI conducted on a bi-monthly basis and
upon completion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical &lt;br/&gt;PIs
propose to investigate the fundamental physics and chemistry of membrane protein
(MP) self-assembly in the presence of a magnetic field to inform strategies for
scalable 2D crystallization of MPs with high crystalline order realized over
large areas. They will compute the diamagnetic susceptibility of MPs and
supporting matrices (block co-polymers and lipids) to assess the
generalizability of this technique across known MPs and to inform subsequent
self-assembly simulations. A novel coarse-grain model will be developed to
describe the self-assembly of MP crystals in the presence and absence of an
applied magnetic field. This model will be sufficiently efficient as to serve as
a front-end biomaterial fabrication design tool across diverse combinations of
MPs and supporting matrices. PIs will validate these models by experimentally
characterizing the effect of magnetic fields on MP crystallization under diverse
experimental conditions. Finally, 2D MP crystals of OmpF and pHR will be tested
as model systems for screening ligands and blockers in comparison with current
state-of-the-art bilayer type systems. This work will contribute 1) a novel
approach for computing the diamagnetic anisotropy and diamagnetic susceptibility
of large molecules in which primary, secondary, and tertiary structure each
contribute to the magnetic properties of the molecule, 2) a physical
understanding of the various competing forces that drive the kinetics and final
state of self-assembly, 3) a modeling tool to guide experimental design for the
fabrication of 2D MP crystals, and 4) a demonstration of 2D MP crystals in
functional devices and an assessment of their performance relative to the
current state-of-the-art.