* 2023568
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Chemistry with Electric Fields (ChEF)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Latha Venkataraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Chemistry with Electric Fields (ChEF) is supported by the
Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry. This
Phase I Center is led by Latha Venkataraman of Columbia University. Other team
members are also from Columbia and include Timothy Berkelbach, Colin Nuckolls,
Tomislav Rovis, and Xavier Roy. The challenge of this center is to use
directional electric fields to understand, control and manipulate chemical
transition states to alter the outcomes of chemical reactions. New techniques
are developed to expand the range of reactions that can be controlled and
manipulated by electric fields. The strategy of bringing together team members
with expertise in synthesis, measurement, and computation augers well for the
Center's goal of controlling and inducing new chemical pathways, accelerating
catalysis, and generating a new paradigm for organic synthesis. The bold goal of
this team is to electric field control such that structures, pathways, and
intermediates that are not possible or practical with traditional chemical
catalysis become so. Broader impacts are addressed in part through strong
collaborations with Merck and Columbia Technology Ventures. Students have
opportunities for self-governance and professional development. Students are co-
mentored and undergraduates are included in the team. The team partners with the
Harlem Childrenâ€™s Zone School in New York to broaden the participation of
chemistry to K-12 underrepresented groups. Development of a Chemistry Magic Show
and Subway Science and Engineering address the expectations for informal science
communication. The NYC location of the Phase I team provides ready access to a
population that is underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
this Phase I Center is to understand, control and manipulate chemical reactions
utilizing electric fields. These electric fields can originate from an external
bias produced using nanoscale electrode gaps or from strategically placed
charges within a catalyst. Altering transition states by an external bias is the
ultimate demonstration of controlling matter away from equilibrium and toward
desired reactivity. This research charts a path to controlling the environment
and electric field around reaction centers to accelerate desired reactivity and
selectivity, developing reaction pathways and outcomes that are otherwise
inaccessible by altering reaction kinetics and thermodynamics. The CCI team
combines expertise in synthesis, measurement and computation and works in two
interdisciplinary research thrusts, focused on two families of reactions: (1)
Isomerization and Pericyclic Reactions, and (2) Coupling Reactions. This work
aims to provide a mechanistic and quantitative understanding of how electric
fields can control reactions while developing routes to alter selectivity and
rates in a range of reactions including the Claisen rearrangement, the Diels
Alder cycloaddition, and bond activation of carbon-halogen, metal-heteroatom and
carbon-carbon bonds. Chemistry is at the center of the nanoscience revolution
and this proposal exploits that position bringing together like-minded
scientists from a diverse set of backgrounds to design experiments to identify
promising target structures, synthesize these new targets, and study their
properties and reactivity in electric fields. Broader Impacts are addressed in
numerous ways. In addition to developing a new form of chemistry, the
overarching broader impact is to increase the participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM fields and to help educate the public about the virtues, beauty,
and utility of chemistry. The work aims to transform undergraduate and graduate
chemical education in chemistry at the interface of synthesis, materials and
electric fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.