* 2023442
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Novel imaging, physiology and numerical approaches for understanding biologically mediated, unsteady sinking in marine diatoms
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Brad Gemmell, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 472,846.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes
a small-scale approach to look at individual cells to investigate the sinking of
marine diatoms, which on larger scales has implications for how food for larger
organisms, carbon, and organic particles move throughout the ocean. Diatoms are
a type of phytoplankton, cells that use photosynthesis in surface waters to
produce roughly half of the world’s oxygen and the food to support ocean food
webs. They have a heavy, glass-like outer wall which causes them to sink and
move up to 40% of particulate organic carbon from the ocean’s surface to the
deep sea. The investigators are using novel methods to determine how diatoms
regulate their sinking quickly in response to different environmental
conditions. These include state-of-the-art video measurements of individual
cells, a micoelectrode approach to understand changes at cell surfaces, and
microscopy to see changes inside and at the surface of cells. The resulting
information will be used to build a model to understand how and why diatoms use
unsteady sinking behavior based on their environment. The project supports early
career investigators, provides training for a postdoctoral scientist and
undergraduate students, and develops a collaboration between US and UK
scientists. The team is also developing lesson plans in conjunction with local
high schools with high populations of underrepresented students in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of sinking and suspension of diatoms has
received considerable attention because of its ecological, evolutionary and
biogeochemical significance, yet understanding of the processes that regulate
sinking rates remains rudimentary. The investigators have used new techniques to
make preliminary observations showing that some species of diatom exhibit an
unsteady sinking behavior that consists of rapid changes of buoyancy on time
scales of seconds. However, it remains unclear how widely this behavior matters
across species and ocean conditions. In this study, the team of investigators is
using state-of-the-art video-based measurements of sinking rates of individual
cells to assess the prevalence of unsteady sinking among centric and pennate
diatoms of varying cell sizes and quantify how this behavior changes in response
to sharp gradients in nutrients and light. The project leverages an
interdisciplinary, international collaboration to combine innovative optical
techniques, advanced tools to assess cell physiology, and numerical modeling
approaches to characterize suspension properties for individual diatom cells.
Results are likely to transform the way we think about the ecology of diatoms,
their strategies for nutrient acquisition, and mechanisms to control their
buoyancy, in particular the modulation of volume and membrane of the central
vacuole. This project contributes to the development of novel tools for single
cell physiological studies, most notably direct measurement of diffusive
boundary layers around cells under varying flow conditions and numerical
modeling of cell-level processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.