* 2023955
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Integrated Catalysis (CIC)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Paula Diaconescu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Integrated Catalysis (CIC) is supported by the Centers for
Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry. This Phase I
Center is led by Paula Diaconescu of the University of California, Los Angeles.
Other team members include Jeffery Byers and Dunwei Wang of Boston College, Loi
Do of the University of Houston, Chong Liu of the University of California, Los
Angeles, and Alexander Miller of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. CIC will develop the fundamental chemistry needed to prepare synthetic
plastics from pools of abundant feedstocks in a single reactor using spatially
separated and temporally switchable catalysts. The inspiration for the work done
in CIC comes from Nature’s remarkable ability as a chemist. Nature uses the
architecture of cells to run chemical factories by combining different processes
to construct structurally complex products. Synthetic chemists, in contrast,
usually run each chemical reaction individually in a separate vessel, requiring
product isolation after each step in the sequence. The goal of the CIC is to
mimic biological systems in the development of synthetic chemical catalytic
processes. Simple starting materials will be used to supply networks of multiple
catalysts operating together on a single platform, with the aid of temporal and
spatial control, to produce new polymeric materials. The Phase I Center focuses
on using simple feedstocks such as amino acids, ethylene, carbon dioxide, and
carbon monoxide. The investigators seek to develop a generally applicable
platform that will help synthetic chemists to test new ideas that benefit from
spatial control. The proximity of each participating campus to various
industries, including pharmaceutical, commodity chemical, and plastic
manufacturers, has the potential to facilitate the transfer of spatio-temporally
controlled catalysis knowledge to the commercial enterprise. Monthly brown bag
seminars, including sessions on business and entrepreneurship topics, are
planned to help promote the career development of the students and postdoctoral
scholars on the team. A strong mentoring program and existing links to local
diverse populations help to ensure the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minorities in the CIC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIC approach
will combine spatial and temporal control to enable catalytic processes that
allow the construction of sequence-defined sustainable polymeric materials from
simple building blocks. In order to achieve temporal control, switchable
catalysts will be employed to control polymer composition. Switchable catalysts
can be activated or deactivated as needed using external stimuli, such as light
or electrochemical potential, enabling control over activity or selectivity;
they can also be protected when another reaction is being carried out in the
same vessel. In order to achieve spatial control, catalysts will be separated
through micropatterning and/or controlling local chemical environments. Surface
functionalization of precatalysts, along with the development of patterning down
to the microscopic scale, will enable catalysis with new reactivity and improved
product selectivity. Moreover, potential opto-electronic responses by the
underlying materials (e.g., semiconductors) allow tunable reactivity of the
active site with external optical or electrical triggers along with the presence
of reactant gradients. CIC will combine aspects of spatial and temporal control
to introduce a transformative approach to catalysis that converts pools of
abundant feedstocks into novel materials of high complexity. For example, the
synthesis of specific building blocks, from ethylene or amino acids and CO/CO2,
will be coupled to their polymerization/copolymerization in order to obtain new,
precisely patterned materials. Examples of projects include the direct synthesis
of polypeptide-based materials from amino acids and CO2, the conversion of
CO/CO2, ethylene, and ethylene glycol into sequence-controlled copolymers that
are sustainable and degradable, and the conversion of CO2, ethylene, and
alcohols directly to polyacrylate materials. The scientific impact of the CIC
will be the introduction of a new paradigm in chemical catalysis, with
applications across the catalysis community and in chemical industry. Students
will be trained in interdisciplinary collaborative chemistry, benefiting from
embedded research experiences at partner sites. Interactions with local
communities, with a particular focus on reaching students from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences, will ensure further impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.