* 2023385
* What Controls Carbonate Formation in Fine-grained and Clay-rich Soils? Gaining Perspective from Serial Soil Water Stable Isotope Datasets
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kathryn Snell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 311,761.00

The stable isotopes of oxygen and carbon from small, irregularly-shaped, compact
growths (“nodules”) of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) have long been used by
researchers to reconstruct past climate. To better interpret the information
preserved in these nodules, however, it is necessary to have a better
understanding of how the nodules form in modern environments. In this project,
researchers will study how soil temperature, soil chemistry, and evaporation of
soil water, all contribute to the formation of calcium carbonate nodules in
fine-grained and clay-rich soils, and how signals of soil temperature and
chemistry are recorded by the stable isotopes of the nodules. This research is
important and timely for three reasons. First, understanding past climate states
more fully can provide context and information about how Earth's climate system
fundamentally functions. Second, widespread calcium carbonate development in the
soil column can limit plant productivity and water movement through the soil
column, creating challenges for agriculture. Better understanding what drives
carbonate formation in certain soils could help to inform choices that land-
managers make. Third, this study will also serve to further test a newly
developed tool, the Soil Water Isotope Storage System (SWISS). This new device
is able to automatically sample soil water vapor, and then store that vapor for
later analysis in a laboratory setting. In particular, researchers are
interested in creating a sub-weekly record of stable water isotope values in the
soil column. Small differences in the stable isotope composition of water at
different depths in the soil may be the result of the details of how water
passes through the soil and how water evaporates in the soil column, so
measuring these values can provide information about these processes. Therefore,
this tool also has broad utility for agricultural science questions, including
improving understanding of how soils absorb water, how roots take-up water, and
how water leaves a soil through evaporation. Additionally, this tool could be
used in atmospheric science to better estimate the amount of water vapor in the
atmosphere that comes from land. This project will provide training in research
for a PhD student, as well as two undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups via the SMART initiative and RRESESS undergraduate research programs. In
addition, middle school students will learn about this research via tours of the
laboratories and curriculum developed based on research's results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable isotope values of pedogenic carbonate are important
archives of paleoenvironmental information because they reflect a wide range of
environmental parameters like soil temperature, evaporation and hydrology, as
well as atmospheric CO2 and vegetation. To better understand how the stable
isotope composition of pedogenic carbonates that is measured today reflect the
environments of the past, researchers need to better understand the timing and
mechanisms of pedogenic carbonate formation in modern environments. In
particular, recent research has utilized the new carbonate clumped isotope
thermometer to better understand the timing and drivers of carbonate formation;
these studies have primarily focused on how carbonate found in coarse-grained
soils records information about the surrounding environment. However, the
deeper-time paleoclimate record is primarily built on pedogenic carbonate
nodules found in finer-grained, clay-containing paleosols. It is unclear, at
present, if the mechanisms that drive the formation of pedogenic carbonate are
the same for these different soil textures, and therefore it is unclear if
paleoclimate data from these two forms can be interpreted in the same way. To
address this question, the investigator will constrain the timing and style of
pedogenic carbonate nodule formation in three modern, fine-grained, clay-bearing
soils. The investigator will monitor both surface and subsurface environmental
parameters (i.e. temperature, precipitation amounts, soil moisture, soil CO2
concentration, and soil pH) and stable isotope parameters (i.e. stable isotope
values of precipitation, soil CO2 and soil water). An important and unique
contribution of this study will be the creation of ~weekly resolution soil water
isotope datasets for each soil site, which is an aspect of the modern
environment rarely measured for previous clumped isotope studies of modern
pedogenic carbonate. This contribution is possible because the investigator has
overcome technical challenges associated with making these datasets by
developing equipment to automatically sample and store soil water vapor for
stable isotope analysis. The investigator will compare observations of the range
of modern environmental parameters with the stable isotope composition of
Holocene carbonate nodules from the same soils to constrain the likely timing
and drivers of carbonate formation, so that the scientific community can improve
paleoclimate interpretations from this important geologic archive of terrestrial
paleoclimate information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.