* 2023454
* Bismuth-210: A tracer of dynamic scavenging in aquatic systems.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* James Waples, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 322,133.00

Chemical cycling in any aquatic system is strongly affected by the transport of
particles through that system, and a better understanding of particle dynamics
is particularly needed in lakes and shallow marine systems, which play a
disproportionately large, yet poorly quantified role in global biogeochemical
cycling. Our current understanding of particle flux and attenuation down through
the water column has largely relied on the use of sediment traps and naturally
occurring particle-reactive radionuclides. However, particle dynamics are
chronically understudied in shallow aquatic systems largely because of
methodological limitations. The downward transport of particulate matter in
shallow waters cannot be reliably quantified with a bottom tethered sediment
trap and the choice of radionuclide tracers in high flux and freshwater systems
is severely limited. The primary goal of this proposed work is to demonstrate
that combined measurements of the natural radionuclide lead-210 (210Pb) and its
daughter bismuth-210 (210Bi) can be used to determine particulate flux in a
shallow and dynamic aquatic system. A thorough demonstration and testing of the
210Bi/210Pb tracer is imperative before any general application of the tracer is
made to study process rates. The project will support two undergraduate students
as field and laboratory assistants during summer months and one MS graduate
student for the duration of this project. Sample collection and field work will
take place in Lake Michigan and will be incorporated into a graduate field
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposed work are to: (i)
demonstrate the practicality of a simple technique for measuring the
210Pb-210Bi-210Po radionuclide trio in aquatic systems; (ii) show that
210Bi/210Pb derived particle fluxes are concordant with 234Th/238U derived
particle fluxes in a dynamic and “calibrated” nearshore system; and (iii) show
that the in situ Kd of 210Bi is greater than that of 210Pb under varying
conditions of particle concentration and organic matter content, across a
gradient of dissolved oxygen concentrations. Nearshore scavenging processes are
chronically understudied due to methodological limitations. Developing a
relatively easy to measure and widely occurring particle tracer based on
210Bi/210Pb disequilibria will allow for future process studies of dynamic
particle cycling that are critical to understanding system-wide chemistry as
well as practical problems associated with the management of trophic status,
hypoxia, harmful algal blooms, and contaminant fate and
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.