* 2023498
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying N2 fixation rates of noncyanobacterial diazotrophs and environmental controls on their activity
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Kendra Turk-Kubo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 543,521.00

Nitrogen (N) is an important element in the ocean that limits the growth of the
microscopic marine plants, phytoplankton. Estimates suggest N inputs and losses
may not be balanced in the modern ocean, and thus an underestimation of N inputs
may explain this imbalance. The conversion of gaseous N2 to biologically
available N (N2 fixation) is the largest source of new N to the ocean. It is
possible that the “missing” N can be explained by identifying new sources of N2
fixation. N2 fixation relies on a group of microorganisms, termed “diazotrophs,”
that utilize N2 for growth, unlike other marine microorganisms. Diazotrophs fall
into two groups, cyanobacterial diazotrophs, which are able to derive energy
through photosynthesis, and non-cyanobacterial diazotrophs (NCDs), which require
a non-light-based energy source. Next to nothing is known about the ecology and
biology of NCDs, except that they are ubiquitous in the ocean and contain the
nitrogen fixing gene, but no direct measurements of their N2 fixation activity
exist. Recent molecular advances for studying organisms at the single cell level
now makes the measurement of N2 fixation by NCDs possible. This study is focused
on determining whether marine NCDs are actually fixing N2 in the environment and
understanding how their N2 fixation is modulated. Determining if NCD activity is
an important missing N source in the global oceans has the potential to fill a
critical gap in our understanding of the marine N cycle. This project supports
early career STEM researchers including a graduate student and a postdoctoral
scientist, as well as undergraduate students through several programs including
UCSC’s California Alliance for Minority Participation
(CAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen fixation, the microbial process of
converting N2 into biologically available ammonia, is an important source of N
in the oceans. Historically, research has focused on the most conspicuous
diazotrophs, such as Trichodesmium, but the discovery of unicellular
cyanobacterial and non-cyanobacterial diazotrophs (NCDs) in the open ocean
revealed a broader diversity than previously thought. Much of what is known
about NCDs is restricted to presence, abundance estimates and transcriptional
activity from gene surveys. NCDs are globally distributed throughout coastal and
oligotrophic environments, however, it is not known whether NCDs supply N to
support primary productivity. Measurements of marine NCDs are needed to
determine if NCDs are actively fixing N2. This study is focused on measuring
single cell NCD N2 fixation rates from a variety of taxa living in well-lit,
oxygen-rich coastal and oligotrophic surface waters in the North Pacific and
Arctic Oceans. The investigators are using a cultivation-independent technique
called geneFISH to microscopically visualize and localize NCDs and measuring the
incorporation of 15N2 into single cells using nanoscale secondary ion mass
spectrometry. Beyond measuring in situ NCD N2 fixation rates, experiments are
being conducted to determine environmental controls on single cell NCD N2
fixation (light, temperature, dissolved organic matter, dissolved inorganic N,
and iron). Obtaining single cell NCD N2 fixation rates from a range of taxa,
under different experimental conditions and in coastal and oligotrophic
environments will provide information to link their presence to N2 fixation
activity, determine the quantitative significance of NCDs in the marine
environment, and set the stage for their inclusion in biogeochemical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.