* 2023678
* A Multi-Spectral Thermal Infrared Imaging System for Air-Sea Interaction Research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Zappa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 939,645.00

Recent research has shown that physical interactions between the earthâ€™s
atmosphere and ocean are inadequately described by purely windspeed-based
parameterizations. In contrast to wind flow over flat surfaces, the ocean
surface prominently features waves that form, grow, interact with each other,
and eventually break. In the course of this process, the waves alter the
turbulent properties of the airflow near the surface and thus change how the
atmosphere and ocean exchange momentum and energy. While this effect has been
studied extensively in the laboratory and through numerical modeling, it is
exceptionally difficult to observe, and therefore quantify, in the real ocean.
To address this fundamental knowledge gap, a multi-spectral thermal infrared
imaging system will be developed during this project. This novel device will
enable the previously-unavailable real ocean observation of viscous (i.e.,
molecular-scale) stress and heat transfer in the uppermost layer of the sea
without disrupting the flow, a task previously relegated to the controlled
laboratory setting. These 21st-century measurements will yield crucial insight
into basic air-sea transfer processes, thereby directly improving the way in
which atmosphere-ocean interactions are treated in weather and climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a multi-spectral infrared
imaging system which is capable of measuring in detail the vertical profile of
turbulent features in the aqueous viscous sublayer. This will enable the direct
non-invasive measurement of the water-side tangential stress and temperature
profile (i.e., heat flux), which would be transformational measurements to make
in the real ocean. This system will be subjected to extensive validation in a
controlled laboratory environment against industry-standard reference
measurements, allowing for the careful determination of error sources and limits
of application. When it is completed, it will be capable of installation and
operation on fixed tower, ship, and airborne platforms. The data produced by
this system are fundamental for the development of a comprehensive air-sea flux
framework and the validation of models which forecast weather, waves and
regional and global climate change. The proposed work includes the designing,
building, calibration, and testing of the instrument over a two-year
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.