* 2023057
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Coronavirus persistence, transmission, and circulation in the environment
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Krista Wigginton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2022
* USD 68,591.00

The novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak has rapidly spread from its beginning
in Wuhan China. Currently, people have been infected on all continents except
Antarctica. 2019-nCoV has some similarity to two other coronavirus outbreaks
(SARS and MERS). Despite intensive study of SARS and MERS, we still lack a
fundamental understanding of coronavirus behavior in the environment. Most
importantly, we do not know how coronavirus spreads and how long it remains
infective when exposed to sunlight. The goal of this RAPID research project is
to address these questions to better predict transport. A secondary goal of this
research project is to determine whether virus monitoring in wastewater
treatment facilities can be used to catch outbreaks early. This will be achieved
by monitoring coronavirus dynamics in wastewater treatment plants in the San
Francisco Bay Area. The project team includes researchers with complimentary
expertise on coronavirus transfer, inactivation, and detection. Successful
completion of this research will better prepare scientists, engineers, and
public health officials for future coronavirus outbreaks. Societal benefits
include understanding coronavirus transmission in communities to decrease the
time necessary to identify outbreaks to protect public health and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) has recently
emerged from Wuhan China and its spread is causing international concern. This
outbreak follows two other coronavirus outbreaks SARS and MERS. The initial
cases of the SARS coronavirus outbreak spread via aerosolized fecal particles
through the air ducts of the apartment complex. Early reports of 2019-nCoV
suggest it too is excreted in feces. Despite intensive study of these past
outbreaks, we still lack a fundamental understanding of enveloped virus particle
transport in air and water infrastructure and their inactivation potential from
solar radiation exposure. This information is critical to control transmission
and predict persistence. A second important question is whether monitoring of
viruses in wastewater treatment facilities can be used to catch virus
circulation early in community outbreaks. The specific objectives of this
project are to characterize how enveloped viruses are transferred from surfaces
to skin, how coronaviruses are inactivated by solar and UV radiation, and by
monitoring coronavirus dynamics in wastewater treatment plants in the San
Francisco Bay Area. The project team includes researchers with complimentary
expertise on virus transfer from skin to surfaces, coronavirus detection
methods, and viral photoinactivation. The work will be performed at the Codiga
Water Resource Recovery Center in Santa Clara County where two of the initial
2019-nCoV cases have been observed in the USA. Results from this research will
better prepare scientists, engineers, and public health officials for future
coronavirus outbreaks. It will provide critical information on endemic
coronavirus circulation and provide a framework for capturing the outbreak
dynamics of a novel virus in a community. Further, the enveloped virus transfer
study will help scientists understand if and how the transfer of enveloped
viruses differs from non-enveloped viruses. Broader benefits to society include
understanding when and how transmission may occur in communities; information
that is critical to decreasing the time necessary to identify viral disease
outbreaks to protect public health and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.