* 2023123
* Collaborative Research: GP-GO: Native Science Fellows in Service (NSFiS)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bonnie Sachatello-Sawyer, Hopa Mountain, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 126,602.00

Salish Kootenai College (SKC), in collaboration with the Blackfeet Native
Science Field Center at Blackfeet Community College (BCC NSFC) and Hopa
Mountain, a Bozeman, Montana based nonprofit organization are developing a
Native Science Fellows effort. The project supports Native American
undergraduate studentsâ€™ diverse pathways to geosciences careers by providing
fellowships with science organizations, nonprofits and other tribal colleges.
The project will also focus on active cohort groups to increase engagement in
higher education and geosciences careers. Specific objectives of the initiative
are to match promising tribal college and university students annually with
hands-on field work and professional research experiences to build skills and
pathways to academic and professional careers in the geosciences. These students
will also be mentored by geosciences professionals and a supportive cohort
network throughout the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating three cohort
groups of Fellows linked to two tribal colleges and universities, this
initiative will be able to compare and contrast the pathways of these Fellows at
each site to determine the most effective strategies to (1) increase the number
of Indigenous students who are engaged in community-based geosciences research,
field experiences and careers; (2) develop work and training programs for
Indigenous tribal college and university students interested in the geosciences;
(3) build a network of community-based science professionals who are committed
to the success of Native American and Latino students and provide ongoing
support for personal, academic and professional success; and (4) prepare these
students to transfer to undergraduate or graduate school. These goals align with
the GEO Education and Diversity Strategic Framework goals of developing a
diverse, competitive, and engaged geosciences
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by The
Directorate for Geosciences GEOPAths Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.