* 2023590
* The efficiency of baroclinic instability in the global ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Stuart Bishop, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 306,472.00

This work will provide a better understanding of the pathways of energy in the
global ocean and the exchanges with the atmosphere. These processes occur on
different time and space scales and regulate Earth’s climate. The ocean
generally gains energy (heat) in the tropics from the sun, which is then
transported poleward by major ocean currents along the western boundaries of
ocean basins, such as the Gulf Stream, and eventually lost back to the
atmosphere in the midlatitudes. Recent research shows that oceanic turbulence in
these midlatitude regions associated with strong current systems leads to a loss
of energy to the atmosphere, not accounted for in traditional ocean circulation
models. This sink of energy to the atmosphere at these turbulent time and space
scales modulates the ocean circulation in unforeseen ways that need further
investigation. This project will enhance our understanding of these processes
and will develop parameterizations for their inclusion in general ocean
circulation models leading to improving projections of Earth’s climate system.
The study will combine remotely sensed data of sea surface height, surface
temperature, and net heat flux collected over several decades with numerical
simulations of coupled and uncoupled high-resolution Earth system models. The
analysis will lead to better quantifying the rates and mechanisms of how energy
is transferred from the ocean to the atmosphere and how this is associated with
mesoscale eddies in the ocean. This proposal will support and help build the
laboratory of an early career PI and the training of a PhD student. Public
outreach lectures will be used to communicate the importance of the Gulf Stream
in a changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will aid in a better
understanding of the pathways of energy in the global ocean. High-resolution
climate models persistently have high sea surface temperature variance, but
surface EKE comparable to observations. This proposal will help shed light on
why this discrepancy occurs. Work in the Kuroshio Extension using a regional
coupled model shows that this sink accounts for more than 70% of the EPE that
would be available for conversion to eddy kinetic energy (EKE). However, it is
still an open question how the OME-A sink connects to a modulation of EKE
globally. This study will use multiple decades of available remote-sensed
surface observations and a suite of global high-resolution simulations in
coupled and uncoupled configurations of the Community Earth System Model
(CESM-H) to access energy conversion rates through a local and global analysis.
A local analysis requires a decomposition of the eddy heat flux field into
divergent and rotational fluxes. The principal investigator will use Helmholtz
decomposition to solve the Poisson equation globally in order to extract the
dynamically important divergent fluxes. The main objectives are to 1) determine
how the OME-A feedback modulates the efficiency of baroclinic instability to
convert potential to kinetic energy in CESM-H; and 2) examine the spatial and
temporal scale dependence of the EPE sources and sinks in state-of-the-art
observations and CESM-H. There will be particular focus on the northern
hemisphere Western Boundary Currents and their correspondence with decadal
climate modes such as the North Atlantic Oscillation and Pacific Decadal
Oscillation. A new parameter will be defined that does not depend on absolute
model energetics and will allow model evaluations in current and future High-
Resolution Model Intercomparison Projects such as the international Laboratory
for High-Resolution Earth System Prediction (iHESP). The proposed team will
collaborate with participants in the climate process team (CPT) on ocean
transport and eddy energy and will ultimately contribute to a framework for
parameterization development of the OME-A EPE sink in coarse-resolution coupled
climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.