* 2023714
* Collaborative Research: Continental Shelf Geodesy: Continued Development of a Low Cost Sea Floor Geodetic System Based on GPS
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 11/30/2023
* USD 118,801.00

Existing technology for sea floor geodesy (measuring small motions of the sea
floor) has limitations in terms precision and cost. This is especially true in
the shallow continental shelf environment, where highly variable salinity,
temperature and density of the ocean cause problems for acoustic ranging and sea
floor pressure techniques. Potential applications of the proposed system include
monitoring of underwater volcanoes, offshore oil and gas fields, and the shallow
offshore portion of subduction zones. Measuring strain accumulation and release
processes in the shallow offshore region of subduction zones is especially
important because it has the potential to improve our understanding of giant
subduction zone earthquakes and tsunamis, as well as improve our ability to
forecast these catastrophic events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed design is
based on a successful Italian concept that uses high precision GPS mounted on a
semi-rigid structure and moored to the sea floor. That system has been
successfully tested up to 140 meters water depth on the flanks of an active
volcano, but only acquired vertical component data. The Italian design has been
modified to reduce costs and enable measurement of the full three-dimensional
displacement vector. Initial tests have demonstrated that a simple rigid spar
design is suitable for water depths up to 40 meters. A steel spar is attached by
shackle to a heavy seafloor anchor and is kept near vertical by a near-surface
float. GPS on top of the buoy measures instantaneous position, while tilt and
heading sensors allow correction for buoy motion, enabling daily estimates of
the position of the sea floor anchor precise to 1-2 cm. The new research
proposed here aims to develop and demonstrate a deeper water version, suitable
for water depths up to 150 meters, by adding a cable with orientation sensors to
the buoy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.