* 2023196
* GP-IN: Discovering Pathways into the Geosciences through EarthBus Partnership
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Kamazima Lwiza, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2024
* USD 349,954.00

Stony Brook University’s School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences and
Department of Geosciences have partnered with other entities to form an
“EarthBus Partnership”. The alliance is designed to increase the diversity of
student participation in geosciences. The project targets earth science students
and teachers at the middle and high school levels, and community college
students. The project goal is to train 2,500 high school students, 120 earth
science teachers, and 50-60 community college students over the life of the
project. Expected results are to increase interest in geosciences as well as
improved student performance on State mandated instruction, and to equip
teachers with strategies and techniques for helping students engage in project-
based learning in the earth sciences. These outcomes will be achieved through a
multi-pronged approach by using classrooms, BioBus vehicles as mobile labs, use
of drone technology and field research. Also, the PIs will reach out to school
districts on Long Island to collaborate on field research projects. The proposed
outreach will allow the PIs to test the impact of integrating school districts
from different economic levels in learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “EarthBus
Partnership” aims to improve participation of diverse groups of students in
geoscience fields. This will be done by recruiting and mentoring students at
high schools with large populations of underrepresented students, and bringing
awareness of geoscience careers as fulfilling employment paths in private
industry, government service, and academia. The project targets earth science
students and teachers at the middle and high school levels, and community
college students. The goals are: (1) to increase interest in the geosciences as
well as improve performance on State mandated instruction and use phenomena
based learning as a tool to increase understanding of the New York State
Learning Standards and federal Next Generation Science Standards; (2) to provide
teachers with strategies and techniques to help students engage in project-based
learning with real world earth science tasks, open-ended investigations, and the
engineering and design processes. (3) to provide short-term employment and
research opportunities to high school and community college students, so they
see earth science as a possible career path; (4) to engage earth science
teachers in better understanding and curriculum design focusing on current
research areas and techniques in the geosciences; and (5) to test the efficacy
of school-district integration and collaboration across different economic
status in student engagement and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.