* 2023234
* A Longitudinal Study of Women in Physics and People of Color in STEM at Primarily White Institutions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ramon Barthelemy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 472,398.00

This project is a ten-year follow up to a pilot study that examined the
educational experiences and career goals of 21 women graduate students in
physics and astronomy. The previous study results revealed a complex tapestry of
experiences with mentoring, gender discrimination, and the development of career
goals that influenced the studentsâ€™ ultimate outcomes. The study showed that
many were considering non-academic careers because of their perceptions of work-
life balance and the academic workplace climate. The current project will expand
the previous study by interviewing the original cohort to collect pathway data
that compares their careers and trajectories to their stated goals and
aspirations. The study will add a second cohort to lay the groundwork for
further research that includes multiple intersectional identities that typically
are omitted from physics education research. The goal is to inform interventions
that may be used to recruit and retain women STEM faculty. The investigator will
also implement a professional development plan to build STEM education research
capacity through mentors who will provide guidance on qualitative data
collection and analysis, manuscript writing, and translation of research to
practice. The project is expected to expand the pool of STEM education
researchers, enhance the knowledge about the role of mentoring in STEM workforce
development, and reduce STEM disparities among women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will seek to understand the longitudinal career outcomes and gendered
experiences of women in physics and astronomy by investigating the following
research questions: (1)What are the differences between the career expectations
of women in graduate school and their actual careers over the last ten years?
(2) What role did mentorship play in their career trajectory and outcomes? and
(3) What gendered experiences have they had since completing their graduate
degrees? The research questions will test the hypothesis that the career
trajectories of women and people of color in physics are impacted by their
identities and mentoring experiences which in turn inform their career goals and
academic pathways. Framed by constructivist grounded theory and standpoint
theory, the study will use an intersectional approach to employ qualitative
methods to analyze data from semi-structured interviews at the University of
Utah to answer the research questions. The interview protocol will be a list of
themed questions that will be discussed during the conversational interviews.
The methodology will not compare women to their peers, but it will yield data
about their individual perspectives about their experiences. The study will
produce methodological approaches and results that could be transferable to
other STEM disciplines for prospective academic and non-academic careers. The
knowledge produced will be useful also in improving the academic climate for
minority students in physics and astronomy and fostering a diverse pool of
talent for the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by
the ECR: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR
Core Research Program. ECR funds STEM education research that focuses on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.