* 2023987
* Collaborative Research: Tellurene mid-infrared integrated photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Juejun Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 310,000.00

Lack of optical materials compatible with common semiconductor substrates
presents a standing hurdle for integrated photonic device development in the
mid-IR domain. This award supports a collaborative team to conduct fundamental
research to advance knowledge for the integration of emerging optical
nanomaterials with the mid-IR photonics platform. The research aims to enable
the design, fabrication, and integration of mid-IR photonic components and
circuits based on a new optical nanomaterial, namely two-dimensional (2-D)
tellurene. Tellurene, atomically thin crystals of elemental tellurium, is an
emerging 2-D material amenable to scalable synthesis and uniquely combines small
and tunable bandgap energies, high carrier mobility, exceptionally large
electro-optic activity, and superior chemical stability, which makes it a
promising and versatile material platform for mid-IR photonics. The mid-IR
spectral band (2-20 micro-meter) is of significant technological importance for
thermal imaging, spectroscopic sensing, infrared countermeasures, and free-space
communications. The proposed tellurene-based device platform, once demonstrated,
will have a transformative impact on mid-IR integrated photonics. The envisioned
detector and modulator devices both are predicted to have performances far
exceeding the state-of-the-art. This research involves several disciplines,
including materials science, electrical engineering, photonics, device physics,
manufacturing, and chemistry. The multi-disciplinary research combined with the
proposed outreach activities will provide valuable opportunities for exposing
the students to cutting-edge nanotechnology and optical sciences to inspire
their interest in STEM career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2-D materials have
emerged as a promising material group for photonic integration, given their
singular optical properties not found in conventional bulk and thin-film
materials. However, some scientific and technical barriers are yet to be
overcome to realize the full application potential of 2-D materials for mid-IR
integrated photonics. This research is to fill the knowledge gap on the
integration of solution-synthesized tellurene with the mid-IR photonics
platform. The objectives are (1) to demonstrate high-performance waveguide
integrated room-temperature mid-IR photodetectors and ultrafast electro-optic
modulators based on tellurene, and (2) to explore the unique advantage and
capability of solution-synthesized tellurene as a novel optical material for
integrated mid-IR photonic devices. The research team will innovate a processing
scheme that directly fabricates waveguide structures on tellurene using
compositionally-engineered chalcogenide glass as both the light guiding medium
and an infrared-transparent gate dielectric. This monolithic approach
capitalizes on the broadband mid-IR transparency and near-room-temperature
processing of chalcogenide glass to not only simplify the integration process
but also allow the photonic circuit to be specifically optimized and precisely
aligned to tellurene crystals with lithographic accuracy. The team will also
develop a physics-based framework to design and guide the material synthesis,
device fabrication, and system integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.