* 2023513
* Calcium and potassium isotopic study of igneous and metamorphic transport processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

Earth scientists measure the chemical composition and age of minerals and rocks
to get information about how they formed. Using the information gained through
analysis, and with knowledge of mineralogy, physics, and chemistry, it is
possible to reconstruct how the Earth has evolved and changed over its 4.5
billion year history. There are many difficulties in this endeavor, because
typically rocks and minerals are subjected to high temperatures and pressures at
multiple times since they first formed. To account for the changes that these
heating and burial processes caused, it is necessary to understand how chemical
elements move between minerals and rock layers at high temperature and
pressures, movement that also results in new minerals being formed. This project
is aimed at using a novel approach to better define how the chemistry of rocks
and minerals can change when they are subjected to metamorphism and melting at
high temperature. The plan is to use the relative proportions of the isotopes of
two important chemical elements – potassium (K) and calcium (Ca) – to
distinguish the extent to which rock chemistry has been changed, and the
processes responsible. This approach has not been employed previously to rocks
in the field, but there is evidence that it will be instructive based on
experiments that have been performed in various laboratories around the world
over the past ten years. The approach can also help us to understand how magma
forms in the Earth and produces volcanic eruptions. This project will have
broader impacts in education and in chemistry and materials science. Although in
detail there are many complexities, the proposed project will produce results
that are keyed directly to macroscopic features that are widely observed in rock
exposures globally and frequently used for teaching. To this end the project
will produce teaching materials to illustrate the processes and their
significance that will be posted on the web and made available for
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at developing a new
level of understanding of high temperature igneous and metamorphic systems,
emphasizing the isotopes of Ca and K, and where there is substantial potential
to advance our fundamental understanding of chemical transport during
petrogenesis. An essential aspect of the proposed work is a focus on field
occurrences having sufficiently predictable starting conditions that they can be
treated as natural experiments. This approach is in contrast to laboratory
experiments, which have been done in abundance, where run conditions can be
controlled but the applicability to nature is questionable. The goal is to
better understand how the mobility of key chemical constituents is controlled
during metamorphism and in magma chambers, and how that mobility relates to
fractionation of Ca and K isotopes. Isotopic effects in these elements are
tracers of micro- and nano-scale processes at mineral surfaces and transport
within geologic media at larger scales. In particular, isotopic fractionation in
these elements is primarily attributable to chemical diffusion, and hence the
isotopic measurements will help to distinguish to what degree diffusion, as
opposed to fluid advection, is responsible for the bulk of chemical
redistribution during high temperature petrogenetic processes. The proposed
research requires high precision isotopic and chemical characterization of rocks
and minerals, insight about the origin of geologic features exposed in outcrop,
knowledge of diffusion, thermodynamics, heat transport, petrology, and
structural geology, insight into isotopic fractionation mechanisms, and an
ability to model the processes with analytical and numerical approaches to
extract key information from the measurements. This multifaceted and
multidisciplinary effort, which is necessary for advancing geochemical and
petrological sciences, provides rich educational opportunities for students and
advanced researchers as well as an opportunity to develop a new level of
understanding of rock-forming processes in the Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.