* 2023626
* Laboratory measurements of turbulence and coherent structures on both sides of a wind-driven air-water interface
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Fabrice Veron, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 549,848.00

The exchange across the air-sea interface of heat, moisture, momentum and gases
like O2 or CO2 are critically important for many phenomena including weather and
climate. In recent years, considerable progress has been made in quantifying
air-sea fluxes. However, the fundamental processes involved rely on small scale
turbulence at the air-sea interface. These processes are poorly resolved and
air-sea fluxes are generally parametrized using readily available, bulk
variables such as wind speed. This study will make detailed laboratory
experiments which will simultaneously measure the flows on both sides of the
air-sea interface to investigate the coherent flow structures and and whether
and how turbulence on either side of the interface is coupled. Ultimately the
primary societal benefits of this research will be in improved models of weather
and climate and the economic and social impacts of improved forecasts including
on fisheries, the energy industry, commodity markets, insurance, and
disaster/threat preparedness. At the local level, the project will help improve
both undergraduate and graduate opportunities including summer fellowships in
Research Education for Undergraduates (REU) programs. New knowledge generated by
this research will be introduced into undergraduate and graduate classes, and
disseminated more broadly through the PI’s web site. Laboratory visits for
schoolchildren and other groups and open houses are conducted at the PI’s
laboratory. These occasions provide an opportunity to inform the general public
of the scientific issues that affect them and to inform school children about
careers in the ocean science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon
extensive experience in measuring wavy turbulent flows in one of the fluids (air
or water) and extends it by resolving both sides simultaneously. Specifically,
the aims of this research are to: 1) Perform controlled laboratory experiments
to measure the flow on both sides of the air-water interface simultaneously, 2)
Evaluate the coupling and potential causality between the turbulent coherent
structures on both sides on the interface, 3) Assess the contribution and
influence of a wavy interface on the turbulent fluxes, and 4) Compare these
results with established turbulent boundary layer results. It is expected that
the findings will lead to a more fundamental understanding of the role of short
surface waves, turbulence, Langmuir circulations, microbreaking and separation
in air-sea fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.