* 2023752
* Collaborative Research: ASCENT: 3D memristor convolutional kernels with diffusive memristor based reservoir for real-time machine learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jianhua Yang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,332,000.00

Digital computers built with traditional electronic devices based on
conventional architecture are ubiquitous in our daily lives. However, they are
not able to keep up with the increasing demand for energy efficiency for data-
intensive tasks, e.g., video streaming, because of intrinsic limitations.
Memristor, a novel device whose resistance depends on their electrical history,
has been proved to be able to overcome or avoid some of the limitations by
performing computing at the same location where data is stored. With only one
type of memristor, however, the demonstrated systems to date lack real-time
learning capability in the hardware, which is required for both spatial and
temporal information processing. The proposed project will develop a
fundamentally new hardware system that integrates two different types of
memristors and supporting circuits into three-dimensional (3D) networks. The new
computing platform is expected to be more versatile, more compact, and more
power efficient. The proposed research will lead to transformative hardware and
technologies, contribute to the training of the nationâ€™s high-caliber workforce,
and hence reclaim the competitiveness and leadership of the IC industry of the
U.S. The proposed project will be also integrated with STEM education through
classroom teaching, summer camp for community college teachers, K-12 students,
with the full participation of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims at experimentally
implementing 3D memristor-based neural networks for real-time machine learning
with high energy-speed efficiency. The specific objectives towards this goal are
as follows: (1) to design and fabricate high-density nanoscale 3D-stacked
passive arrays for parallel convolution operations for spatial feature
extraction; (2) to enable reservoir computing with novel diffusive memristors in
order to extract temporal patterns; (3) to develop learning algorithms co-
designed with the hardware; and (4) to design and build an integrated system on
printed circuit boards that physically integrates the 3D-stacked kernels, the
diffusive memristor dynamic reservoir, the fully connected layer, and the
auxiliary digital circuits for real-time video processing and classification.
The success of the proposed work will not only provide an energy-area efficient
hardware system with custom-tailored algorithms and software to realize real-
time machine learning, more importantly, but it will also provide solutions to
the biggest obstacles that hinder the processing-in-memory. This system could
deliver a large computing throughput with small operating power and compact
system size. More importantly, the pretrained convolution kernels and fixed
connections of the dynamic reservoir could substantially reduce the training
complexity, rendering the system suitable for real-time learning tasks like
video classification with hardware learning circuits combined with co-designed
algorithms and software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.