* 2023648
* The Maintenance of Cultural Continuity in the Context of Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alexandre Tokovinine, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 142,678.00

Understanding the relationship between governance, religion, and cultural
identity is central to the social sciences. The underlying tension is evident in
the modern globalized world, but it was also common in many earlier societies.
Archaeology offers a valuable perspective on the topic by revealing long-term
social processes and by exploring how the dynamic interplay between power and
religion was mediated by practices and objects of everyday life. This project
will examine the relationship between ruling power and cultural change in the
context in which rulers relied less on socio-economic integration and more on
moral and religious authority. The study will determine the extent to which
leaders could introduce new beliefs and values without compromising the
resilience of the underlying system. In addition to informing the broader
discussion on the nature of governing authority, this project will assist in the
preservation of cultural heritage. It will provide research and training
opportunities to undergraduates and graduate students. The methodological
emphasis on large-scale three-dimensional digitization of excavations and finds
will result in a large body of data available online. It will promote teaching
and learning by offering remote access for low-income and minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paradox of certain polities is their relative
stability with no evidence of extensive armies and bureaucracies. If sovereigns
could tap into group identities to ensure social cohesion, there should be cases
when those identities clashed with their ambitions. This research will center on
one such case of relocation that was marked by foreign religious practices and
cultural values communicated through architecture, stone and ceramic artifacts.
The research team will study residences before, during, and after the relocation
and will examine spatial layout, architecture, stone tools, and ceramic vessels
used in ritual offerings and feasting. Researchers will rely on ground survey,
excavations, and subsequent investigation of the retrieved material record with
an emphasis on architectural styles, ceramic analysis, lithic analysis,
epigraphy, and chemical characterization of certain construction materials. The
interdisciplinary dataset will reveal whether different legitimization
strategies employed by rulers had a positive or negative impact on their
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.