* 2023415
* Investigating the exchange flow in glacial fjords through an estuarine lens
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Robert Chant, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 617,470.00

With the Greenland Ice Sheet losing mass at an accelerating rate, a poor
understanding of ocean-glacier interactions contributes to the uncertainties in
sea level rise projections. Although fjords cannot be resolved in global climate
models, fjord processes must be understood – and eventually parameterized – in
order to study the global impacts of both ocean warming on glacier retreat and
increased glacial freshwater on ocean circulation. Fjords connect Greenland’s
marine-terminating glaciers to the continental shelf ocean, forming long, narrow
conduits for the export of glacial freshwater and the import of oceanic heat to
melt ice. As such, fjord dynamics modulate the exchange of heat and freshwater
between the ocean and glaciers, and processes of climatic relevance are affected
by both directions of this ocean-ice interaction. In terms of the cryosphere’s
impact on the ocean, the Greenland Ice Sheet is losing mass at an accelerating
pace, and ocean warming has been implicated as a trigger for recent glacier
changes via submarine melting in fjords. In the other direction, increased
freshwater from Greenland can impact ocean dynamics and ecosystems – locally
within fjords, regionally in coastal currents, and potentially globally by
altering the deep-convection in basins of the North Atlantic. Despite the
importance of fjord circulation to ocean-glacier interactions, we have a limited
understanding of the fjord processes that transport heat, salt and freshwater
between the shelf ocean and glaciers. Recent observations have demonstrated the
importance of two primary modes of circulation: freshwater buoyancy forcing from
subglacial discharge at the glacier, and synoptic external forcing from winds
and coastal trapped waves on the shelf. Drawing on these observations, the
investigators will carry out numerical simulations of a fjord and its adjacent
shelf, for both a quasi-realistic fjord and an idealized set of simulations. The
goal of the project is to investigate the dynamics of the buoyancy-driven flow
at the fjord-scale, and how this circulation interacts with synoptic external
forcing to drive a net transport of heat, salt and freshwater. The relative
contributions of these modes of circulation to mixing and the total exchange
flow will be assessed spatially within fjords with characteristics
representative of Greenland’s major fjords. This project will support K-12
education outreach, in close collaboration with two educational specialists at
Rutgers. The PIs will help develop polar data kits with fjord observations and
idealized model output for students to use in the Rutgers’ Data Jam Program, an
opportunity for students to get hands-on experience working with data and
developing scientific skills. The project will involve participation in Data Jam
activities and also the 4-H STEM Ambassador program at Rutgers, where the PIs
will engage with 9th graders from underserved schools and develop an educational
component focused on melting of glaciers, sea level rise, and climate change.
Additionally, this project, which brings together scientists across a wide range
of career stages, will train a PhD student and support an early career
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New observations from near-glacier surveys and
downstream moorings in fjords have been instrumental for understanding fjord
exchange flow. Dynamical frameworks have recently been developed for external
(shelf and wind) forcing in isolation, but no theory exists to describe the
buoyancy-driven flow that transports tracers through the fjord or the impact of
external forcing on this exchange. A realistic fjord model could untangle these
intertwined dynamics and provide new insights into processes driving ocean-
cryosphere exchange. While glacial fjords are fundamentally estuaries – coastal
embayments where terrestrial freshwater mixes into seawater – they do not fit
easily into traditional estuarine paradigms. However, there are many useful
frameworks to build on from the coastal and estuarine world. This project will
investigate fjord dynamics through an estuarine lens, drawing on better-studied
processes in standard estuaries, and will attempt to expand estuarine paradigms
to include glacial fjords. These questions will be addressed by a team of
investigators with complementary expertise in fjord dynamics and ocean-ice
interactions, estuarine dynamics, and coastal modeling and shelf
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.