* 2023514
* Development of an Automated and User-Friendly Technique for Measuring Dissolved Methane and Nitrous Oxide Concentrations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* John Kessler, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,373.00

This research is fully developing an automated, user-friendly, field-portable,
and cost-effective technique for the high-precision analysis of dissolved
methane and nitrous oxide concentrations in discrete seawater and freshwater
samples. The oceanic and freshwater methane and nitrous oxide systems are large
natural reservoirs of these potent greenhouse gases in active exchange with the
atmosphere. Numerous hypotheses have been levied suggesting positive feedbacks
between increasing ocean temperatures and increasing emissions of these gases.
Yet, new and often unexpected production and consumption mechanisms are being
discovered and the biogeochemical mechanisms behind these processes are being
constrained, suggesting that the dynamics of these systems are not as
straightforward as may have originally been hypothesized. While these
investigations are diverse spanning local properties to global processes, they
are all founded on fundamental measurements of the dissolved concentrations of
methane and nitrous oxide. However, a variety of measurement techniques are in
use between laboratories which have recently been shown to produce results with
substantial interlaboratory variability. The work conducted here is establishing
a technique that can be relatively easily implemented into different
laboratories measuring these gases for increased precision and interlaboratory
comparability of results. Beyond the broad scientific impacts this work will
have on the research communities measuring these dissolved gases, this project
will also have broad impacts on STEM education. A series of educational modules
is being developed to introduce, excite, and educate undergraduate students for
technology and instrumentation development in the geosciences, and the modules
will be incorporated into a sequence of research courses at the University of
Rochester. This project is also supporting graduate and undergraduate students
from groups underrepresented in the ocean sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
precision analytical chemistry techniques for the quantitative analysis of these
molecules must first transfer these gases from the dissolved to gaseous phase.
Thus, the technique being developed here incorporates components of both vacuum
gas extraction, for increased efficiency, and gas-water equilibration, for
increased precision, in a fully automated platform, for increase
reproducibility. This project recognizes that most laboratories currently
measuring these dissolved gas concentrations likely have one or more of the
relatively expensive detectors necessary for these gas-phase analyses. Thus,
this project is fully developing a relatively inexpensive “front-end” and freely
distributing the automation software, so that this technique can be interfaced
with a variety of already available detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.