* 2023995
* I-Corps: Label-free optical imaging of the lymphatic system for anatomical pathology, image-guided surgery, and disease screening
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it can
potentially improve the survival rate of cancer patients and increase work
productivity of physicians from a number of specialties. This I-Corps project
aims to explore the applications of a technology for anatomical pathology,
intra-operative imaging, intra-operative diagnosis, and noninvasive cancer
screening. The lymphatic system is extremely important to human health because
it is responsible for immune functions. However, it has been traditionally
difficult to visualize the lymphatic system because it is translucent and flows
very slowly. This project explores opportunities for a technology that
visualizes the lymphatic system without any dye or label. In anatomical
pathology, pathologists can potentially use it to find more lymph nodes to
evaluate cancer staging and help improve survival rates. In intra-operative
imaging, cardiothoracic surgeons and plastic surgeons can potentially use it to
find individual lymph nodes or lymphatic vessels faster and with higher
accuracy. In non-invasive screening, physicians can potentially use it to
evaluate the lymph node conditions of patients as a disease
indicator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a cutting-edge
optical imaging technique that exploits the natural contrast between the
lymphatic system and the surrounding fat. It does not require an injection or
preparation step. The imaging contrast is purely based on the contrast in
chemical composition. In mice experiments, this technology can visualize almost
all the superficial lymph nodes through the intact skin. When monitoring mouse
lymph node responses to cancer and vaccines, immune responses as early as 9
hours after injection were observed. In human specimen pilot studies, human
lymph nodes surrounded by fat were observed with extremely high contrast. This
technology may be translated to use in anatomical pathology, intra-operative
imaging, and noninvasive screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.