* 2023698
* Joint Undertaking for an African Materials Institute (JUAMI)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Sossina Haile, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 333,699.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Joint Undertaking for African Materials Institute
(JUAMI) is an Advanced Studies Institute that serves to connect materials
researchers in Africa with those in the United States. The December 6-18, 2020
school in Nairobi, Kenya on "Materials for Sustainable Energy" will enable
participants to explore shared scientific challenges and to co-generate new
knowledge and innovative solutions with colleagues who bring different national,
cultural and institutional perspectives. World-renowned experts will teach
courses and provide opportunities for hands-on learning. The Institute promises
to strengthen the capacity of the African Materials Science community by
providing short-term graduate level training of African students and researchers
by some of the world's top scientists during a two-week school. It benefits U.S.
participants by not only providing access to these same top scientists, but also
because it immerses the US participants in a rich, transcontinental network of
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Motivated by the need to
develop and sustain positive international scientific relationships between the
scientific communities in the United States and Africa, JUAMI employs a unique
format to address three primary concerns: the creation of new knowledge and
innovative solutions through cross-cultural collaborations, the need for U.S.
graduate students and faculty to be engaged in international research
collaborations and networks, and the value to the United States of remaining a
desired collaboration partner for African counterparts. This two-week school,
which follows on earlier such schools, focuses on "Materials for Sustainable
Energy", a topic at the frontier of materials research, with lectures offered by
world-renowned experts recruited both internationally and locally. The
curriculum includes directed hands-on activities, lectures, and the
preparation/presentation of group proposals that give rise to ongoing cross-
cultural collaborative research projects. Experts from the Searle Center for
Advancing Learning and Teaching at Northwestern University provide ongoing
assessment to quantify educational outcomes and improve pedagogy and program
structure. In addition, a graduate student in Northwestern’s acclaimed media
arts program is recruited to document the activities for subsequent public
dissemination of JUAMI activities. The 2020 school takes advantage of JUAMI's
existing clearing house, a virtual gathering place, to connect researchers and
resources across international boundaries. The institute’s unique format,
essentially a hybrid between a state-of-the-art conference offering advanced
seminars and a school with hands-on learning opportunities, is key to achieving
mutual benefit for the United States and Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.