* 2023248
* Collaborative Research: Plant-based Pathogen Filters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Thanh Nguyen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 140,693.00

Viral contamination of drinking water can cause disease. Although such
waterborne diseases pose significant public health threats, current filtration
technologies suitable for virus removal have high cost and energy requirements.
This prevents their widespread use and has led to the need for less expensive
and sustainable alternatives for disinfecting drinking water. The goal of this
project is to use computational biology tools to discover plant-based peptides
that can trap viruses to create low-cost and energy-efficient drinking water
filters. The potential for scale up will be assessed to understand the impacts
of common water constituents on virus-protein interactions to improve
sustainable and effective filter operation. Creation of a large database of
plant peptides will be broadly informative to other scientific disciplines and
easily accessible via internet resource to be developed as part of this project.
Successful development of plant-based water biofilters will have a range of
potential applications including the replacement of aging infrastructure and use
in disaster relief situations. More broadly, low cost filters have significant
potential to decrease waterborne disease deaths worldwide through improved
access to clean drinking water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water contamination with
human enteric viruses is one of the leading causes of acute diarrhea
hospitalization and fatalities worldwide. Removal of these viruses can be
achieved through filtration and other water treatment technologies. Although
filtration has been one of the most widely used techniques for drinking water
treatment, there has been comparatively little innovation in filtration in
recent decades. The goal of this project is to develop sustainable, scalable
filters functionalized with sustainable plant material known as antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs). Specific objectives designed to achieve the project goal focus
on understanding the fundamental biomolecular and physicochemical interactions
to: 1) Computationally identify plant-derived AMPs that preferentially bind
viral capsid proteins for use in plant-based pathogen filters; 2) Validate
chosen AMPs using lab removal tests with the enteric viruses Adenovirus 2,
Rotavirus OSU strain, and Tulane virus (a surrogate for human norovirus); 3)
Identify readily available substrates and feasible filter configurations that
can be tailored to a range of applications; and 4) Quantify interactions and
interferences between filter surfaces, viruses, and water matrix components to
enable translation to the field scale. Successful completion of these research
objectives will lead to the development of a data-driven framework for creating
and evaluating AMP-based materials. Further, low cost-effective plant-based
pathogen filters have the potential to reduce waterborne disease worldwide
through widespread adoption of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.