* 2023250
* Engineering Enzymes for New Stereoselective and Stereodynamic Processes: An Integrated Chemistry -Bioengineering- X-Ray Crystallography-Molecular Dynamics Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* David Berkowitz, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2024
* USD 603,881.00

Most pharmaceutical drugs and agrochemicals are what is referred to as fine
chemicals. The molecules have very specific structures that give them their
beneficial properties. Enzymes are highly effective in producing such
structures. The objective of this project is to develop a strategy to design and
tune the activity of enzymes that are involved in the production of a class of
fine chemicals called taxanes. These compounds have anti-cancer properties. One
of the taxanes, taxol, is currently used in the treatment of metastatic breast
cancers. The project will include educating and mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students at the interface of biomolecular engineering, chemistry and
structural biology. A collaboration with the science department at a large
public high school with a diverse student population is also planned. These
efforts will develop a workforce to support a vibrant
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools of molecular dynamics simulation and
x-ray crystallography will guide the directed evolution of two promising
nicotinamide-dependent oxidoreductases. The focus is on engineering these
enzymes for reactions in which racemic substrates can be effectively deracemized
and converted to primarily one of four possible stereoisomers through dynamic
reductive kinetic resolution. The targeted transformations will provide access
to a spectrum of valuable building blocks for natural products synthesis,
chemical biology and medicinal chemistry. Several building blocks to be
constructed are for chemotherapeutic agents of the taxane family, useful as
anti-cancer drugs. In previous work, the team has shown that the Clostridial
enzyme (CaADH) shows remarkable substrate promiscuity, while at the same time
exhibits considerable stereochemical fidelity. Preliminary results suggest that
the origins of this behavior lie in a flexible binding pocket. A key goal of
this project is to understand how this flexible active site is able to adapt to
substrates of different shapes and functionalities and stereoselectively
transform these substrates. More specifically, the team seeks to elucidate the
mechanisms by which such biocatalysts effectively make two ‘stereochemical
choices’, namely enantiodiscrimination (choosing one of two rapidly
equilibrating enantiomers-sets first stereocenter) and facial discrimination
(delivering a nicotinamide-derived hydride equivalent to one of two
diastereofaces-sets second stereocenter).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.