* 2023337
* Support for Student Participation in the 64th International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication; New Orleans, Louisiana; May 26-29, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Chih-Hao Chang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2022
* USD 18,000.00

This award supports the student attendance at the International Conference on
Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication (EIPBN) to be held
May 26 to 29, 2020, in New Orleans, Louisiana. The EIPBN meeting is an important
annual lithography and nanofabrication gathering and attracts participants and
presenters from academia, industry, and government laboratories. This forum is
instrumental in the generation and incubation of breakthrough and transformative
ideas in many scientific areas including nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing.
This international conference is a key mechanism for linking basic science with
engineering towards the development of useful nano-enabled products, which are
significant to the US and world economies. This conference offers a forum for
the open exchange of new and previously unpublished scientific research and
ideas. This award will partially support the participation of undergraduate and
graduate students, to train the next generation of researchers in nanotechnology
and nanomanufacturing and to broaden participation by students who would
otherwise not be able to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIPBN is a major
international meeting and will provide a single forum for discussion of the
latest developments in directed energy-enabled synthesis, fabrication, imaging,
measurement and characterization of nanoscale structures, multi-layered devices
and multi-scale systems. NSF funding will be used to support about 36 students
financially so that students may participate in short courses, the commercial
session, the technical program, and other social events. There are also a number
of key student programs, including a Career Mentoring Session with academic and
industry leaders, Student Breakfast with the organization committee, and Women
in Nanofabrication (WIN) Luncheon to discuss diversity challenges faced by
nanotechnology researchers and scientists. The conference organization committee
will reach out to local universities and underrepresented groups to recruit
student presenters and participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.