* 2023684
* NSF-BSF:Defining the Role of Steroids and Temperature in Coral Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anne McElroy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 630,548.00

More than 500 million people worldwide depend on coral reefs for food, income,
and coastal protection. But most coral reefs are on the brink of collapse, due
in large part to rising sea temperatures, with 70-90% predicted to degrade by
mid-century. Knowledge of what drives and disrupts coral reproduction, and the
ability to detect early signs of reproductive stress, are crucial to the
conservation of globally threatened reef ecosystems. The corals of the Gulf of
Aqaba (GoA) are uniquely resistant to thermal stress. They may be one of the
century’s last surviving reefs, making them an invaluable resource. This project
will examine key aspects of coral reproductive physiology through the study of
two prevalent, heat-tolerant species of coral in the GoA, and will determine the
individual and combined effects of two global environmental stressors, high
temperature and exposure to chemical contaminants, on these corals’ reproductive
function. The project’s findings and the measurement tool it will develop will
support future research on the stressors and resilience of coral populations
worldwide in the face of climate change and expanding coastal development, which
is occurring in proximity to many of the world’s reef ecosystems. The
international workshop to be held at the project’s conclusion will broaden the
education and the international collaborative capabilities of U.S. graduate
students, share results with scientists from the entire GoA region, support
future development of a regional program to monitor coral reproduction in the
GoA and encourage future research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recovery
of the world’s collapsing coral reef ecosystems depends on successful coral
reproduction and the mitigation of environmental stressors. This project will
study reproduction in corals from the Gulf of Aqaba (GoA), which possess a
unique thermal tolerance. A recent report of loss of synchrony in broadcast
spawning in several key coral species in the GoA makes it imperative to begin
evaluating impediments to successful reproduction in these exceptional corals
before the reef degrades. Researchers will conduct extensive field studies in
the GoA, precisely controlled mesocosm studies in an automated, 80-aquaria
facility, and advanced chemical analyses using high-resolution mass
spectrometry. These innovative experiments will: 1) characterize the role of
specific steroids (estrogen, testosterone, progesterone) in regulating the
months-long reproductive cycle in corals; 2) assess the impacts on that cycle of
two common and potentially interactive environmental stressors, elevated
temperature and exogenous estrogen; and 3) develop the first non-invasive method
to track the progress of reproductive cycles in corals at high resolution.
Science communication efforts including a series of publicly accessible video
blogs and field diaries, a graduate course, and an international workshop, will
contribute to broadening the impact of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.