* 2023924
* Workshop on Intelligent Systems for Information Exploration and Access (iSEA)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Chirag Shah, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 10/31/2023
* USD 23,815.00

We have made many advancements in the field of search and recommendation over
the last few decades. However, there are still challenges and opportunities to
address information access issues that involve solving tasks and accomplishing
goals for a wide variety of users. Specifically, we lack intelligent systems
that can detect not only the request a user is making (what), but also
understand and utilize the intention (why) and strategies (how) while providing
information. Many scholars in the fields of search, Recommender Systems, and AI
have recognized the importance of extracting and understanding a user’s task and
the intention behind doing that task in order to serve them better. However, we
are still struggling to get out of single-query or single-turn interactions. The
proliferation of intelligent agents that come integrated with smartphones and
smart speakers has opened up new modality for interacting with information. But
these agents will need to be able to work more intelligently in understanding
the context and helping the users at the task level. Several events have taken
place over the past few years around this topic, indicating continual and
increased interest by scholars, but also highlighting the need for doing
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-day workshop in the Seattle area will bring
together scholars, students, and leaders working or interested in this domain.
The participants will be invited from different disciplines that include but not
limited to search and AI. The workshop will have three primary goals: (1) learn
and share about the current state of scholarship around intelligent systems for
information access for solving tasks; (2) identify gaps in our knowledge and
opportunities for developing new models, theories, and systems in this space;
and (3) consolidate these discussions and insights to broader audiences through
compilation of a report. The outcomes of this workshop will include a
proceedings, a technical report, and a curriculum for teaching the topics
covered through this workshop to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.