* 2023212
* GP-GO: LET'S GEO: Learning Ecosystem for Training Student Geoscientists for Employment Opportunities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dyanna Czeck, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 290,907.00

A degree in the geosciences is valuable for many careers in sectors related to
water, environment, energy resources, and mineral resources. However, current
projections suggest that soon there will be too few students graduating with
geoscience degrees to fill these important roles. LET’S GEO (Learning Ecosystem
for Training Student Geoscientists for Employment Opportunities) is an
initiative to provide targeted workforce training for students graduating with
geosciences degrees at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM). LET’S GEO
will create a network between a large university’s geoscience department and
local employers which is intended to amplify the impact of the degree programs
for students, provide opportunities to students underrepresented in the field,
and address the projected shortfall of trained
geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LET’S GEO will utilize a geoscience learning
ecosystem approach with geosciences partners from academia (faculty, staff, and
students), government agencies, and private sector employers. The primary goals
of this program are fourfold: 1) to provide current geosciences students with
marketable career-oriented skillsets, 2) to strengthen existing partnerships
between the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) Department of Geosciences
and environmental and geotechnical employers in southeastern Wisconsin, 3) to
recruit more students into geosciences majors through clear articulation and
examples of pathways from geoscience education to employment, and 4) to provide
geosciences faculty who have largely academic work experience an industry-
applicable knowledge base. These goals will be addressed through ongoing
discussions between partners to create integrated frequent opportunities for
students to become engaged in short-term low-stakes career preparation
activities including short-courses on technical topics, communication skills,
and regulatory frameworks required for many geosciences careers; directed
mentoring for students by industry professionals; safety training required for
many geosciences jobs; and job-shadowing opportunities for students to see their
potential career tracks firsthand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.