* 2023430
* Collaborative Research: Nitrous oxide reduction in oxygen minimum zones: an understudied but critical loss term in ocean greenhouse gas cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Damian Grundle, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 545,790.00

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a gas produced by microbes in both aquatic and
terrestrial environments, and, like other greenhouse gases, it contributes to
global warming. Furthermore, N2O can destroy ozone, a gas responsible for
protecting the earth from dangerous ultraviolet radiation. In the ocean, N2O
production is largely controlled by the amount of available dissolved oxygen,
with more N2O being produced under low oxygen concentrations; however, when no
oxygen is available, a scenario referred to as anoxia, microbes in the ocean
switch from producing N2O to consuming N2O. In recent years, it has become
evident that zones of low oxygen are expanding in some areas of the oceans, and
this has raised concern that more N2O will be produced. If this occurs, more N2O
will be emitted to the atmosphere, and will lead to further global warming and
ozone destruction. Because of this, research has largely focused on
understanding how much N2O is produced in the ocean under low oxygen conditions.
If, however, anoxic zones also increase in size, this could act to balance out,
at least to some degree, the predicted increase in N2O production caused by the
expansion of zones where oxygen is present but in low concentrations. This study
aims to simultaneously measure N2O production and consumption, in both low
oxygen and anoxic zones and identify the microbes responsible for N2O production
and consumption. Our results will: 1) lead to a much better understanding of how
N2O consumption in anoxic zones could help to balance out an increase in N2O
production if low oxygen zones in the ocean continue to expand, 2) help to
inform models aimed at predicting oceanic N2O production and emissions to the
atmosphere under future ocean conditions, and 3) allow us to better understand
the microbes involved in N2O production and consumption. Our study will support
a postdoc and undergraduate students who will work at the interface of marine
chemistry and community genomics. The PIs plan to specifically consider
applications from underrepresented minorities and students at institutions with
limited opportunities. The PIs also plan a number of other educational/outreach
programs ranging from teacher-training workshops, teacher internships, and
academic and public lecture series. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceanic
production of the potent greenhouse and ozone destroying gas nitrous oxide (N2O)
increases as dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations transition from oxic to
hypoxic. Marine DO concentrations have decreased globally with climate change
and oceanic hypoxic zones have expanded and predicted to continue expanding.
This increase is cause for concern that N2O production in the ocean will
increase in the future which would lead to higher emissions to the atmosphere.
As a result, much research has focused on quantifying the oxygen thresholds that
correspond to large increases in N2O production. In contrast, relatively few
studies have aimed to quantify the capacity for net N2O consumption, resulting
from microbial N2O reduction to N2 under anoxic conditions, to buffer against
predicted N2O production increases if anoxic zones expand in conjunction with
hypoxic zones. To this end, this study aims to simultaneously quantify N2O
production and consumption from oxic-hypoxic-anoxic water column zones, in order
to determine the potential for N2O consumption to counteract predicted increases
in N2O production. Our field work be conducted in Saanich Inlet, a British
Columbian fjord which is an ideal natural laboratory for our study, as it is
characterized by a well-established oxycline and anoxic zone. Specifically, we
aim to 1) measure bulk N2O concentrations, and, using 15N tracer techniques,
quantify N2O production and consumption rates as DO concentrations decrease from
oxic to anoxic conditions, 2) quantify the magnitude by which N2O consumption in
the anoxic zone balances increased N2O production in the overlying hypoxic
region, and 3) definitively link observed N2O production and consumption rates
to the microorganisms mediating this process, focusing specifically on
distinguishing N2O consumption via denitrifier (NO3- to N2) versus non-
denitrifier (N2O to N2 only) taxa. Ultimately, our results will provide
quantitative information on N2O consumption rates over fluctuating ocean
conditions, thereby helping constrain models of oxygen effects on net N2O
production and ocean-to-atmosphere greenhouse gas fluxes. Furthermore, this work
will identify the taxonomic breadth of microbes capable of N2O reduction and
their linkage to actual N2O reduction rates, thereby providing a quantitative
understanding of whether or not the detection of specific bio-signatures is
predictive of marine N2O dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.