* 2023007
* Collaborative Research: GP-IN: Traditional Knowledge In Geoscience: Policy and Research Practices
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Judith Clarke, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 48,003.00

This project engages in geoscience research, education, and policy training to
align and braid Traditional Knowledge (TK) from Native American/Alaska Native
(NA/AN) communities with Western science disciplines. The project encourages
participation of underrepresented students (i.e. Indigenous, African American,
Hispanic) into geoscience and policy research in an effort to demonstrate the
diversity and potential for STEM careers and to provide rigorous geoscience
research projects that are place- and community based in collaboration with
NA/AN communities. The project builds upon multiple scientific paradigms
blending biology, math, oceanography, chemistry, and environmental sciences with
TK to encourage student interest in STEM. The program seeks to pointedly improve
retention of NA/AN students in geoscience by fostering the creation of peer and
mentor networks through collaborative research between tribal communities and
academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs seek to develop an innovative and
culturally aligned research program through the development of culturally
aligned geoscience research and teaching models and by building on research in
STEM education that provide theoretical and empirical justification for the
project. The project investigates the impact of a culturally aligned geoscience
research program to increase NA/AN students self-efficacy as scientists. The PIs
believe that by acknowledging TK and STEM knowledge systems as valid modes of
communicating science in the context of place, language, and culture the project
effectively fosters intellectual justice and equal access to geoscience research
and education. This program introduces a new model for undergraduate research by
incorporating place- and community-based research coupled with TK and western
knowledge systems, and through the incorporation of policy practices and drivers
at both a federal and local scale. The program seeks to enhance the diversity of
the geoscience workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.