* 2023410
* GEOPAths UP: Geoscience on-ramps for HBCU STEM majors
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Tiffani Holmes, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 340,618.00

Geoscience lags behind almost all other Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math (STEM) disciplines with respect to diversity; for example from 2001 to 2010
the nation graduated 539 African American geoscientists, which was a mere 1.6%
of the geoscience degrees. Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU)
are an excellent source of underrepresented minority STEM majors, although they
account for only 3% of US colleges and universities but have produced 27% of the
African-American bachelor degrees in STEM. However geoscience is a “discovery
science”, where students often don’t realize it is a career option until too
late in their undergraduate years, and chances of discovering geosciences in
college is extremely slim as there are only few geoscience programs at HBCUs.
This project will enhance the undergraduate experience through sustained new
multi- and academic-year research, and experiential learning activities that
nurture students’ quest for geologic knowledge, and provide new mentorship and
access to professional networking and career pathways in the geosciences.
Overall, this project seeks to couple education research and education practice
with institutional capacity for preparing a professional workforce with skills
that tomorrow’s employers need, both through direct engagement with students and
sharing of successful strategies with other organizations and institutions of
higher learning. The project activities are designed to increase the number of
African-American students who graduate with the intention of pursuing a
geoscience-related career either by applying to graduate school or directly
entering the workforce. The overall program is also designed to be a model which
could be adopted by lone geoscientists at other HBCUs or Minority Serving
Institutions, in collaboration with other STEM faculty members and outside
organizations. In this model, some of the geoscience is introduced in other
science courses where the students hone on the quantitative and analytical
skills needed to be successful in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
confront the challenge of a lack of diversity in geoscience, the PIs will
develop a sequence of interconnected geoscience opportunities that will build on
an existing, highly successful diversity program at Fort Valley State University
(FVSU), a rural HBCU in middle Georgia that along with its partner
organizations, has provided a supportive geoscience learning ecosystem (GLE) for
47 African-American students who have received geoscience bachelor degrees in
the past two and half decades. This new program will provide resources and
support to engage and retain an even larger community of students from entry to
college through to graduation and preparation for graduate school or a career,
and can be a model for other HBCUs that do not currently offer a geoscience
degree. The program will create a GLE that engages students already enrolled in
a normal 4-year degree program in other STEM fields at FVSU. This program will
provide them with learning experiences that explore interdisciplinary real-world
societal issues that can be addressed via geoscience approaches, with a goal of
encouraging more HBCU students to pursue geoscience careers or graduate school.
The project has six interrelated objectives: 1) Increase the number of first
year undergraduate African-American students who are introduced to geoscience.
2) Establish new multi-year, academic-year and summer geoscience opportunities
for undergraduate students at the awardee institution and through partnership
with the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) and other
organizations. 3) Enrich the academic preparation of students in STEM
disciplines by focusing on developing 3 one-hour courses as a part of a new
Minor in Geology at FVSU. 4) Broaden and strengthen faculty professional
development opportunities in computational science and infuse technology into
teaching to enhance students’ computational skills. 5) Strengthen partnerships
with academic institutions and industrial labs to enhance quality research
experiences for students. 6) Develop an enhanced service-learning component for
the GLE, leveraging the FVSU iHelp community volunteering program. A unique
aspect of this project is that it provides a model where a lone geoscientist in
an HBCU non-geoscience STEM department working with an NSF facility, can both
help strengthen the STEM department by retaining and graduating a larger number
of students as well as introduce geoscience to over 500 mostly African-American
and other underrepresented minority (URM) STEM majors over the length of the
grant who would otherwise be unaware of the opportunities in
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.