* 2023124
* GP-GO: GeoScientists Promoting Accessible Collaborative Education (GEOSPACE)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,02/29/2024
* David Williams, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2024
* USD 469,604.00

Field-based education is a core component of many geoscience programs that can
have a significant impact on student learning and feelings of belonging in the
geosciences. Traditional field programs present a significant barrier to degree
completion for students with disabilities. The lack of accessible field courses
is a contributing factor in the significant underrepresentation of people with
disabilities in geoscience careers, and limits the academic progression of
students with disabilities into graduate programs. Because a significant portion
of any demographic group identifies as having a disability, this barrier also
impacts the recruitment and retention of all other underrepresented groups into
advanced degrees and geoscience careers. A growing number of projects have
demonstrated a variety of ways in which students of all abilities can
participate in field training activities, but accredited accessible field camps
remain exceedingly rare. The GeoScientists Supporting Accessible Collaborative
Experiences (GeoSPACE) program will create a geophysics and planetary geology
field course that provides academic and professional development for a cohort of
upper level undergraduates, with and without disabilities, who are interested in
pursuing a graduate degree in the geosciences. The GeoSPACE field course will
focus on data collection and analysis, and collaboration and communication
skills, while building networks and a community of support through mentoring
connections between peers and geoscience professionals with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GeoSPACE Program will use collaborative
problem solving to address barriers of access that inhibit degree completion by
providing a fully accessible field and research program. Development of this
two-week field course will take place in 3 phases. Phase 1 will evaluate
locations, build course material and select students. Phase 2 will pilot the
2-week field course, collect student feedback and evaluate learning outcomes. In
Phase 3, a new student cohort will be recruited to trial the fully developed and
pilot-tested two-week field course, earning course credit for their
participation. Some students from the pilot phase will act as virtual peer
mentors for the new students, starting a tradition of peer mentoring and
community building that could continue in future iterations of the field course.
This course provides a tangible solution to one barrier to degree completion for
SWDs, as well as the development of a fully virtual mode of participation for
students who cannot travel to the field for extended periods of time for any
reason family/caregiving, job constraints, temporary injury,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.