* 2023680
* Characterizing the effects of exogenous reactive oxygen species on marine microbial ecosystem dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Erik Zinser, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 913,189.00

The microbes that constitute the phytoplankton community of the ocean account
for about half of all photosynthesis on the earth and as a consequence are
critically important to the climate and major nutrient cycles of the planet. The
vast majority of the ocean surface is relatively depleted in nutrients essential
for organisms to grow. This is especially true for the ocean gyres that are
hundreds or thousands of miles from the coast and thousands of meters above the
ocean floor. In these regions, competition among different phytoplankton for
nutrients is thought to be especially strong. The most abundant member of the
photosynthetic community, the single-celled bacterium Prochlorococcus, is also
its smallest, measuring a half a micrometer in length. Interestingly,
Prochlorococcus is very sensitive to reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as
hydrogen peroxide and cannot grow in the absence of “helper” microbes which
detoxify the ROS generated when sunlight reacts with pigmented organic material
in the seawater. The true extent to which Prochlorococcus depends on helpers is
currently unknown: thus far, experiments have only assessed Prochlorococcus
survival of ROS stress under otherwise optimal growth conditions which are rare
in the natural environment. Recent evidence that Prochlorococcus and helpers can
compete for nutrients adds another layer of complexity. This project combines
experimental culture work, field measurements, and ecosystem modeling to
characterize the roles of ROS in surface ocean community dynamics. Laboratory
cultures of Prochlorococcus and other microbes are being examined for growth and
survival changes when exposed to ROS under a range of nutrient concentrations,
temperatures, and light intensities, when grown separately and in co-culture
with each other. Outcomes from the laboratory experiments are then being used in
mathematical ecosystem models to simulate the natural marine environment.
Finally, laboratory results and mathematical models are being compared to
natural communities in the North Pacific Ocean exposed to a range of ROS
concentrations. In this way, this research is developing a deeper and more
predictive understanding of how microbial community composition and mortality
depend upon ROS production and decay. Broader impacts of the project include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in oceanographic research and
public outreach about microbiology and oceanography to the local Knoxville
community, as well as dependents of active duty Marines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to empirically
parameterize ecosystem models using a combination of lab experiments and field
manipulations to explore the coupled dynamics of HOOH and oligotrophic microbial
communities. Prochlorococcus is the most abundant phytoplankter in the
oligotrophic ocean and contributes significantly to global carbon cycling. Key
to its abundance is its ability to outcompete other microbes for nutrients. This
ecological advantage is thought to involve an evolutionary process of genomic
streamlining, including a loss of hydrogen peroxide (HOOH) resistance mechanisms
and reliance of Prochlorococcus on the microbial community to degrade
photochemically-generated HOOH in the sun-exposed surface mixed layer. When
temperature deviates from optimal, however, sensitivity of Prochlorococcus to
HOOH – and thus reliance upon helpers - is heightened. The same may hold true
for light and nutrient conditions. Similarly, little is known about the
environmental sensitivity of HOOH-detoxifying “helper” microbes, including
fellow members of the phytoplankton community. Therefore, the extent to which
Prochlorococcus requires help, and to which different HOOH-consuming microbes
provide this function, is not currently understood. This project is providing
the quantitative measurements in HOOH and microbial dynamics to understand the
rules of microbial community assembly in the surface mixed layer. Several
strains of Prochlorococcus, potential helper, and competitor microbes are being
grown under a range of nutrient-limiting and HOOH conditions in chemostats to
assess growth, mortality, and - for the phytoplankton – photosynthesis. Co-
cultures with the other microbes, including Synechococcus and several
photosynthetic picoeukaryotes, are being used to test hypotheses about HOOH
detoxification and the impacts of competition on Prochlorococcus–ROS dynamics
under optimal and suboptimal conditions These ecosystem model predictions are
being interpreted alongside field manipulations which directly assess ROS
mediated impacts in the context of other loss processes, primarily grazing and
viral lysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.