* 2023323
* Void Formation During Manufacturing of Composites with Liquid Composite Molding Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Suresh Advani, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,714.00

A manufacturing process, termed Liquid Composite Molding and used to fabricate
polymer composites, places a fibrous textile-based reinforcement into a mold and
injects a polymer resin into it. A common manufacturing defect in the polymer
composite are voids which form and grow during the process. Voids during
composite processing may form at all length scales: at the macro (cm to mm
scale- part scale); meso (mm to sub mm scale- the fiber tow scale); and micro
scale (micron to submicron scale filament diameter scale). The presence of voids
results in a significant reduction in properties and even rejection of the part.
Due to lack of understanding about void formation and growth, expensive
inspection techniques need to be incorporated to ensure fidelity of the produced
part to design specifications. This work will conduct fundamental research to
incorporate the required knowledge in a manufacturing simulation to provide
guidelines to reliably manufacture void-free parts. This will reduce costs due
to less rejections and inspections from the use of computer simulations instead
of time-consuming and expensive trial and error methodology. In turn, composites
will be more cost competitive with steel and aluminum and reduce the need for
import of these materials. The research will re-invigorate US manufacturing
sector by fabricating cost effective, light weight and corrosion free composite
parts in aerospace, automotive, biomedical, energy and sports industries
benefiting the U.S. economy and society. The research will be incorporated in a
computer simulation which will also provide the much-needed training to
practitioners and professionals to reduce the manufacturing cycle time from
design to prototype to product and encourage high school students to pursue STEM
fields to advance US competitiveness in the global economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research describes the void dynamics to model the
mold filling stage of the Liquid Composite Molding processes. The general
framework developed will couple the macro, meso and micro scale physics to
predict void formation, growth and movement as a function of material, process
and geometric parameters. To accomplish this, (i) a multi-scale flow modeling
approach will be developed with governing equations that include the void
transport and dynamics to (ii) be included into an existing simulation to
improve its predictive capabilities for porosity at macro, meso and micro scale.
This will help determine material and processing parameter window that will
ensure successful resin filling within tolerated target porosity. Such
guidelines will allow manufacturing engineers to develop strategies such as
improving vacuum effectiveness, introducing local consolidation to increase
resin pressure and manipulate resin flow front to avoid entrapment of
voids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.