* 2023158
* GP-GO:Providing Educational Access to Research &amp; Learning in geoscienceS (PEARLS)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Akua Asa-Awuku, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 384,413.00

Geoscience is one of the least diverse disciplines in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This program will apply scientifically
ratified best practices to Provide Educational Access to Research &amp; Learning
in geocienceS (PEARLS) for non-traditional geoscience majors, women, under-
served, and underrepresented minorities (URM). The work will increase the
awareness and access to the geosciences and will develop a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. The project will engage students in the geosciences
through extracurricular experiences and training. The project provides a
geoscience learning ecosystem with integrated experiences at the University of
Maryland, College Park (UMD) to help undergraduate upperclassmen from non-
traditional geoscience majors and masterâ€™s degree-seeking students transition
into geosciences and engage in geoscience studies. The experiences will help
students matriculate more successfully in geoscience graduate programs and the
geoscience workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
catalytic experiences for students to engage in interdisciplinary geoscience
work. The learning design is composed of three critical objectives. The PIs will
i) create a mentorship program that includes a life-long learning enrichment
program culminating in nationally recognized certification and/or apprenticeship
with academics, as well as with and the state and local governments. ii) design
and test bridge programs to help post-undergraduate students from non-geoscience
fields transition into geoscience graduate programs and iii) foster career-
aligned collaborations between academia and the local private sector or
state/local government sector that facilitate transitions between
undergraduate/graduate programs and the geoscience workforce. The proposed
learning ecosystem model offers three distinct pathways to enhance technical
expertise and knowledge of non-traditional geoscience majors in virtual and in-
person platforms. The technical knowledge and promotion of growth is supported
by a vertically tiered mentor network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.