* 2023173
* GP:IN Geoscience Teaching Outdoors in NC (GET OUT in NC)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Piehler, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 318,896.00

The Institute for the Environment at the University of North Carolina (NC) at
Chapel Hill, together with the NC Museum of Natural Sciences, will implement
Geoscience Teaching Outdoors in NC (GET OUT in NC). The goal of this project is
to support a diverse future workforce and STEM-literate public, by implementing
educational programming on community resilience to climate change for secondary
science teachers and youth. Over three years, GET OUT in NC will engage 40
secondary teachers from eastern NC in learning experiences in state parks,
building their capability to incorporate current research on climate change
impacts into their teaching. The project also will directly engage 50-60 high
school aged youth in programming at the Greenville, NC location of the NC Museum
of Natural Sciences, introducing diverse youth to education and careers in
geosciences. NC State Parks and Martin County Schools also are collaborating on
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of Geoscience Teaching
Outdoors in NC (GET OUT in NC) is to support a diverse future workforce and
STEM-literate public, specifically by engaging diverse youth in eastern North
Carolina in geoscience research, education, and career pathways. The project has
three primary objectives: (1) enhance secondary science teachersâ€™ geoscience
knowledge and pedagogy to enable them to engage their students in active
geoscience learning; (2) increase knowledge of and interest in geosciences
research and careers among high school aged youth through informal learning
about local/regional climate change impacts and solutions; and (3) cultivate a
geoscience learning ecosystem by supporting collaboration among educators,
researchers, and natural resource professionals from local science centers and
state parks, local school districts, and university geoscience departments. By
interweaving two critical issues facing our society, namely the need for
community resilience to climate change impacts and lack of diversity in
geosciences, this project lays a foundation for diversifying the workforce while
developing local solutions that can replicated
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.