* 2023583
* The Role of Ritual in the Development of Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Silvana Rosenfeld, High Point University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 142,460.00

A research team will investigate the roles of ritual and economy in the
construction of inequality in an archaeological study of the rise of complex
societies. Anthropology has long shown that the economy does not exist outside
of culture and that ritual has important connections to economic practices. One
of the hallmarks of stratified and socially unequal societies is that people
begin to gain differential access to material goods and procure resources from
outside of their catchment area. A study of ritual activity expansion provides
insights into how economies around the world shift when growing numbers of
people participate in shared religious activities. Archaeology is uniquely
situated to study the long-term influences of the economy on religious and
social life as it allows the examination of change over long periods of time.
This project will give undergraduate students experience in archaeological
fieldwork and laboratory analysis. The researchers will work with the local
community to promote learning and cultural interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the connections between ritual and
incipient inequality through a case study at an important archaeological center.
While the main ceremonial center shows evidence of religious activity and high
social status in its architecture and archaeological deposits, it is still
unknown how and by whom the center was supported. This research will
particularly focus on an area of the site which contains domestic residences.
Through the excavation and archaeological analysis, the work seeks to better
understand the intersection between ritual activity at a major temple and the
active involvement of the people who economically supported the temple and lived
adjacent to it. Investigating the social, political, and economic mechanisms
that underwrote the fluorescence of a prominent ceremonial center will shed
light on the dynamics of emergent institutionalized sociopolitical inequality,
one of the grand challenges in archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.