* 2023300
* GP-UP: Building a GeoFORCE Learning Community to Attract, Prepare, and Retain Rural,  Alaska Native, and First-Generation STEM Majors
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2025
* Sarah Fowell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2025
* USD 369,072.00

GeoFORCE Alaska is a four-year, field-based, summer geoscience program with a
record of attracting underrepresented students to the University of Alaska
Fairbanks (UAF). The program is supported by industry sponsors and Alaska Native
Corporations with interests or shareholders in northern and interior Alaska. As
we prepare to welcome an unprecedented number of GeoFORCE Alaska graduates to
UAF, we seek to increase both preparation and retention by incorporating digital
mapping and Language Arts into the summer program and building an undergraduate
learning community at UAF. This GeoFORCE Alumni Learning Community will provide
opportunities for supplemental instruction, social networking, and financial
support in order to increase college retention and graduation rates and realize
the goal of workforce diversification in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of GeoFORCE Alaska are: 1) Promote high school graduation; 2) Increase the
number of rural students attending college and pursuing STEM degrees; and 3)
Diversify Alaska’s technical workforce. Results of the first two cohorts
indicate that GeoFORCE Alaska is highly effective as a means of raising high
school graduation rates in remote Alaskan villages and increasing the
participation of rural, Alaska Native, female, and first-generation college
students in STEM majors. However, GeoFORCE has yet to accomplish goal 3. Alumni
tracking reveals significant barriers to degree completion, including: 1) lack
of preparation, leading to placement in developmental Math and Writing courses;
2) difficulty adapting to campus life; and 3) financial struggles. To forge a
strong learning community among GeoFORCE alumni, we will employ common course
construction, near-peer mentoring, scholarships, and social activities. Freshman
and Sophomores will enroll in blocks of Math, Writing, and introductory
Geoscience courses. As upperclassmen, these students will be eligible to serve
as GeoFORCE counselors and mentor the next wave of rural Geoscience majors.
Trained counselors and a high school English teacher will assist students with
technological and narrative elements of project construction. Rural Alaskan
students with STEM degrees bring valuable perspectives to decisions regarding
land management and resource extraction. Enhancing student preparation and
building an integrated academic, social, and financial support system for
GeoFORCE alumni has the potential to increase college success among Alaska
Native, female, and first-generation students from rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.