* 2023027
* EAGER: Testing Late-Pleistocene and Holocene Climate Change in Southeastern Australia with Multi-proxy Analyses of Alpine Lake Sediments, Kosciuszko National Park, Australia
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Douglas Clark, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 134,104.00

This project is funded, under the auspices of the EArly Concept Grant For
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award concept, to test ideas on late-Pleistocene
through late-Holocene climate change in southeastern Australia based on
multiproxy analyses of sediment cores collected from three alpine tarns (lakes)
in the highest portions of the Snowy Mountains, New South Wales, Australia.
Despite recent efforts to reconstruct the magnitude and spatial distribution of
major post-glacial climate events in the Southern Hemisphere (e.g., Antarctic
Climate Reversal, Little Ice Age), key gaps in proxy data, most notably in
Australia, hinder these reconstructions; this gap reflects a dearth of sites on
the continent that preserve high resolution, continuous paleoclimate records.
The alpine tarns in Kosciuszko National Park (KNP), New South Wales, represent
notable exceptions to this problem: five tarns have acted as continuous sediment
traps since deglaciation 18,000-20,000 years ago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All lakes
in KNP freeze during the peak of the Austral winter (July-September), which
provides stable surfaces for deep coring. Blue Lake was previously cored in the
1970â€™s, and although analyses of those cores were limited, they indicated that
the lake has trapped sediment continuously since deglaciation (&gt;18,000 years
ago). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a small grant from Western Washington
University (WWU), the researchers collected a pilot core from the lake in 2016
in order to test the viability of collecting continuous records from the lake.
Initial analysis of the core on an ITRAX multi-scanner demonstrates that the
sediments are well preserved and highly structured. Both visual and X-ray
imagery indicate sub-centimeter scale strata throughout the core; based on the
age estimates from above, this stratigraphy would provide sub-centennial
resolution (ca. 20 year/cm) throughout the core. If borne out by dating, such
resolution would be unprecedented in southern
Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This single core demonstrates the exceptional
stratigraphic record preserved in Blue Lake alone, and implies that similar,
complementary records likely exist in the other, smaller tarns in the park. To
test this, the researchers propose to core two additional tarns in the park:
Lake Albina, and Club Lake; although shallower than Blue Lake, both occupy
bedrock basins and so are less susceptible to lake-level fluctuations related to
droughts than sediment dammed lakes. Their differing sizes, depths, and basin
geometries might provide complementary records to Blue Lake, allowing the
researchers to distinguish between local and regional signals based on
correlation testing of the cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to collecting
cores, a suite of analyses to test the paleoclimate potential of cores from
these lakes will be conducted at University of Canterbury/University of
Queensland by Australian collaborators under existing Australian
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts include providing new data and
insights into the frequency and magnitude of possible past droughts and
temperature variations as well as informing resource managers in local agencies
and water and power utility companies. The project will also provide valuable
training of early career scientists and undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.