* 2023710
* Collaborative Research: An Inter-disciplinary Approach to Constraining Paleo-geomorphic Responses to the Eocene-Oligocene Hothouse to Icehouse Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 08/23/2019,12/31/2022
* Anjali Fernandes, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,106.00

Rivers are the arteries of the nation and are vital as sources of water and
recreation, and avenues of commerce. They are also bellwethers for change in the
landscape. However, a question of fundamental importance for national interest
is how river systems respond to major environmental changes. Predicting how
changes in environmental conditions affect river processes, such as flooding and
erosion, is critical for water resource management. This project uses knowledge
of the past as a key to better inform the present through examining ~35 million
year old sediments from an ancient river network in western Nebraska and South
Dakota to quantify how changes in precipitation, vegetation and temperature in
the past caused changes in river discharge and flood magnitude. These data,
integrated with hydraulic models, will improve our ability to predict how rivers
flood, sediment is transported and catchments evolve. Results of this work will
have far reaching implications for understanding, modeling and planning for
changes to river systems in the future. Three key broader impacts of this study
include: 1) support of graduate and undergraduate students to develop
interdisciplinary expertise; 2) sharing of data, methods and results as teaching
data-sets on open-access platforms; 3) science outreach modules for children to
explore 3-dimensional rock outcrops and animations from computational models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to reconstruct the
coevolution of paleoriver and ecosystems dynamics with environmental change in
western North America during the Eocene-Oligocene transition (EOT), perhaps the
largest climate state change of the last 65 million years. This will be
accomplished by integrating geochemical records of paleoclimate, sedimentologic
indicators of river transport and deposition, and hydraulic-geomorphic models.
To achieve the project goals a team of geochemists, sedimentologists and
hydraulic engineers will develop an integrated approach to understanding how
rivers respond to environmental change. Success in this cross-disciplinary
approach could provide a paradigm shift in utilizing modern and ancient
terrestrial geologic archives to quantify environmental perturbations that
manifest in the hydraulics, morphodynamics and regional ecosystem
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.