* 2023900
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Re-Energize Governance of Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience for Sustainable Development
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Michael Dodds, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,675.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries to address the
growing need for assessment and reduction of disaster risk, collaborative co-
design of resilience strategies with a breadth of stakeholders, and
scientifically and technologically enhanced responses to disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Re-energize project will address the interactions
between disasters and sustainable development for effective disaster risk
management and will provide an assessment of risk factors due to human
activities, including climate change. The project will embed disaster risk
reduction and resilience into development planning and programs by employing
artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and natural language
processing (NLP) across six case studies from four continents. The team will
create an open-access tool to provide critical data to decisionmakers and
planners for disaster risk reduction strategies and will develop a response
processes to help generate standardized approaches intended to enhance the
resilience of communities. This project will ultimately develop innovative and
implementable strategies and technologies to help reduce disaster risk and
enhance societal coping capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.