* 2023639
* HNDS-I: Decennial Census Linkage Project
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Katie Genadek, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,499,639.00

The Decennial Census Linkage (DCL) project will link individual records from the
1960 through 1990 censuses and create tools to improve the dissemination of
these data. When combined with already-available linkages between the censuses
of 1940, 2000, 2010, and 2020, DCL will complete a massive longitudinal data
infrastructure covering almost the entire U.S. population since 1940. The
resulting data resource will revolutionize our understanding of human behavior
and life in the United States, providing transformational opportunities for
research, education, and evidence-building across the social, behavioral, and
economic sciences. In addition to making research possible that is not feasible
with any currently available data, the DCL will advance the science of record
linkage, expand access to restricted federal data resources, and provide
training to a diverse group of students and early-career
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DCL project has two main objectives. The
first is the development and implementation of methods to create linkages across
the 1960-1990 censuses, using the available information in each year. The
project will also evaluate the quality of linkages across the entire data
series. The second objective is to facilitate access to the longitudinal
infrastructure inside and beyond the Federal Statistical Research Data Centers
(FSRDCs). The project will develop high-quality public documentation and
synthetic data files for researchers. The project will also provide support for
researchers and FSRDC staff to develop proposals to access the restricted data
and create toolkits for researchers working with the linked data in the FSRDC
research environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.