* 2023668
* Reverse engineering methods for elucidating the molecular assembly mechanisms of thermoresponsive peptide-based conjugates: computation and experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kristi Kiick, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 518,481.00

Nanostructures assembled from thermoresponsive synthetic and biological polymers
are widely applicable as sensors, electronic devices, molecular machines, drug
delivery systems, and matrices for tissue engineering. The design features of
these polymers, such as molecular composition, sequence, molecular weight, and
aqueous solution concentration, permit tuning of the temperature at which phase
transitions take place. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that conjugates of
thermoresponsive polymers provide a means of encoding dual thermal transitions;
this multi-temperature responsiveness can be used to direct the assembly and
disassembly of nanostructures at specific temperatures, increasing their
potential range of applications. However, there is a lack of fundamental
understanding of how the molecular design of these thermoresponsive conjugates
affects the molecular interactions that drive the multi-step nanostructural
assembly and disassembly processes. Developing such an understanding is key to
expanding thermoresponsive nanostructures in applications such as biochemical
sensors, actuation, molecular cargo (e.g., drug) delivery, and spatiotemporally
controlled catalysis. The ability to characterize conjugates during
nanostructure (dis)assembly using small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering
coupled to advanced computational methods for analyzing the scattering results
will provide transformative opportunities in molecular
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this proposal is to
develop new approaches to interrogate molecular interactions, packing, and
dynamics during the assembly and disassembly of technologically useful
thermoresponsive conjugates. The research team has introduced dually
thermoresponsive elastin-like peptide conjugates tethered to rod-like,
oligomeric peptide domains. These molecules will be synthesized and
characterized via X-ray and neutron scattering and microscopy. Experiments will
be coupled to a new, coarse-grained model and simulations that will predict
structural transitions with varying temperature for a range of molecular designs
of the peptide conjugates. Temperature-controlled small-angle scattering
experiments will probe structures at various temperatures in the assembly
pathway. The intermediate structures, and potentially the final assembled
structures, will not necessarily obey canonical structure and form factors, thus
new computational methods that will elucidate the molecular underpinnings of the
assembly process will be developed. The proposed work will leverage the
knowledge gained from previous successful collaborations between the senior
members of the research team. Interdisciplinary training of students in
experiments and simulations will be enriched through this collaboration; the
technical advances made through the proposed work will be integrated into the
classroom. The researchers will build on their historical commitment in
recruitment and retention of students from under-represented minority groups,
contributing to curricula and outreach from the secondary through graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.