* 2023355
* EAGER: Lowering the detection threshold of Antarctic seismicity to reveal undiscovered intraplate deformation
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 246,017.00

Part 1: Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Unlike other locations on the globe
Antarctica is not known for having large earthquakes and the remote nature and
harsh conditions make it difficult to install and maintain seismometers for
earthquake detection. Some researchers believe the lack of large earthquakes is
due to the continent being surrounded by inactive tectonic margins. However, in
the last two decades, scientists have discovered that more earthquakes occur in
the interior of the continent than previously observed. This suggests that there
are many earthquakes missing from historic earthquake catalogs. This study aims
to find the missing earthquakes using novel earthquake detection and location
techniques from seismic data collected from temporary and permanent seismic
stations in Antarctica over the last 25 years. Locating these earthquakes will
help understand if and where earthquakes are located in Antarctica and will help
in planning future seismic deployments. As part of the project broader impacts,
a field expedition with the Girls on Rock program will be conducted to teach
high school age girls, and especially those from underrepresented backgrounds,
data visualization techniques using scientific data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Part
2: Technical&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The spatial distribution of seismicity and
the number of moderate magnitude earthquakes in Antarctica is not well-defined.
The current catalog of earthquakes may be biased by uneven and sparse
seismograph distribution on the continent. We will mine existing broadband
seismic data from both permanent and temporary deployments to lower the
earthquake detection threshold across Interior Antarctica, with a focus on
tectonic earthquakes. The hypothesis is that Interior Antarctica has abundant
moderate magnitude earthquakes, previously undetected. These earthquakes are
likely collocated with major tectonic features such as the Transantarctic
Mountains, the suspected Vostok collision zone, the West Antarctic Rift System,
the crustal compositional boundary between East and West Antarctica, and the
Cretaceous East Antarctic Rift. Previous seismic deployments have recorded
earthquakes in the Antarctic interior, suggesting there are many earthquakes
missing from the current catalog. We propose to use novel earthquake location
techniques designed for automated detection and location using 25 years of
continuous data archived at IRIS from PASSCAL experiments and permanent
stations. The approach will use STA/LTA detectors on the first arrival P-wave to
90 degrees distance, Reverse Time Imaging to locate events, and beamforming at
dense arrays strategically located on cratons for enhanced detection and
location. The combination of detection and location techniques used in this work
has not been used on teleseismic body waves, although similar methods have
worked well for surface wave studies. If successful the project would provide an
excellent training dataset for future scrutiny of newly discovered Antarctic
seismicity with machine learning approaches and/or new targeted data collection.
We plan to collaborate with Girls on Rock, a local and international
organization committed to building a culturally diverse community in science,
art, and wilderness exploration, in a summer field expedition and integrating
computer coding into post-field scientific projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.