* 2023315
* Collaborative Research: Management and Implementation of US GEOTRACES GP17 Section: South Pacific and Southern Ocean (GP17-OCE)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,104,597.00

This award will support the management and implementation of a research
expedition from Tahiti to Chile that will enable sampling for a broad suite of
trace elements and isotopes (TEI) across oceanographic regions of importance to
global nutrient and carbon cycling as part of the U.S. GEOTRACES program.
GEOTRACES is a global effort in the field of Chemical Oceanography, the goal of
which is to understand the distributions of trace elements and their isotopes in
the ocean. Determining the distributions of these elements and isotopes will
increase understanding of processes that shape their distributions, such as
ocean currents and material fluxes, and also the processes that depend on these
elements, such as the growth of phytoplankton and the support of ocean
ecosystems. The proposed cruise will cross the South Pacific Gyre, the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current, iron-limited Antarctic waters, and the Chilean margin. In
combination with a proposed companion GEOTRACES expedition on a research
icebreaker (GP17-ANT) that will be joined by two overlapping stations, the team
of investigators will create an ocean section from the ocean’s most nutrient-
poor waters to its highly-productive Antarctic polar region – a region that
plays an outsized role in modulating the global carbon cycle. The expedition
will support and provide management infrastructure for additional participating
science projects focused on measuring specific external fluxes and internal
cycling of TEIs along this section. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South Pacific Gyre
and Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean play critical roles in global water
mass circulation and associated global transfer of heat, carbon, and nutrients,
but they are chronically understudied for TEIs due to their remote locale. These
are regions of strong, dynamic fronts where sub-surface water masses upwell and
subduct, and biological and chemical processes in these zones determine nutrient
stoichiometries and tracer concentrations in waters exported to lower latitudes.
The Pacific sector represents an end member of extremely low external TEI
surface fluxes and thus an important region to constrain inputs from the
rapidly-changing Antarctic continent. Compared to other ocean basins, TEI
cycling in these regions is thought to be dominated by internal cycling
processes such as biological uptake, regeneration, and scavenging, and these are
poorly represented in global ocean models. The cruise will enable funded
investigators to address research questions such as: 1) what are relative rates
of external TEI fluxes to this region, including dust, sediment, hydrothermal,
and cryospheric fluxes? 2) What are the (micro) nutrient regimes that support
productivity, and what impacts do biomass accumulation, export, and regeneration
have on TEI cycling and stoichiometries of exported material? 3) What are TEI
and nutrient stoichiometries of subducting water masses, and how do scavenging
and regeneration impact these during transport northward? This management
project has several objectives: 1) plan and coordinate a 55-day research cruise
in 2021-2022; 2) use both conventional and trace-metal ‘clean’ sampling systems
to obtain TEI samples, as well as facilitate sampling for atmospheric aerosols
and large volume particles and radionuclides; 3) acquire hydrographic data and
samples for salinity, dissolved oxygen, algal pigments, and macro-nutrients; and
deliver these data to relevant repositories; 4) ensure that proper QA/QC
protocols, as well as GEOTRACES intercalibration protocols, are followed and
reported; 5) prepare the final cruise report to be posted with data; 6)
coordinate between all funded cruise investigators, as well as with leaders of
proposed GP17-ANT cruise; and 7) conduct broader impact efforts that will engage
the public in oceanographic research using immersive technology. The motivations
for, and at-sea challenges of this work will be communicated to the general
public through creation of immersive 360/Virtual Reality experiences, via a
collaboration with the Texas A&amp;M University Visualization LIVE Lab. Through
Virtual Reality, users will experience firsthand what life and TEI data
collection at sea entail. Virtual reality/digital games and 360° experiences
will be distributed through GEOTRACES outreach websites, through PI engagement
with local schools, libraries, STEM summer camps, and adult service
organizations, and through a collaboration with the National Academy of
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.