* 2023351
* Understanding and quantifying the retention and migration of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances in the vadose zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mark Brusseau, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 398,524.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are manmade chemicals that have
recently been found in soils and waters all over the U.S. and other countries.
Their widespread use and and persistence in the environment may result in
exposure of millions of people in the U.S. to PFAS-contaminated drinking water.
Because of the impacts of PFAS to human health, it is important to understand
how these contaminants move in the environment and reach points of exposure. To
date, the movement of PFAS through soil to groundwater is poorly understood and
difficult to predict. Knowing how they move and how long they stay in soils is
critical for cleanup and reducing exposure. The proposed project will integrate
experimental and modeling approaches to study the factors that control the
movement of PFAS in soils and groundwater. The project will generate data and
predictive tools that can provide valuable information for stakeholders and
decision makers. The project will further benefit society by supporting STEM
education, including broadening of participation of underrepresented groups, and
informing the broader community about the risks posed by PFAS-contaminated water
and potential for intervention to mitigate risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing
body of field data demonstrates that soils serve as significant sources of PFAS
to groundwater. However, the primary mechanisms that control the long-term
retention of PFAS in soils remain poorly understood. This project will address
this critical knowledge gap by combining novel experimental and mathematical
modeling approaches. Specifically, the project will 1) conduct investigations of
PFAS transport in unsaturated porous media under transient flow conditions; 2)
develop and use state-of-the-art mathematical models that represent surfactant-
induced flow and PFAS-specific transport processes to identify the critical
factors that control the retention of PFAS in soils and the long-term mass
discharge to groundwater. The conceptual and computational tools developed in
this project are expected to contribute to the establishment of science-based
state and federal regulations for PFAS in the soils and to develop protocols on
remediation. The research findings will be disseminated to a local water utility
to improve water resources management and remediation decisions for PFAS
contamination problems in Tucson, Arizona. In addition, the project will train
underserved undergraduates in STEM at the University of Arizona through the
Arizona Science, Engineering and Math Scholars Program and educate the local
community about PFAS contamination through by collaboration with the Flandrau
Science Center &amp; Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.