* 2023974
* Tackling Instability in Perovskite Solar Cells through Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Marina Leite, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 05/31/2024
* USD 409,317.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells based on metal halide perovskites
are a promising technology to increase the adoption of renewable energy due to
their high efficiency and low fabrication cost. However, their performance
degrades under illumination, presenting a roadblock to widespread adoption of
this technology. There is accordingly an urgent need to identify what factors
impact device performance and stability, but this problem is complex. Many
factors can impact device performance, including humidity, temperature, exposure
to oxygen, and electrical conditions under operation. Complex problems such as
this present a challenge that requires innovative solutions. Machine learning is
a type of artificial intelligence in which systems learn and improve from
experience without being explicitly programmed. Machine learning (ML) is well
suited to complex problems such as the stability of perovskite solar cells. The
application of machine learning to the stability of perovskite solar cells is
the primary focus of this research project. This research will advance the
state-of-knowledge of perovskite solar cells by implementing ML routines to
identify the ideal conditions to achieve long-term power conversion efficiency
in perovskite solar cells. ML will be used to close the loop in the development
of game-changing, stable photovoltaic devices through a holistic approach. This
research builds upon the research teamâ€™s experience in fabrication and
characterization of solar cells and machine learning. The outreach/education
impacts of this project will be preparing female students for prominent
positions in STEM fields by providing them with intensive mentoring and the
opportunity to develop cutting-edge research in materials science and
engineering (MSE). The PI will work with the Mathematics Engineering Science
Achievement (MESA) Pre-College program to engage female students in STEM. The
research results of this project will enrich the curricula and programs at UC
Davis, especially in the field of Renewable
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims
at determining the conditions required for device rest and recovery in halide
perovskite solar cells. The goal is to implement machine learning (ML) routines
to accelerate the development of stable devices. First, systematic
photoluminescence (PL) measurements and time-resolved microwave conductivity
(TRMC) will be performed under a set of well-defined environmental conditions to
elucidate the individual and combined effects of water, oxygen, bias,
temperature, and light on device performance. Second, the data will be used as
an input for ML to resolve the conditions required for maximum power conversion
efficiency with enhanced lifetime. Third, the optimal conditions for device
performance will be experimentally demonstrated. Finally, the knowledge gained
by ML will be used in a holistic approach to develop stable perovskite devices.
This research will have a transformative impact on photovoltaics, leading to a
new framework to quickly diagnose device stability and to the future design of
solar cells with overall enhanced performance and lifetime. Beyond
photovoltaics, these methods could advance the scientific knowledge of
perovskites for other optoelectronic devices, including light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) and photodetectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.