* 2023403
* Ethical and Responsible Research (ER2) Rigor and Transparency Initiatives (RTI)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Brian Nosek, Center for Open Science
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 639,783.00

This project examines the efficacy of “Rigor and Transparency Initiatives” in
science to shift attitudes, norms, and behaviors in research communities and
promote more ethical and open science. Rigor and Transparency Initiatives
involve a funding call for a special section or issue of journals to promote new
behaviors that are valued but not yet incentivized or normative, such as
replication studies or using Registered Reports to increase rigor and eliminate
publication bias against negative findings. Rigor and Transparency Initiatives
raise awareness about the value of these behaviors, demonstrate support for the
behaviors from credible stakeholders (e.g., funders, journals), incentivize
researchers to try the behaviors, and provide proof-of-concept of the
feasibility, value, and impact of the behaviors. The principal investigators
collaborate with funding partners to implement RTI interventions promoting rigor
and transparency in different research communities. Surveys are distributed each
year to members of each research community to assess changes in the attitudes,
norms, and reported behaviors incentivized by the Rigor and Transparency
Initiatives. The project will produce new methods for testing the efficacy of
Rigor and Transparency Initiatives and create new open datasets, computational
code, and analytic workflows to enable outside assessments of the project and
promote new research on these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fostering research
ethics, rigor, and transparency is achieved through training, policies,
incentives, and developing new community norms within research disciplines and
institutions. “Rigor and Transparency Initiatives” are organized attempts to
shift such attitudes, norms, and behaviors in research communities based on
collaborations between journals and funders. Despite increased calls for such
initiatives, evidence regarding their effectiveness is sparse. This project is a
naturalistic, longitudinal investigation of the effectiveness of Rigor and
Transparency Initiatives as a mechanism for culture change toward rigor and
transparency to enhance ethical and responsible conduct of research. Rigor and
Transparency Initiatives will be implemented in different research communities
with customized features to maximize fit for each community. Community members
will be surveyed each year to test for changes in attitudes, norms, and reported
behavior related to each Rigor and Transparency Initiative. Overall, the project
produces new insights about mechanisms of cultural change in science and new
methods of purposely fostering more open and ethical research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded by the SBE and CISE
directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.