* 2023301
* Seafloor Fiber Optic Array in Monterey Bay (SEAFOAM)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gregory Beroza, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 666,236.00

The ocean covers 70% of the surface of our planet, but the underwater
environment is limited by access and by exceptionally high costs and complex
logistics. Yet, underwater measurements are crucial for offshore seismic hazard,
tsunami and earthquake early warning, submarine volcano science, and crustal and
deep earth imaging. Strategies explored so far to access the seafloor require
expensive field campaigns, including several days to weeks of ship time, and
long-term management either of cabled nodes, ships, or instrument pools.
Upscaling any strategy to monitor the seafloor worldwide is difficult to
envision. Fiber-optic sensing provides a novel promising avenue for making high-
resolution seafloor measurements offshore and tackling the scientific questions
that cannot be answered otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following recent short-
time successful experiments offshore, this research proposes to develop the
first continuously operating Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) experiment in a
marine environment using the Monterey Accelerated Research System (MARS) cable
in Monterey Bay, CA. The Seafloor seismology with a Fiber-Optic Array in
Monterey Bay (SEAFOAM) project will demonstrate, calibrate, use, and expand the
capabilities of fiber-optic sensing in marine geophysics, including growing the
DAS user community through release of open access data. The project consists of
a 1-year experiment with the MARS cable in order to record earthquakes, and
extend our knowledge of the ambient seismic background wavefield recording
interval over several tidal, storm, and seasonal cycles. This project will also
deliver a software-hardware system that will provide an example pathway for
continuous, real-time, open DAS data streaming to a seismological data
archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.