* 2023348
* A Molecular Role for Plant LINC complexes in Pollen Tube and Guard Cell Function.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Iris Meier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,237,918.00

This project explores the function of a new class of plant proteins that are
located at the periphery of the nucleus - the center of genetic information - in
the plant cell. These enigmatic protein complexes connect the inside of the
nucleus to the cytoplasm - the part of the cell that surrounds the nucleus - and
are important for a number of plant functions. This project will explore two
functions. First, their role in pollen tubes, which are essential for
fertilization and seed production (grain yield) in flowering plants. And second,
guard cells, the cells that control the opening and closing of apertures
(stomata) in the leaf of the plant, which regulate the movement of carbon
dioxide from the air into the plant, and the loss of water (as vapor) from plant
leaves into the air. The uptake of carbon dioxide from the air and the loss of
water from the plant are of added significance in the face of increasingly
frequent climate events such as drought, temperature extremes and the rising
levels of carbon dioxide in the earth's atmosphere. In addition to training
postdoctoral scientists, and graduate and undergraduate students, in cell and
molecular biology, the project will initiate and develop an outreach project
involving art to visualize aspects of the research and present them to the
broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-specific outer nuclear envelope
proteins (KASH proteins) are the functional equivalent of animal KASH proteins
of the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complexes. This project
will dissect how KASH proteins function in plant male fertility and guard cell
aperture regulation. One plant specific LINC complex is required to move the
vegetative nucleus through the pollen tube and its disruption affects pollen
tube termination and male fertility. The connection of this newly discovered
process to known signaling pathways of pollen tube function, including ROS and
calcium signaling, will be determined; mathematical modeling will be applied to
simulate the movement of the vegetative nucleus and the defects caused by the
mutants; and motor proteins will be identified that interact with the LINC
complex and are involved in the movement. A second plant-specific LINC complex
is located at the nucleus of guard cells and its disruption changes guard cell
abiotic stress response, and guard cell dynamics. The connection between this
LINC complex, guard cell cortical actin patterns, nuclear calcium signaling, and
vacuolar morphology will be dissected. In addition, candidate proteins for a
plant lamina will be tested for interactions with the plant LINC complexes and
for their involvement in the guard cell and pollen tube biology described
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.