* 2023161
* Seismic Ocean Thermometry
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Joern Callies, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 611,475.00

Of the energy trapped on Earth by increasingly abundant greenhouse gases, over
ninety percent is absorbed by the ocean. Monitoring the resulting ocean warming
remains a challenging sampling problem, despite drastic improvements of the
observing system over the past two decades. This project will complement the
existing observations by inferring largescale and deep ocean temperature changes
from sound waves that are generated by repeating natural earthquakes. These
waves propagate across entire ocean basins, and changes in their travel time
reflect changes in the average ocean temperature they encounter along their
paths. Preliminary work has shown that the seismic ocean thermometry to be used
constrains temperature changes averaged over a 2900 km long section in the
equatorial East Indian Ocean with an accuracy of 0.007 K. This initial example
of seismic ocean thermometry would be expanded into a broadly applicable method
that harvests some of the abundant information on ocean warming that is
generated every year by tens of thousands of shallow submarine earthquakes. This
project will contribute to understanding of the ocean’s heat uptake and rate of
transport to the deep ocean, that drives climate change. Measuring and
understanding the patterns of heat uptake and its partitioning between the
surface and deep ocean is crucial for improving projections of the climate’s
trajectory in the coming decades and centuries. Furthermore, ocean warming
contributes substantially to sea level rise, and the patterns of uptake imprint
on regional sea level rise. The method of seismic thermometry has the potential
to substantially enhance the existing observing system, and it could be operated
at very low cost. In addition, the project will contribute to the development of
the new generation of scientists through the support of a post-doctoral scholar
and a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary application
of the seismic ocean thermometry over a 2900 km long section in the equatorial
East Indian Ocean using data from the period 2005 to 2016 identified temperature
fluctuations on time scales of 12 months, 6 months, and about 10 days and
inferred a decadal warming trend that significantly exceeds previous estimates.
The proposed work would improve the currently preliminary methodology of seismic
ocean thermometry, and it would provide improved constraints on the temperature
variability and trends of the largescale deep ocean. The project will apply the
method to two new regions: the Southern Ocean and the subtropical Northwest
Pacific. The Southern Ocean is interesting because previous data coverage is
particularly sparse, estimated trends are large, and the SOFAR channel expands
towards the surface. The Northwest Pacific is interesting because it displays
strong decadal variability and with the Kuroshio current system hosts a strong
front and an energetic eddy field. These two regions are therefore ideal test
beds, both to improve the methodology and to uncover interesting signals.
Another advance will be to use hydrophone rather than seismic station data. This
will improve the sensitivity and thus allow use of more abundant small
earthquakes, and will allow observation of travel time changes at different
frequencies, from which to infer information on the depth structure of the
associated temperature changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.