* 2023575
* Pathways and regulation of transformation of low molecular weight carbon compounds in subseafloor sediments from the Guaymas Basin (Gulf of California)
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Samantha Joye, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 491,586.00

This research will explore carbon cycling in one of the largest carbon
reservoirs on Earth, marine sediments, located at bottom of the ocean. This
carbon is recycled gradually over time through interacting geological, chemical,
and biological processes. This project will document how each of these processes
transforms carbon in marine sediments from the Guaymas Basin (Gulf of
California). This setting offers the chance to study carbon cycling across a
broad range of chemical and temperature gradients, providing an opportunity to
tease apart the factors regulating carbon cycling in marine sediments. This
project will investigate the role of ocean sediments in the global carbon cycle.
These research objectives represent key science priorities in a time of global
environmental change. For outreach activities, the scientist, in collaboration
with Jim Toomey Education, would continue the “Adventures of Zack and Molly”
educational video series. In this instance, the video would document results
from this study and its broader significance. The scientist also would create a
learning guide for teachers. Both the video and the learning guide would be
disseminated to educators. One graduate and one undergraduate student would be
supported and trained as part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface
sediments in the Guaymas Basin (Gulf of California) offer an accessible window
for investigating carbon cycling in a dynamic, yet tractable, marine
environment. This work will study how heating of subsurface sediments affects
the production, consumption, and fate of low molecular weight dissolved organic
carbon. The research will track the fate of key carbon species – including
formate, acetate, and methanol – as they are processed through a gauntlet of
microbial-mediated processes. Samples were collected during Expedition 385 of
the International Ocean Discovery Program in September-October 2019. Some
experiments were conducted on the research vessel and additional experiments
will be conducted in the laboratory. The study will constrain the magnitudes of
transformation and the fate of low molecular weight carbon substrates using a
combination of direct rate, pool size, and stable isotopic measurements coupled
to thermodynamic modeling and probative laboratory experiments. Key topics for
investigation include: (1) What is the dominant production mode for organic
compounds in subsurface sediments? (2) What are the dominant pathways of
methanogenesis along geochemical and temperature gradients? (3) What are the
temperature limits of microbially-driven carbon cycling processes? (4) How does
the fate of organic compounds change along geochemical and/or temperature
gradients?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.