* 2023133
* The significance of doliolid-microbial interactions: Do doliolids fundamentally alter the trophic structure and productivity of sub-tropical continental shelf food webs?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marc Frischer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,080,019.00

Gelatinous zooplankton play crucial but poorly understood roles in food webs and
element cycling in the world's oceans. This is especially true for smaller
mucus-feeding gelatinous animals including the pelagic tunicates (salps,
pyrosomes, larvaceans, and doliolids). Doliolids form massive blooms in particle
and nutrient-rich waters of the world’s continental shelves, often exceeding
1,000 zooids m-3 and extending 100’s of km. These blooms are likely to alter the
structure and function of marine food webs. When crustacean zooplankton
(copepods) are the primary consumers of phytoplankton they nourish larger
species such as fish, birds, and marine mammals. The investigators hypothesize
that doliolid blooms, in contrast, enhance microbial loop processes leading to a
lower efficiency of trophic transfer to larger consumers. In this project, the
investigators examine the role that doliolids play in linking and modifying
microbial loop and classical food web processes in subtropical continental shelf
systems. In addition to the project’s focus on a central theme in biological
oceanography, the results of this project are of broader interest. Specifically,
gelatinous zooplankton remain a poorly resolved component of ecosystem models,
and a better understanding of how these communities interact with microbial
processes and are influenced by chemical and physical conditions will improve
predictions of population- and ecosystem-level responses to the myriad of
environmental stressors. The project supports a targeted effort to increase the
representation of African Americans in the Ocean Sciences, provides experiential
research opportunities to K-12 educators, supports 2 PhD students and several
undergraduate students, and involves an investigator at the beginning of his
academic career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to
understand the ecological function of doliolids on subtropical continental
shelves and their influence on microbial processes. In association with monthly
oceanographic field expeditions on the mid-continental shelf at 31°N and two
longer longitudinal expeditions complemented with experimental studies, the
project investigates the relationship between doliolid abundance and life stage
composition, their spatial relationships to marine snow aggregates and other
zooplankton, water column microbial activity, bacterial production, and net
system productivity. Utilizing a constellation of modern and classical
approaches in microbial and zooplankton ecology, including deployment of an in
situ zooplankton imaging system in the South Atlantic Bight, microbial
metagenomics and transcriptomics, and stable isotope-based tracer experiments,
these studies will allow the testing of three fundamental hypotheses. First,
independent of total shelf productivity, the presence and abundance of doliolids
is correlated with heterotrophy compared to periods when doliolids are not
abundant. Second, doliolids predictably shape continental shelf microbial
communities, activity, and function, and third, doliolids are detrital feeders
benefiting nutritionally from the consumption of microbial enriched aggregated
particles and fecal material - the pool to which they also
contribute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.