* 2023928
* New Phases and Non-Equilibrium Transport in Topological Mesoscopic Superfluids
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Anton Vorontsov, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on unusual states of matter that appear in liquids and solids when they
are confined to very small spatial dimensions. In some special materials, such
as superconducting and superfluid condensates, the fundamental particles
interact with each other in such a way they move in lockstep, eliminating
collisions and forming a new phase of matter that is of great importance to new
technologies from lossless electricity transfer to quantum computing. It is
possible to increase the complexity of such superfluid phases by confining them
to very small regions of space so that the interaction of the superfluid with
its confining boundary can lead to the emergence of surface phenomena which
could be useful for engineering new phases of matter that are not observed in
the bulk material. These new phases of matter have the potential to drive future
quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will work
with graduate student researchers to develop theoretical and computational tools
that will advance the fundamental understanding of the interaction of
superconducting phases with their boundaries in confined geometries. The project
will provide critical knowledge that will drive the discovery of new boundary-
induced surface states in superconductors as well as the development of ways to
tune these states to achieve desirable physical properties. The research will
bridge past, ongoing, and future experimental work on superfluids in small-scale
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train graduate students in
advanced quantum physics, theoretical and numerical techniques, and complex
numerical codes. The PI will also involve undergraduate students in some of the
research projects. The PI will continue with his outreach activities at regional
schools, where he gives presentations that demonstrate the connections between
low-temperature physics, quantum mechanics, and materials to excite students
about the possibilities in modern science, and shows them how materials
transform our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the theoretical investigation of the
fundamental properties of unconventional fermionic condensates in a strongly
confined geometry. It aims to build a reliable connection between theory and
experiment by creating a set of tools to both rigorously model actual
experimental environments, and to supply qualitative analytic descriptions of
boundary effects. This project is designed to provide a theoretical link for
ongoing experiments on unconventional superconductors and superfluid Helium 3.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical and numerical methods, based on the quasi-
classical quantum field theory, will be used to obtain realistic spectra of
localized Andreev quasiparticle states. One emphasis will be on establishing
characteristic signatures of the surface states in multiple experimental probes
that include thermodynamic and non-equilibrium responses as well as non-local
effects in microscopically confined geometries. The central topics of the
research are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The PI will explore the effects of
boundary conditions, supercurrents, and external fields on the formation of
phases with new broken symmetries in multi-component superfluids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The PI will pursue the development of magnetic
scattering boundary conditions involving spin-flip dynamics and their effects on
surface states in superconductors with entangled spin and orbital degrees of
freedom. These studies will include the investigation of spin-current generation
in interface regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Thermal energy transport promises
to be a powerful tool to study surface states, including charge-neutral modes of
topological materials. The PI will build a theory of surface heat transport by
bound states in a confined geometry and domain walls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will train graduate students in advanced quantum physics, theoretical
and numerical techniques, and complex numerical codes. The PI will also involve
undergraduate students in some of the research projects. The PI will continue
with his outreach activities at regional schools, where he gives presentations
that demonstrate the connections between low-temperature physics, quantum
mechanics, and materials to excite students about the possibilities in modern
science, and shows them how materials transform our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.