* 2023006
* 2020 Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic Pathways GRS: The Enzymology of Human Health, Biotechnology and the Environment
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Tyler Stack, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 10/31/2022
* USD 5,000.00

Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) “Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic Pathways”
seminar will be held on July 25th–26th, 2020, at the Waterville Valley Resort in
Waterville Valley, NH. This is a pivotal conference for early-career researchers
focused on the study of biochemistry, engineering, physics, and chemistry, who
are interested in dissecting the molecular mechanisms of biochemical reactions
to share ideas and network in an informal setting. The long-term goals of this
seminar are to foster interactions and collaborations among the graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers who share common research interests –
studying the roles of enzymes in the biological processes that are fundamental
for life. To achieve these goals, the GRS has created a program of 13 Speakers
(12 chosen from abstracts submitted by attendees, and an established
investigator as a Keynote Speaker). These talks will describe current advances
in methodology, the discovery and characterization of enzymes, engineering these
systems for industrial applications, and the relation of these enzymes to
disease processes and the environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The GRS will hold a
Career Mentorship Panel (5 leaders from diverse backgrounds), to expose the
trainees to different career options as scientists in the field of enzyme
research. This career panel will help graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers decide between different paths and to network with the panelists in
the various careers represented in the session. The seminar includes two poster
sessions where all attendees can present their work to their peers and the
panelists. These poster sessions will provide a unique opportunity for junior
scientists to mingle and interact with senior investigators. This meeting was
supported by the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and
cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.