* 2023297
* Evolutionary and ecological dynamics of a contemporary climate-driven range expansion
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,064,171.00

Anthropogenic climate change is shifting the distributions of species across the
globe. Such contemporary shifts in species’ ranges may have cascading effects on
entire ecosystems. This project disentangles the mechanisms underlying climate-
driven species range shifts in marine systems using the intertidal owl limpet as
a case study. During the recent marine heatwaves off the Pacific coast of North
America, populations at the northern range limit in northern California have
expanded, with ongoing reproduction even after termination of the heatwave
events. This is therefore an ideal system to explore the dynamics of natural
selection that occur as species occupy new regions. Broadly, this project
deepens understanding of how range shifts occur in marine systems and furthers
the ability to predict future species distributions in response to climate
change. The project provides research experiences for high school and
undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups by engaging
with existing, demonstrably-effective programs. The investigators host
leadership and skill-building workshops for senior female graduate students and
engage the public in partnership with the California Academy of Sciences, Bodega
Marine Lab, and San Francisco Exploratorium. Finally, the project provides
training for a postdoctoral scholar and two graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although phenomenological studies suggest that
climate-associated range shifts are common in marine systems, to date,
mechanistic studies of the climate-organism interactions that alter geographic
distributions have largely focused on terrestrial systems. However, dispersal
dynamics greatly differ in many marine systems, as currents may frequently
transport planktonic larvae into new environmental regimes. This project
integrates detailed demographic observations of the recent range expansion of
the intertidal owl limpet, Lottia gigantea, with ecological, phenotypic, and
genomic measurements of divergence across its range. Specifically, the work 1)
documents phenotypic divergence in larval and juvenile traits across the zone of
range expansion, 2) uses whole genome sequencing to estimate gene flow across
the entire range, 3) identifies genomic patterns of selection across the zone of
range expansion and through time, and 4) identifies drivers of variation in
performance over latitudinal and microgeographic scales. The ability to monitor
this range shift in real time, along with the suitability of this system for
tracking individuals across multiple years, allows the investigators to examine
the impact of selection in novel range-edge conditions at the phenotypic and
genomic levels, and scale from individuals to species-level responses to ongoing
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.