* 2023424
* Collaborative Research: Tipping points in coral reefs and their associated microbiomes: interactive effects of corallivory,  herbivory, and nutrient pollution
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Rebecca Vega, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 799,871.00

Coral reefs are some of the most diverse, yet most imperiled, ecosystems on the
planet. Global change has driven the decline of corals worldwide with many reefs
now lacking corals and being overrun by macroalgae. This research examines the
impacts of several factors of thermal stress, overfishing of important
herbivorous fishes, and nutrient pollution on the health of corals and their
ability to recover after large coral-killing disturbances. Importantly, the
investigators address the impacts of global change on the coral microbiome, the
microbes that associate with corals and impact coral health. The overarching
hypothesis is that factors such as overfishing and nutrient pollution impact
coral health via impacts to their microbes. This 6-year experiment on the coral
reefs of Mo’orea, French Polynesia to examines what levels of herbivory, mostly
by parrotfishes and surgeonfishes, are needed to provide resistance and
resilience of corals and their microbiomes when reefs are exposed to elevated
nutrients and ocean temperatures. Notably, the team tests how local stressors
(overfishing, nutrient pollution) potentially interact with global stressors
(climate change and rising ocean temperatures) to impact coral reef health. This
research may yield insight into how to manage local factors (reducing fishing,
mitigating nutrient pollution) to help corals survive the global stress of
climate change. The field experiment provides a realistic platform to test
questions about how local management of fisheries can alter reef health and
provides data about the recoverability of reefs should new water quality
management be put into place. This interdisciplinary work trains a new
generation of both marine ecologists and microbiologists, including one
postdoctoral researcher, two graduate students, as well as numerous
undergraduates. The main international outreach effort is to map the microbiome
of the island of Mo’orea. Mo’orea is approximately 130 square-kilometers in area
and has five major watersheds that transport sediment and nutrients to the
nearshore coral reef ecosystems. Thus poor stewardship of these watersheds
likely contributes to the local phase shifts currently occurring in several
areas of the lagoon. Therefore the team has engaged the local community to help
collect microbiome samples from 50 terrestrial, 50 stream, 25 coastal sites, and
25 offshore sites around the island. The sampling effort is generating an
island-wide map of the microbial communities associated with the soils, streams,
and coastal waters that can be linked to adjacent coral reef health - The Moorea
Microbiome! As part of this outreach effort, the team also collaborates with
filmmakers to make a trilingual (English, French, and Tahitian) film about the
project to serve as local engagement and teaching tool to help educate school
groups and different stakeholders about both the seen and unseen connections
between land and sea on their island. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the island of
Mo’orea, French Polynesia, coral communities have exhibited strikingly different
trajectories, with some reefs recovering from disturbances and others undergoing
protracted coral decline, accompanied by an increase in macroalgae. This
diversity in coral community dynamics makes Mo’orea an excellent model system
for testing why some reefs are resilient and return to abundant coral while
others are not and undergo persistent phase shifts to macroalgal dominance. This
6-year experiment will measure the dynamics of benthic communities, coral
demography, and the coral microbiome across seasonal change in ocean
temperature, allowing the team to (1) link changes in coral microbiomes (e.g., a
rise in pathogenic bacteria) to the trajectories of coral decline or recovery
and (2) link nutrients, herbivory, and temperature to phase shifts in both
benthic communities and coral microbiomes. Importantly, the team is testing the
resistance of phase shifts of benthic communities and coral microbiomes by
measuring their changes after removing the nutrient enrichment treatment at the
end of year 3 and tracking recovery of the system for 3 more years. Thus, this
project begins to answer whether reef and microbial community phase shifts can
be easily reversed once they occur. Many studies have focused on the factors
that disassemble coral reef communities, but this is the first to examine how
reef communities can be reassembled from the microbiome
upwards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.