* 2023405
* Empirical Implications of Theoretical Models (EITM) Summer Institutes 2016 - 2019
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Rocio Titiunik, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 71,286.00

America's private and public sectors work hard to improve national security,
economic growth, and quality of life for people around the world. In an
increasingly competitive global environment, American competitiveness often
depends on analyzing the best available data and evidence in ways that are
rigorous and actionable. Our military, our farms, our factories, our tech
companies, and our governments benefit from analyses that document the effect of
past and current programs and provide a credible basis for improving future
effectiveness and efficiency. The EITM (Empirical Implications of Theoretical
Models) program is designed to help young scholars develop research designs in
ways that advance critical scientific knowledge and that make that knowledge
more relevant and usable to the private and public sector. EITM pursues these
goals by providing opportunities for scholars to better leverage possible
intersections between theoretical modeling and empirical inference. For example,
today sophisticated methods for examining qualitative data, text, "big data",
networks and related phenomena are drawing scholars' attention. EITM his
attention increases the opportunities for, and headwinds facing, theory-
empirical integrations. A new approach to EITM can help scholars increase the
credibility and value of the knowledge that they are now
producing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EITM Summer Institutes offer younger
scholars an opportunity to work with senior scholars who are leaders in
advancing theoretical and empirical research. The content of Institute
activities pertains to the development and expansion of best practices. The
substantive focus is on areas where appreciable research integrating theory and
methods already exists. Institute activities transcend passive receipt of
lecture material. Each institute offers participants multiple dynamic
opportunities to receive mentoring and feedback from a wide range of sources.
Each institute combines a rigorous curriculum with a wide range of one-to-one
mentoring opportunities with leading faculty from across the country. EITM is
committed to making these opportunities available to people from all
backgrounds. We have worked with other groups to deal with the fact that
aspiring members of historically underrepresented populations often desire the
benefits of an EITM experience, but lack confidence that their institutions have
adequately prepared them. EITM's expanded Scholarship program gives us the
ability to be proactive in building new opportunity pipelines for such
individuals. In short, EITM emphasizes addressing important substantive and
methodological problems with a combination of clearly-stated premises, logically
coherent theory explaining relations among concepts named in the premises, and a
logically coherent empirical work developed to evaluate the premises and/or the
relations. Society benefits when its members can develop, articulate, and apply
logically-coherent and empirically robust explanations of critical social
phenomena. Dealing with such questions directly, as EITM does, is a means to new
levels of accuracy and reliability for the growing range of private and public
sector entities that use social science to improve their effectiveness and
efficiency. Developing a generation of scholars who are up to helping the nation
effectively confront its most significant challenges and to make the most of its
evolving opportunities is the main goal of the EITM approach.