* 2023338
* Structure of a recharging crustal magma plumbing  system at the Santorini arc volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Douglas Toomey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 292,974.00

This project will improve the understanding of magma storage under volcanoes - a
critical input for volcanic hazard assessments. Magma beneath a volcano can be
detected using geophysical tools, but the shape of the magma plumbing systems
that underlie volcanoes is still not known. For hazard analyses it is critical
to know what fraction of a magma is molten rock (melt) and what fraction are
crystals; this ratio controls how fluid the magma is and thus how easy it is for
an eruption to occur. After a large, explosive eruption of the volcano, the
subsurface magma system has to reassemble. To resolve the detailed structure of
a recharging crustal magma plumbing system beneath an arc volcano, this project
will use a unique seismic dataset, PROTEUS, from Santorini volcano in Greece.
The PROTEUS dataset probed the volcano in unprecedented detail. The data reveal
a column of broken rock that is narrowly confined beneath the northern caldera
basin. Below this structure lies the uppermost part of the magma system. This
project will further analyze the PROTEUS seismic data as well as model the
stresses with the volcano to: (i) image the magma plumbing system of the volcano
to great depths (the base of the crust); (ii) determine the melt content of
magmas located in the mid- and upper-crust; (iii) explore how volcano internal
structure and by regional setting control magma distribution within the volcano.
When recruiting graduate and undergraduate students, diversity in STEM training
will be prioritized. This project will build on existing international
collaborations including with four different European scientific institutions
and with an International Ocean Drilling expedition to Santorini. To most
effectively bring the science results to the public and local decision makers,
the project engages Greek collaborators and a science communications expert.
This study will provide a framework for volcanic and seismic hazards assessment
at Santorini, where the dramatic landscape draws over 2 million tourists per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models of volcano plumbing systems predict
vertically extensive magma systems dominated by low melt-fraction crystal mushes
where differentiation occurs in the lower and mid crust and magma accumulation
in the upper crust. However, the detailed geometry, distribution, and
composition of melt throughout the crust remain poorly known. These conceptual
models also predict that the existence of eruptible melt-rich magma chambers
prior to Plinian events is short-lived. Of interest is how the magma system is
reshaped after a caldera-forming eruption. This project will address two
outstanding science questions: (1) What is the high-resolution structure of the
magmatic system at an arc volcano and what are the melt contents throughout the
crust? And (2) How is magma movement affected by caldera collapse structures and
regional stresses? To resolve the detailed structure of a recharging crustal
magma plumbing system at an arc volcano, this project leverages the unique
PROTEUS active-source seismic dataset from the well-studied Santorini volcano.
These data probed the volcano with unprecedented wavefield density and, to date,
tomographic analysis of first arriving P-waves has resolved the structure of the
uppermost crust at, and around, the volcanic edifice. The results reveal a low-
velocity, porous column that is narrowly confined beneath the northern caldera
basin beneath which is an upper-crustal magma system. Here the PROTEUS seismic
dataset will be exploited further to model the stress state. The proposed
analyses will: (i) determine the structure of the magmatic system below the
currently-resolved upper-crustal reservoir through tomographic inversion of
deeper turning rays and Moho reflections; (ii) better constrain the melt content
of the mid- and upper- crust through joint Vp/Vs tomography and modeling of
secondary arrivals; (iii) interpret the seismic results in terms of physical
properties; and (iv) explore how the internal structure of the edifice and
regional stresses affect magma accumulation within the volcano through modeling
and seismicity analysis. This project will also build international
collaborations including four different European institutions and synergies with
an IODP proposal. Diversity in STEM training will be prioritized when recruiting
graduate and undergraduate students. This study will provide a framework for
volcanic and seismic hazards assessment at Santorini, where the dramatic
landscape draws over 2 million tourists per year. To most effectively bring the
results to the public and local decision makers, the project leverages Greek
collaborators and a science communications expert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.