* 2023775
* ASCENT: Photonically Driven mm-Wave Communication Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Andreas Beling, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,300,000.00

The ever-increasing demand for wireless communications has created a need for
extremely wideband radio transmitters that can deliver multi-giga-bit-per-second
data rates to individual users. A promising approach that can enable these high
data rates and even future faster tera-bit-per-second (Tbps) data rate is the
use of the millimeter-wave (mm-wave) spectrum (30 to 300 GHz) which readily
provides a vast amount of bandwidth. Cellular networks operating at mm-wave
frequencies will increase the required base station bandwidth significantly, but
they will also decrease the size of each cell dramatically due to the large path
loss and atmospheric absorption at these frequencies. As a result, installing a
base station on every light pole may become necessary to guarantee coverage in
an urban environment. This scenario creates many technical challenges since the
baseband rack-mount hardware equipment cannot be placed adjacent to each antenna
in this case. To address this, solutions are needed that allow for dense
deployment of compact mm-wave base stations with Tbps-level throughput whose
complex communication equipment can be placed away from the antenna itself.
Compared to pure electronic solutions, photonic technologies offer many
technical advantages to realize such wideband systems. However, traditional
photonic approaches are not scalable and suffer from large insertion loss and
large footprint when cascading discrete components. This project will address
these challenges by a joint multidisciplinary effort that leverages recent
developments in nonlinear optics, integrated photonics, and wideband integrated
antennas to enable a compact platform that can provide a vast array of wireless
channels with over 1 Tbps data capacity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to develop a new paradigm for chip-scale Tbps wireless systems. The approach is
based on optical dual-microresonators with ultra-high quality factor, where
mode-locked femtosecond soliton pulses are generated through the balance between
cavity dispersion and Kerr nonlinearity to create arrays of stable optical
carriers. Filtering, data modulation, and multiplexing will be accomplished in
the optical domain through ring resonators, heterogeneously integrated high-
bitrate modulators, and arrayed waveguide gratings. Conversion into the mm-wave
frequencies will be achieved by heterodyne detection in ultra-wideband
photodetectors, which will be co-designed with integrated antennas to ensure
efficient radiation into free space. This effort is expected to advance not only
the performance of individual components and circuits, but also the
miniaturization and applicability of integrated photonic-electronic technologies
to push the state-of-the-art for mm-wave wireless communications. The fact that
all key components will be integrated on a single chip will pave the way toward
manufacturable large-scale mm-wave photonic integrated circuits with small size,
light weight, and low power, which will also benefit other applications in
sensing and imaging. The research will allow in-depth studies of the potential
benefits, trade-offs, and limits of photonically driven high-frequency
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.