* 2023638
* STTR Phase I:  Sustainable Glass Raw Materials and Processes for the Upcycling of Waste Concrete into SIlicate Glass
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Scott Misture, CONOX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to provide waste concrete as a new raw material source for the glass
and other industries. It is estimated that 2.2 billion tons of waste concrete is
generated globally each year. About 70% of the construction waste generated in
the US is concrete, but it is not typically used as a raw material for glass
production or other chemical processes. Using concrete as a raw material reduces
its contribution to landfills as well as the need for mining virgin raw
materials., and contributes environmental benefits. This STTR Phase I project
will study processes to prepare furnace-ready concrete for glass
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project will study the
feasibility of waste concrete as a raw material constituent (feedstock) for
calcium-silicate glass and glass-making. Environmental benefits are possible
because concrete contains the same key oxides used in glass making (silicon,
calcium, aluminum and iron oxides) as well as sulfur compounds (e.g. gypsum
mixed with the cement to regulate setting, and therefore can potentially serve
as a candidate raw material in the production of calcium-silicate soda lime and
calcium-borosilicate glasses.Research objectives include: 1) characterize
variations in chemical composition from industrially relevant sources; 2)
determine variation in contaminant concentrations; 3) demonstrate processes and
methods to address contaminant variations' 4) characterize the specifications
for a furnace-ready waste concrete glass batch; 5) produce pilot batches of
calcium-silicate soda lime glass; and 6) characterize variations in produced
glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.