* 2023089
* Human Input and Coastal Landscape Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Heather Thakar, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 110,765.00

This project will focus on environmental and social changes that accompanied the
long-term movement of people and plants along the Pacific coast. Previous
scholarship has identified the emergence sedentary communities based on food
production as a critical turning point in the development of the modern world,
shaping current day environment, economy, and social order. This project
explores the long-term ecological feedbacks that set the stage for this key
transition in human history, within this unique context. Archaeological research
has demonstrated how human modifications of the landscape helped drive long-term
changes, especially along the coastline, where forest clearance interacted with
stabilizing sea levels to create highly productive wetland environments. Given
that a large proportion of the global population today lives within proximity to
the coast, there is great value in reconstructing the breadth of human
adaptations within this dynamic ecosystem, along with the economic and societal
resilience that they may afford. In coastal regions throughout the world, better
understanding the nature and timing of changes in ecosystem structure, the
availability of habitable land, and the long-term sustainability of economic
strategies is of great significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will examine the (1) impacts of early foragers and later farmers on the coastal
forests, (2) the development of coastal ecosystems and societies, and (3) how
humans adapted to changing opportunities and constraints afforded by the
emergence of novel habitats. The team will accomplish these goals through a
detailed landscape and occupation history of a Pacific coastal region by
sampling the regionâ€™s sedimentary and archaeological records. The research team
is composed of archaeologists specializing in geoarchaeology, archaeometry,
archaeobotany, and prehistory, and will employ an integrated analysis of
paleobotanical, isotopic, and radiocarbon data acquired from coastal and
interior sediment cores alongside extensive archaeological survey and site
testing. This combined approach will allow the team to document not only the
timing and nature of initial human settlement and use of plant domesticates but
also facilitate reconstruction of forest management practices that shaped both
interior and coastal ecosystems in this region. This highly collaborative
research will generate new data and interpretations for better understanding
coastal communities and landscape transformations, while creating educational
and training opportunities for students and local
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.