* 2023376
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Grant: Long Term Societal Response to Volcanic Exposure
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 23,068.00

This project will investigate the impact of volcanism on the development and
trajectories of past societies. Disasters are typically framed as externalized
crises which pass judgment on a society’s resilience. However, these narratives
often ignore how disaster reveals underlying tensions and inequalities, and how
disaster is capitalized upon for systemic change within social fields. This
project will examine how trends of shifting social organization, power
distribution, and a society’s priorities are amplified in the context of
disaster. Disasters can open new means and motivations to divert or accelerate
social trends: communities can choose to communally support each other through
bottom-up organization schemes, just as institutions and their leaders can seek
to entrench their power and control through top-down administration. Each person
also has a unique social and environmental exposure to the hazard itself, which
informs the decisions they make to maintain or alter their behavior, or even
leave the affected landscape entirely and emigrate. These contestations and
negotiations play out along already-established social conventions and power
dynamics – and their consequences establish expectations for how to respond to
future disasters. Studying disaster-affected societies through this lens
contributes to understanding of the development of social complexity. This
research also deepens a growing literature on the role of disaster in the human
experience, and helps illustrate how modern society can contend with our own
increasing number of disasters worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines one specific aspect of disaster and society, that of the impact of
volcanism in a coastal region. It was impacted several times by volcanic
eruptions that began in the highlands and deposited volcanic ash (tephra) widely
but unevenly. This presents the opportunity to complement and expand on
interpretations of regional volcanic exposure and its interaction with
trajectories of social complexity. Investigation will take place at a site which
preserves stratified occupations in domestic features like house floors, storage
pits and hearths. Excavation and site survey will recover ceramic, lithic,
paleoecological, and biological material correlates to assess if residents
altered their land use and social arrangements; and will also identify tephra
related to source and time of eruptions. These correlates will support rigorous,
interdisciplinary interpretations which discuss the social-ecological dimensions
of disaster through time. Understanding how these communities negotiated
volcanic vulnerability broadens archaeological discussions of alternative social
complexity, and aids modern communities exposed to these volcanic hazards by
learning from past events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.