* 2023210
* Collaborative Research: Eddy fluxes across the Southern Antarctic Circumpolar Current Front near Southeast Indian Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Xiaobiao Xu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 105,480.00

Ocean circulation regulates the Earthâ€™s climate by transporting heat and carbon
through the global ocean and storing heat and carbon in the deep ocean. In the
Southern Ocean, the strongest current on earth, the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (ACC), distributes heat, salt, and freshwater between ocean basins. This
project seeks to use moored instrumentation to quantify the exchange of heat and
salt across the southernmost portion of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC)
into the waters around Antarctica in a sector where the ACC fronts are in close
proximity and mesoscale eddy activity is particularly high. The project
coordinates US and Korean observational and modeling components. The
instrumentation and modeling will expand and augment an already funded Korean
program. Ship time needed to deploy and recover the instruments will be provided
South Korea. Data from the moored instruments will be collected annually by
telemetry via pop-up data shuttles, leaving the instruments undisturbed on the
seafloor. The observations will be used to refine and verify global proxy
estimates of heat fluxes. Global context for understanding the heat budget will
be guided by a high-resolution numerical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to measure and diagnose ocean eddy heat fluxes in the lee of
Southeast Indian Ridge in the ACC. This location stands out as one of the major
ACC eddy flux hot spots and as a region where the three ACC fronts converge
closely together as they encounter the ridge complex. At this hot spot, mean and
eddy fluxes likely conspire to cross the breadth the ACC. The focus is upon the
southernmost ACC front where existing in situ measurements are sparse and where
ACC-sourced heat influences the Southern Ocean Ross and Weddell gyres and
ultimately the Antarctic margin. A high-resolution numerical model will provide
the larger context for proposed observations, and proxy estimates will be sought
that use the existing global observing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.