* 2023088
* RAPID: Responding to an Emerging Epidemic through Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Troy Sadler, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 02/28/2022
* USD 200,000.00

At this moment, there is global concern about the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) and its potential to become an epidemic in the U.S. and other
countries. Reports of past studies on student understanding of epidemics and how
they are taught in school indicate that teachers are reticent to teach the
material because the science is unclear given the emerging nature of evidence,
or because they donâ€™t understand it well themselves. Curricular resources are
limited. Consequently, many students are left on their own to grapple with a
potential public health emergency that could affect them and their families. The
problem is further complicated by misinformation that may be spread through
social media. There is less public understanding about the science of the virus
and how it spreads; the risk of being infected; treatment, or, the severity of
the illness. This research project will produce curricular materials designed to
help students learn about viral epidemics as both a scientific and social issue.
It will engage students in scientific modeling of the epidemic and in critical
analyses of media and public health information about the virus. This approach
helps students connect their classroom learning experiences with their lives
beyond school, a key characteristic of science literacy. This project is an
example of how science education can be both engaging and relevant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of North Carolina and the
University of Missouri have been studying how to teach about issues at the
crossroads of science and social concerns such as community health; they have
developed a framework to build curriculum materials focused on student learning
of such complex issues through modeling and inquiry. For this study on the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19); first, the researchers will study student
responses to the epidemic in real time, collecting data on student initial
understandings and concerns. Then, using this information, they will work with 7
high school science teachers familiar with their framework to build a prototype
curriculum unit, and test it in classrooms in 4 high schools selected for their
socio-economic and ethnic/racial diversity. The study will gather data on
student interest in the epidemic, as well as how students access information
about it through various forms of media, and how they vet news reports and
social media. The researchers will also use pre- and post-test data to assess
student learning. After this initial enactment of the curriculum materials
developed to teach about the epidemic, researchers and teachers will revise the
curriculum materials to make them more effective. The final products will be a
curriculum unit that will be readily available and modifiable for teaching and
learning about future epidemics, as well as greater understanding about how
students deal with vast amounts of information about societal issues that affect
their immediate lives and the science behind them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers, through the research and development of new
innovations and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.