* 2023314
* Collaborative Research: Plastic Ceramics: The Role of Grain Boundaries During Laser Shock Peening
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Amanda Krause, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 10/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Laser shock peening (LSP) is a new surface
engineering method that has been proven to prevent crack growth in several
ceramic materials, which are inherently brittle. In particular, success has been
found with ceramics suitable for applications in extreme environments (e.g.,
hypersonic vehicles, gas-turbine engines, and armor). The general applicability
of this technique is impeded because the underlying mechanisms are not fully
understood. The goal of this project is to identify the role internal interfaces
play during LSP to guide future material design, which will extend the
applicability of this technique and increase its effectiveness at improving the
ceramics’ mechanical performance. The next generation of ceramic engineers are
being trained on these methods and approaches to enable the processing and
implementation of tough structural ceramics. In addition to the two doctoral
students, undergraduate and high school students are being recruited to
participate in the project each summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
This research identifies how grain boundary character (macroscopic parameters,
thickness, and chemistry) in ceramics affects the propensity to form
dislocations and, thus, build compressive residual stresses during LSP. LSP has
been adapted to ceramic materials such as silicon carbide and alumina to induce
compressive residual stresses that improve their crack resistance. Yet, the
fundamental mechanisms and the broad applicability of the technique remain
poorly understood. The scientific hypothesis is that LSP will be applicable to
materials with higher order complexions – equilibrium grain boundary states with
high disorder – to generate shock wave propagations that initiate dislocation
formation necessary for building compressive residual stresses near grain
boundaries. To test this hypothesis, the effect of LSP is being investigated in
various grain boundaries of different character and composition in alpha-phase
alumina with complexion engineering. The specific aims are to (1) correlate the
extent of compressive residual stress induced by LSP with grain boundary
character distributions and grain size and (2) identify individual grain
boundary structures associated high dislocation density. Engineering students
are learning valuable skills in ceramic processing and electron microscopy
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.