* 2023932
* Enhanced Atomization of Viscous Liquids Using Insights from Global Instabilities of Two-Phase Countercurrent Mixing Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alison Hoxie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,952.00

Atomization refers to the process of breaking up a liquid stream into a
collection of droplets, which are then usually sprayed into a fluid flow or onto
a surface to form a coating. Atomization occurs in a variety of industrial and
natural systems. Consumers are familiar with many products that have been
produced using a spraying technique, such as powdered milk, infant formula, and
painted surfaces, or are deployed using a spraying operation, such as hair
spray, automotive fuel injectors, and nasal inhalers. The sprays are designed to
atomize the fluids into fine droplets that improve products by enhancing
efficiency, reducing costs, and minimizing wastes. In many cases of practical
interest, the fluids that are sprayed are highly viscous, which poses problems
to achieving fine sprays and increases the energy used to produce a spray.
Often, sprays of highly viscous fluids produce extremely large droplets that
diminish the effectiveness of the atomization process. This project will use a
combination of experiments, theory and numerical simulation to study the
atomization process. The research team will use a model flow system and examine
the instability in the flow that is the start of atomization. Undergraduate
students will be recruited to the research team through the University of
Minnesota's Research Experience for Undergraduates program. The researchers will
create a traveling exhibit that will be used at science fairs for middle-
schoolers to acquaint youngsters with principles of fluid dynamics applied to
atomization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the performance
of a newly designed atomizer nozzle that dramatically reduces energy
consumption, while enabling the atomization of highly viscous fluids into sprays
of fine droplets. The project will use a combination of theory, experiments and
computational fluid dynamics to identify the mechanisms responsible for the
enhanced performance, which will enable design enhancements to further improve
energy efficiency. The hypothesis is that a two-phase counterflow mixing layer
established inside the nozzle is responsible for high levels of turbulent
mixing, creating a two-phase mixture that emerges from the nozzle directly as a
spray. The experiments involve characterization of the spray as a function of
liquid viscosity, counterflowing air-liquid mass flow and momentum ratios, and
nozzle internal geometry. In parallel, the research team will use experiments on
planar countercurrent mixing layers that allow optical access to examine in
detail the dynamics of a liquid-air interface with counterflow velocity
profiles. Experiments will also be performed at the X-Ray facility at Argonne
National Labs to elucidate the density profile inside the nozzle. These
experiments will be accompanied by a detailed linear stability analysis to
identify the presence of absolutely unstable profiles in the mixing layer, which
may appear in experiments as self-sustained oscillations. High-resolution Direct
Numerical Simulations (DNS) will clarify the physics of mixing inside the nozzle
and provide design guidance to engineering practitioners in atomization
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.