* 2023499
* Collaborative Research: Explorations of Salt Finger Convection in the Extreme Oceanic Parameter Regime: An Asymptotic Modeling Approach.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Keith Julien, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 363,735.00

This project is a theoretical and computational study of turbulent double
diffusion in the ocean. Double diffusion processes arise from the different
rates/scales of salinity and temperature diffusion in the ocean under
thermohaline conditions that can lead to turbulent mixing. The project employs
asymptotic scaling approaches to render the equations of motion more tractable,
facilitating detailed examinations of double diffusion. The development of new
asymptotic models provides a unique capability to perform simulations of the
salt-finger convection in the extreme oceanic regime. The underlying scaling
assumptions of the asymptotic theory also provide a new strategy for rescaling
the oceanic equations of motion that allows for greater numerical stability in
probing this regime. New theories will be developed to help improve our
understanding of the saturated states of salt-finger turbulence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a comprehensive study of salt-finger
convection valid in the oceanic regime of small salinity to thermal diffusivity
ratio. This is accomplished by utilizing: novel asymptotically reduced models
that extrapolate to extreme parameter settings; a new reformulation of the
Navier-Stokes fluid equations that extends the stability and computational
capabilities of direct numerical simulations; and theoretical analysis that
dissects the flow morphology, energetics and multiscale nature of turbulent salt
fingers. At present, direct numerical simulations of turbulent double diffusion
are limited by the diffusivity ratio. Asymptotic models which filter
computationally prohibitive fast internal waves and maintain an inertia-free
balance will be employed. The reformulated Navier-Stokes fluid equations retain
internal gravity waves but utilize the asymptotic rescalings of the spatial and
temporal derivatives and field magnitudes and allow for comparison with reduced
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.