* 2023525
* CAREER: Interrogating dense anisotropic colloidal suspensions with SMR-TIRM
* ENG,CBET
* 01/02/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Wirth, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 378,500.00

Nanometer to micrometer scale "colloidal" particles are found in consumer
products, coatings, and nature. For example, paints, inks, and lubricants
contain particles of this size that are designed to be well-dispersed in a
liquid. However, particles may deposit or aggregate in ways that diminish
performance. It is difficult to predict these unfavorable processes for
particles that are non-spherical or have non-uniform surface chemistry. The
principal investigator will develop and apply an experimental technique to
reveal the physical and chemical forces controlling the deposition or
aggregation of these complex particles. The results should transform our
understanding of advanced coatings, multiphase materials, and biofilm adhesion.
In addition, the PI will form teams of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students to explore the world of consumer products, textiles, cosmetics, and
food through an experiential summer program. The program consists of laboratory
and in-class experiences that will culminate in the development of a college-
level course, teaching tools, and case studies to be disseminated throughout
Ohio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award integrates research and
educational objectives to transform our understanding of how anisotropic
colloidal particles interact with interfaces for the processing of coatings,
production of multiphase materials, and understanding of synthetic and
biological active colloids. The research objective of this work is to measure
conservative and non-conservative surface interactions for dense suspensions of
colloids with anisotropy in both shape and surface chemistry. The current
bottleneck to completing this work is that existing surface interaction
measurement techniques are either not suitable for such systems or are not
sufficiently sensitive. The PI will develop a tool called Scattering Morphology
Resolved Total Internal Reflection Microscopy (SMR-TIRM). SMR-TIRM works by
utilizing fluctuations in the morphology of evanescent wave scattering from a
colloidal particle, rather than the integrated intensity fluctuations. The PI
will use SMR-TIRM to quantify the nature of symmetry breaking in driven colloids
and the dependence of surface interactions on crowding of anisotropic particles
near rigid and non-rigid interfaces. This research will provide crucial
information for how anisotropic colloidal particles interact with surfaces. The
education objective is to build an experiential program that integrates
university activities with those at an on-campus STEM high school, which is part
of the Cleveland Metropolitan School District. The theme of the program will be
applications of Colloid and Interface Science in the design of chemical
products. The program will consist of a college-level course in Chemical Product
Design, a project based experiential learning program for high school students,
and a research experience fostering multi-level project teams of high school
students, undergraduates, and graduate students housed in the new shared Soft
Materials Lab at Cleveland State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.