* 2023039
* GP-IN: Chesapeake-Student Recruitment, Early Advisement, and Mentoring (C-StREAM) to Diversify Leadership in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Denice Wardrop, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 298,299.00

Through the IUSE:GEOPAths project, the Chesapeake Research Consortium, Inc.
(CRC) and its partners aim to evolve and strengthen a leadership pathway that
attracts and retains a diverse community of both undergraduate mentees and
mentors so that the necessary diversity of perspectives is applied to the
understanding of complex human-impacted ecosystems. The project is intended to
strengthen and further develop, improve, and evaluate the CRC’s recently created
and unique program, Chesapeake-Student Recruitment, Early Advisement, and
Mentoring (C-StREAM). In its current form, C-StREAM develops and trains a
diverse population of future leaders in environmental research, restoration, and
protection by engaging them over multiple years in mentored engagement
experiences. While this initial pipeline construction has been successful, there
are structural elements that can be strengthened so that it can be filled to
capacity. The PIs intend to do this by individually tailoring the arc of the
entire student engagement experience, over multiple years, and by deeply
integrating the students within the full intellectual ecosystem of the
Chesapeake Bay restoration effort, which is a partnership of students, senior
researchers across a variety of institutional settings, managers, and policy-
makers working to develop and apply scientific understanding of the Chesapeake
Bay regional ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to strengthen the existing
pathway model (a multi-year experience associated with a large ecosystem
restoration effort), the PIs specifically will focus on building the confidence
and competency of participants (Fellows) toward continued study in their field
of interest and an eventual career of contribution to environment-related
careers by: a) providing access to a summer internship program that allows them
to explore both sides of actionable science (i.e., science and its application
in management and policy) by offering opportunities from multiple on-going,
impactful internship programs at two different federal agencies and multiple
(currently seven) CRC member or partnering institutions; b) employing a common
language of leadership competencies that can be developed by the student through
the program, so that specific experiences can be woven together in a cohesive
arc and tailored to the individual needs of the student; c) building a strong
sense of belonging by providing the Fellows of any given annual cohort (of
roughly a dozen students) multiple and substantive opportunities to create
community, enhance communication skills, and have shared professional
development experiences; d) creating a community of practice composed of well-
respected and professionally well-connected summer mentors who are not only
highly skilled in areas of direct intellectual interest to the student, but also
trained to be culturally aware, articulate in leadership competencies, and
responsive to the student’s needs so that the program experience can be
leveraged to its fullest potential; e) incentivizing each Fellow to continue to
pursue interests that they’ve developed (from the summer experience or
otherwise) during the academic year and in collaboration with home institution
advisors and mentors, to bridge the summer experiences to create a thoughtful
and individually-tailored arc of engagement; and f) connecting Fellows (via
access during common activities and encouragement by mentors) with more than one
professional mentor, including individuals both within and outside their home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.