* 2023443
* Examining hydrodynamics and connectivity resulting from atmospheric frontal passages in a coastal river delta
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Chunyan Li, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 378,354.00

This project aims to understand how cold fronts affect water movement in coastal
river deltas. In regions with small tides, such as coastal Louisiana, winds
associated with cold fronts are known to be important for circulating water and
sediment throughout the region. However, scientists do not understand how water
in complex coastal regions, such as coastal river deltas, respond to winds
associated with cold fronts. Understanding this interaction is important,
because cold fronts may contribute to coastal erosion, a major issue in
Louisiana, and restoration efforts must account for the effects of cold fronts
to be effective. This project will investigate these issues throughout coastal
Louisiana using field measurements and modeling of wind events and water
movement. In addition to improving the understanding of water circulation in
complex coastal regions, the project will also engage stakeholders and delivers
hands-on demonstrations to Baton Rouge (Louisiana) schoolchildren.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric cold fronts are major drivers of water
circulation and sediment transport in coastal Louisiana, a region experiencing
rapid land loss due to relative sea level rise, coastal erosion, and lack of
sediment input. There is considerable interest in understanding and using
natural deltaic processes through sediment diversions to mitigate land loss, as
well as increased storm surge and saline intrusion. River deltas comprise
relatively deep distributary channels and shallow wetlands that are
hydraulically connected to channels. Previous analyses of the hydrodynamics
resulting from frontal passages have focused on relatively homogeneous
environments that do not have considerable changes in depth (e.g., the coastal
shelf or open bays). Stark changes in depth, spatial gradients in connectivity,
and the impact of fluvial versus marine forcings make river deltas a
significantly more complex heterogeneous environment where cold front-induced
circulation is not yet understood. This proposal will: 1) determine how water
levels vary throughout frontal passages across the Mississippi Delta Region, 2)
determine how appreciable changes in depth across a heterogenous delta affect
hydrodynamics induced by cold fronts, and 3) identify the mechanisms that
control channel-wetland connectivity in deltas during cold fronts. Synoptic
analyses will focus on the coastal Louisiana region while detailed field
measurements and numerical modeling will focus on the Wax Lake Delta in
Louisiana. Outreach efforts include digital brochures distributed to local
stakeholders and coastal managers, as well as a portable wind-driven wave tank
that will be used in demonstrations engaging 200 undergraduate students and
2,500 K-8 students and teachers on an annual basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Physical Oceanography
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.