* 2023399
* Collaborative: The STARS Aligned: How the STARS Computing Corps Broadens Participation in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Audrey Rorrer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 105,104.00

This award is a one-year extension of the STARS Computing Corps Alliance for
Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC). The primary research aim of
extension is to investigate research questions around the impact of the STARS
Computing Corps Alliance on its past and current efforts to broaden
participation in computing. This longitudinal evaluation has the potential to
elucidate successful components of BPC Alliances and their role as national
resources on issues of diversity, equity, and inclusion in computing. Further,
the results of this study could further extend knowledge about practices
designed to increase persistence and support career advancement in computing for
undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty, particularly for those
from underrepresented groups. The conferences, communities, and networks
supported through STARS will continue to create significant institutional and
human resources that could increase the reach of BPC research to a larger
audience of researchers, educators, administrators, CS departments, and K-20
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to understanding the longitudinal
impact of the STARS Computing Corps on computing persistence and career
advancement for underrepresented students and faculty, the work also aims to 1)
formalize existing STARS efforts for propagating best-practices for BPC; 2)
expand STARS online resources designed to build capacity for engaging in BPC
evaluation and research; 3) develop a virtual STARS alumni community; and 4)
continue to support an academic community for BPC through STARS Celebration and
RESPECT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.