* 2023412
* I-Corps:  Consumer-based infrastructure for Kitchen Internet of Things (IoT)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Richard Voyles, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves a
revolution in the way we cook, eat, socialize, and organize our lives. In the
age of COVID-19, technologies that focus on the kitchen as the "nerve-center" of
the home are more important than ever for keeping us safe, connected, and
organized. The "Internet of Kitchen Things" will anticipate and streamline
shopping needs and methods while enabling a tighter connection to our social
networks, even in quarantine. This technology will improve safety by automating
the connection of user needs to touchless interactions and improve efficiency by
off-loading menial tasks, allowing humans to focus more on value-added actions
and creative pursuits. The system will enable consumer conveniences, such as
suggesting dinner menus based on user preferences and inventory on-hand,
automatically compiling budget information, and even providing lifelong learning
opportunities for cooking, exercise, etc. alone and with
friends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on developing an
ecosystem of consumer-based Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure and
applications, centered on the home kitchen, for enhancing user convenience
related to selection and preparation of meals, and pantry inventory management.
The infrastructure involves in-house-developed containers, that include sensors
for temperature, color, weight, and volume; displays for information feedback;
bi-directional communication facilities such as RF, Bluetooth, RFID and barcode;
and wide-area internet connectivity. The prototype app can communicate with the
network of containers and provide services such as the automatic maintenance of
inventories and shopping lists, reminders for food about to expire, and
recommendations for menu ideas and preparation tips. The app and supporting
containers are built on an open architecture that can be expanded and customized
with other internet-controllable cookware to increase infrastructure and
enhanced convenience for other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.