* 2023310
* TRTech-PGR: Identification and characterization of stress-responsive and evolutionary conserved epitranscriptomic modification sites in plant transcriptomes.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Brian Gregory, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,893,254.00

RNA is an essential molecule for life, serving many roles in the functioning of
cells. Chemical modifications to RNA can affect its rate of turnover. In plants,
little is known about the chemical diversity of these modifications and the
biological contexts in which they occur, due to the difficulties in
biochemically identifying them at the cellular level. This project aims to use
computational approaches to systematically identify RNA modifications by
reanalyzing ~1 petabyte of publicly available data from a broad diversity of
model and agriculturally important plant species. This project will identify and
classify RNA modifications based on where they are applied, the biological
conditions (e.g., during the development of the plant, when the plant
experiences stress, etc.), and the degree to which each modification is
conserved between plant species. This project is devoted to training the next
generation of plant scientists at the interface between computers and biology.
Undergraduate students will play an integral role in the identification and
biological validation of RNA modifications. Altogether, this project will
provide insight into the biological significance of RNA modifications using
novel applications of data in public repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA
chemical modifications are diverse, occur on all classes of RNA molecules, and
are physiologically relevant. However, RNA modifications have not yet been
studied in depth in plants. This gap in knowledge is in large part due to the
cost and technical difficulties of the biochemical assays used to measure
abundance of specific RNA modifications. In light of these difficulties, in
silico methods have been developed that facilitate high-throughput
identification and prediction of these chemical additions. This proposal aims to
address challenges in identifying modifications and placing them into a
biological context by: 1) developing an exhaustive, annotated plant
epitranscriptomic resource of over 47 unique modifications using approximately 1
petabase of publicly available RNA-seq data, and 2) provide a biological and
evolutionary context for each of these modifications and the RNAs they are found
to modify. To process the wealth of publicly available RNA-seq data and present
the resulting information in a manner that will drive hypothesis generation,
this project will develop novel computational workflows and data visualization
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.