* 2023192
* GP-IN: Cape Cod Community College Research Opportunities for Scientific Engagement in Ocean Sciences at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Julie Huber, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2024
* USD 331,064.00

This project will contribute to solving the problem of supporting authentic
research experiences to increase retention of 2YR college students in STEM
through a partnership between Cape Cod Community College (CCCC) and Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). The partners will work collaboratively within
the Cape Cod Regional STEM Network (CCRSN) Learning Ecosystem to provide
meaningful research opportunities, professional development resources, and
mentoring to both students and educators. The focus is on ocean sciences and
engineering, two sectors of the region’s growing Blue Economy that are rapidly
expanding and require a greater workforce. This work will increase ocean science
and engineering skills and capacity among CCCC students through hands-on
research experiences, peer-to-peer mentoring, and professional development
opportunities, while also encouraging students to transfer to a four-year
university, obtain a degree in a STEM subject, and continue on in an ocean
science or related geoscience field. The team will advance the understanding of
how to effectively integrate support services with authentic research
experiences for community college students that help them persist in seeking
degrees and careers in STEM fields. Student research will also contribute to the
understanding of the ocean, pushing the boundaries of knowledge about the ocean
to reveal its impacts on the planet and people’s lives, thus raising awareness
of the need and value of fundamental ocean research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will work towards accomplishing the following objectives: 1) provide
significant, integrated research opportunities for community college students in
ocean sciences at WHOI through paid, non-residential research experiences during
the summer as well as in the fall semester in a credit-bearing course; 2)
provide comprehensive evidence-based supports for all student participants to
increase students’ STEM identity and pursuit of STEM and ocean science and
engineering career pathways; and 3) form a community of practice for the Cape
Cod and MA South Coast region that establishes networks, fosters collaborations,
and supports early exposure to the ocean sciences and engineering in local
education systems. The described interventions will help broaden participation
and diversify the workforce in ocean sciences and engineering, while engaging
the public in ocean science literacy. The synergistic partnership developed
between a non-profit research institution and a community college can serve as a
model for other organizations and colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.