* 2023061
* Collaborative Research: Transformation plasticity as a transient creep mechanism in Earth’s crust and mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Lars Hansen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 78,260.00

The minerals that comprise Earth’s crust and mantle undergo phase
transformations. Changes in their crystal structure occur in response to changes
in temperature and pressure. With increasing pressure, olivine — the main
constituent of the upper mantle — transforms into denser minerals; much like
graphite transforms into diamond. As one mineral transforms into another,
crystal defects, known as dislocations, are produced. Dislocations allow
crystals to deform plastically, i.e., permanently. These dislocations can cause
temporary weakening that speeds up crust and mantle flows. Transformation-
induced weakening — "transformation plasticity" — may impact the mantle flows
driving plate tectonics. It may also provide an explanation for the earthquakes
occurring at great depths in the mantle. These deep earthquakes are still poorly
understood. Despite its importance, transformation plasticity has seldom been
observed in the laboratory. This is because it involves complex processes,
difficult to quantify by conventional methods. Here, The researchers conduct
experiments at the extreme pressures and temperature prevailing in the mantle.
They study the plasticity of fayalite, olivine Fe-rich end member, and quartz
which is an important constituent of the continental crust. They use a state-of-
the-art high-pressure deformation device set up at a national synchrotron
facility. There, powerful X-rays allow imaging the minerals and analyzing their
properties during their transformations. The multidisciplinary project, at the
intersection of geophysics, materials science, and crystallography, aims to
expand the understanding of Earth’s interior dynamics. It supports the
professional development of an early career scientist. It also provides training
for one graduate and several undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformation plasticity may play a central role
in: 1) mantle decoupling and the development of layered convection; 2) slab
ponding in Earth’s mantle transition zone; 3) shear zone nucleation during
orogenesis; 4) mantle plume upwelling; and 5) the nucleation of deep-focus
earthquakes. However, few studies have examined transformation plasticity in
major rock-forming minerals. This is because of the difficulty to quantify
complex transient behaviors at high temperatures (&gt;1000 K) and pressures
(&gt; 1 GPa). Here, the team explores the quartz-coesite and olivine-spinel
phase transformations — under hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic conditions — using
a Deformation-DIA (D-DIA) apparatus located at the Advanced Photon Source (APS)
at Argonne National Laboratory. This experimental setup is uniquely suited to
examining transformation-related phenomena in situ at mantle pressures and
temperatures. Stresses and transformation kinetics are quantified via energy-
dispersive X-ray diffraction. Axial and volume strains are measured using X-ray
radiography. Constitutive laws describing transformation plasticity are derived,
benchmarked against experimental data, and extrapolated to Earth conditions. Run
product microstructures are also investigated in detail — using high-resolution
electron backscatter diffraction — to interrogate the physical processes
responsible for transformation-induced weakening. Ultimately, the team seeks to
determine the importance of transformation plasticity in Earth’s crust and
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.