* 2023110
* Collaborative Research: Seasonal variability in refractory dissolved organic carbon fluxes associated with primary marine aerosol emitted from the oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Amanda Frossard, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 326,678.00

Collaborative Research: Seasonal variability in refractory dissolved organic
carbon fluxes associated with primary marine aerosol emitted from the
oceans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceans hold a massive quantity of organic carbon
that is greater than all terrestrial organic carbon biomass combined. Nearly all
marine organic carbon is dissolved. On average, it is thousands of years old,
chemically stable, and carried throughout the entire ocean several times before
complete removal. However, little is known about the processes that produce and
remove this old carbon, referred to as refractory dissolved organic carbon
(RDOC). One potential removal pathway involves RDOC adhering onto the surfaces
of rising bubbles produced by breaking waves. The bubbles ultimately burst at
the sea surface, ejecting tiny particles (primary marine aerosol, “PMA”) that
carry the RDOC into the atmosphere. Most of this PMA organic carbon is
associated with the smallest particles (less than 1 μm diameter) that drift in
the atmosphere for several days to weeks. During this time, RDOC in these
particles can be degraded photochemically (by sunlight), partially transported
landward, and/or returned to the sea. When this RDOC is converted to inorganic
carbon (e.g., carbon dioxide) or degraded to more reactive constituents in the
atmosphere, it is effectively removed from the marine RDOC reservoir. Based on
preliminary results, the annual rate at which RDOC is removed from the ocean by
this process is similar to all other known RDOC losses (interactions with
particles, biological degradation, and hydrothermal circulation), except for
photochemical degradation in seawater. Building on this prior research, this
project will identify seasonal changes in the removal of RDOC from the oceans
through this process during three research cruises to the northwestern Atlantic
Ocean. Results from this project will provide important findings about the
coupled ocean-atmosphere loss of RDOC and improve understanding of the role of
RDOC in the global carbon cycle and Earth's climate. The research will involve
two early career faculty, and will provide training for undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiocarbon (C-14)
measurements indicate that RDOC comprises 19 to 40 % of the organic carbon
associated with PMA produced by bursting bubbles at the sea surface. Injection
of RDOC into the atmosphere in association with PMA is a potentially important
process that removes as much as 2 to 20 Tg RDOC yr-1 from the oceans. This
project will measure seasonal variations in the PMA-mediated emission of marine
RDOC to the atmosphere by quantifying: (1) the fraction of RDOC in PMA OC and
(2) its relationship to the abundance of biologically produced labile and semi-
labile dissolved organic matter in near surface seawater. These relationships
will be evaluated at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Station during three
research cruises (one in July, two in January). During the cruises, the
investigators will measure: (1) the natural abundance C-14 values for PMA and
its organic source materials in seawater; (2) the dynamic and equilibrium
surface tension and physical properties of seawater, including bubble size
distributions; (3) concentrations of major ions, organic carbon, carbohydrates,
peptides and proteins, and surfactants in PMA; and (4) chromophoric dissolved
organic matter (CDOM) and the concentrations of dissolved organic carbon,
chlorophyll a, major ions, carbohydrates, peptides and proteins, and surfactants
in near-surface seawater and in the sea-surface microlayer. Based on these
chemical measurements and physical properties, this study will reveal the
magnitude and potential controls on RDOC inputs into the atmosphere as a
component of PMA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.