* 2023708
* Collaborative Research: Coupling of physical and chemical processes in the shelf to basin transport of iron and iodine off Washington and Oregon
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,169.00

The boundary between productive coastal waters and relatively non-productive
offshore waters is not a simple function of distance from the coast, but is
determined by a complex interplay between biology, chemistry, and ocean physics.
This interplay is a fundamental property that controls the oceanic contribution
to the food supply and the global carbon cycle. During summer months when waters
are warmer with low oxygen, biological decomposition near the seafloor consumes
available oxygen and releases iron from sediments into overlying seawater. In
deeper parts of the ocean, canyons and other rugged surface features influence
currents and create turbulence that rapidly moves iron from the shelf offshore.
This iron in turn can enhance biological productivity miles away. This project
will investigate (1) how decomposition processes on the continental shelf
seafloor release elements like iron required for ocean life and (2) how ocean
currents interact with the continental shelf and slope to move waters overlying
the shelf offshore to enhance productivity. Based on model simulations from the
California and Oregon coasts done over 20 years that show transport of iron via
plumes from the shelf to the open ocean, scientists will collect and analyze
samples for iron and iodine to prove the findings of the model. Iodine has been
included in the study because it can track inputs from low oxygen sediments to
the shelf. In addition, results from the study will be used to improve
assumptions used in the current model. The project will support the research in
whole or in part of four graduate students and several undergraduate students.
The scientists are involved with High School student mentoring, through Project
COOL (Chemical Oceanography Outside the Lab) and the Students on Ice
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scientists from the University of Southern
California and the University of California, Los Angeles will study iron (Fe)
and iodine (I) geochemistry along the Washington and Oregon Coasts, where high
organic matter oxidation rates, low dissolved oxygen concentrations, and high
sedimentary Fe fluxes on the continental shelf occur. This project hypothesizes
that a shelf-to-basin shuttle controls the supply of Fe from the Fe-rich shelf
into the interior of the North Pacific Ocean. Simulations of a Regional Oceanic
Modeling System (ROMS) coupled with the Biogeochemical Elemental Cycling model
(BEC) run between 2007-2017 showed that this coastline is a major source of Fe
to the ocean basin, exhibiting both deep and shallow Fe plumes that arise from
subsurface eddies generated by poleward undercurrents. Results from this model
will be used to predict how the distribution of Fe evolves seasonally and guide
sampling during two cruises in 2021 to the region. According to the ROMS-BEC
model, the Fe inventory is highest in late summer, when bottom water oxygen is
lowest, and the inventory is lowest in winter and early spring. Model-generated
deep plumes resemble those reported off Namibia, Peru and the Gulf of Alaska.
This work will sample depths up to 4500m and look for such plumes. Deep plumes
are important in global Fe budgets and because they may outcrop in high latitude
waters that are Fe limited. Iodine will also be measured because, like Fe, it
accumulates at the sediment water interface and is released under reducing
conditions. Plumes of iodine arising from shelf sediments will be used as a
semi-conservative tracer for lateral Fe advection. The cruises will also assess
the relative importance of direct inputs from rivers (especially the Columbia
River) versus reducing sediments, since these inputs are decoupled
seasonally&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.