* 2023630
* New Directions in Law and Society
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Jamie Rowen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 39,997.00

Law and society scholarship is a vibrant field of study, encompassing a wide
range of perspectives and addressing some of the most pressing questions facing
society. These include salient issues such as the impact of technology on legal
processes, efforts to redress violence from ongoing wars, understanding and
overcoming bias in the legal system, and criminal justice reform. One of the
challenges to solving these significant societal problems is that scholars
addressing them frequently work independently from other scholars tackling the
same issues from different disciplinary, methodological, or theoretical
perspectives. Resolving highly significant and complex societal problems
necessitates approaching those issues from a variety of perspectives, and
requires scholarly exchange and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to
encourage scholarly exchange, collaboration, and education, this grant will
bring a diverse group of law and society scholars together for a conference at
the University of Massachusetts Amherst from October 2-3, 2020. First, by
facilitating opportunities for networking, scholarly exchange, and learning from
panel presentations on funding and publishing law and society research, we plan
to generate new research activity, highlight diverse forms of law and society
research ranging from STEM to the humanities, and give concrete tools for
academic advancement. Second, the conference will bring new scholars into the
law and society research community, including women, scholars of color, and
those from other underrepresented groups, inducting them into science research
and helping to foster new research programs. Third, it will provide
opportunities for graduate student training through a workshop in which graduate
students will present their research and receive intensive feedback from senior
scholars. Fourth, plenary sessions and critical intervention panels will be open
to the public and will generate an edited volume, thus helping to inform public
debate. Finally, we anticipate that participants will broadly disseminate the
findings of the conference to their home institutions and in their teaching,
thus expanding the conference’s impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.