* 2023244
* Collaborative Research: The Antarctic Circumpolar Current: A Conduit or Blender of Antarctic Bottom Waters?
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Andrew Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2023
* USD 344,969.00

Part 1: Because of the manner in which it is formed at high latitudes in the
Antarctic ice, Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) is the coldest, saltiest and
densest water on the planet. The global circulation of is often quantiﬁed via
the transport in a two-dimensional, latitude/depth coordinate space. However,
AABW formation, northward ﬂow and distribution between the Atlantic, Indian and
Paciﬁc basins are fundamentally three-dimensional processes. AABW is formed in a
handful of distinct sites around the Antarctic coast, notably the southern
Weddell Sea, the western Ross Sea, along the Ad´elie coast, and in Prydz Bay.
AABW is one of the key components of the global ocean overturning circulation,
and plays a critical role in regulating Earth's climate, on multi-decadal-to-
millennial time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Mapping of AABW transport
to northern basins is not well constrained, with conflicting conclusions drawn
in previous studies. At one extreme the ACC has been suggested to be a “conduit"
that simply allows each variety of AABW to transit directly northward. At the
other extreme, it has been suggested that the ACC “blends" all shelf AABW
sources together before they reach the northern basins. To close the gap in
understanding, this collaborative project draws on three complementary
analytical tools: process-oriented modeling of AABW export across the ACC, a
high-resolution global ocean model, and an observationally-constrained estimate
of the global circulation. The proposed identification and mechanistic
understanding of AABW pathways. This project will also advance the careers of
three postdoctoral researchers and two early-career faculty members, and will
continue collaborative links between the PI and a foreign
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.