* 2023059
* GP-GO: Building Latinx Pathways into Geoscience Graduate Education through R1-HSI-Nonprofit Collaborations
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kenneth Voglesonger, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 281,944.00

This project will build pathways into geoscience (earth, oceanic, and
atmospheric) for Latinx students through exposure to research opportunities,
developing relationships with research active laboratories, and peer-to-peer
mentoring. Efforts to enhance diversity must address systemic issues in order to
ensure retention. The PIs seek to build a transferable, sustainable model for
enhancing Latinx participation and retention in geoscience through collaboration
– based in deep trust and equality – between Michigan State University (MSU;
research university), Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU; Hispanic-serving
institution), and GeoLatinas (Latinx-focused organization). This effort will
build inclusive institutional structures that will provide sustainable pathways
for Latinx students to enter graduate training in the geosciences, at MSU and
beyond. This effort towards structural reform will enhance diversity through the
promotion of inclusion, leading to retention at the graduate level and the
establishment of support systems as students move into geoscience related
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Latinx students are severely underrepresented in
geoscience. To this point, the project addresses four goals: 1. Recruit Latinx
undergraduates from diverse sciences into geoscience graduate school; 2. Support
socialization into graduate school and geoscience careers; 3. Mentor via routine
on-the-ground and virtual interactions; and 4. Advance Latinx scholars as they
enter and engage with the geoscience workforce. Activities are grounded in four
stages of Graduate Student Socialization, plus a fifth Wellbeing stage. All
three partner organizations will collaborate to meet these goals.
Undergraduates/recent graduates from all sciences will be exposed to geoscience
graduate opportunities through workshops at NEIU, graduate-like research
experiences at MSU, and GeoLatinas virtual interactions focused on mentoring and
professional and personal development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.