* 2023780
* ASCENT: Collaborative Research: Programmable Photonic Computation Accelerators (PPCA)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Liang Feng, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 849,996.00

As the Fourth Industrial Revolution is approaching, large-scale computing is
becoming more demanding and popular than ever. However, the performance of
conventional electronic microprocessors has almost reached their limits for
device speed, on-chip density and power consumption and will not be able to
continue sustaining the upcoming data explosion. Optical computation can be
extremely fast and with low-power requirements compared to electronics, for its
intrinsic high speed, large bandwidth, and unlimited parallelism, which are
critical to ease the data traffic associated with applications where artificial
intelligence decisions need to be made in real time. Novel approaches towards
programmable computations are required for data-driven training of modern
artificial intelligence. In this project, the investigators will leverage the
state-of-the-art integrated photonics technology to develop an innovative
programmable photonic computation accelerators (PPCA), accelerating the
computation speed and reducing the cost and energy consumption to sustain long
term performance requirements for machine learning. This research is closely
integrated with the existing educational activities, providing both
undergraduate and graduate students with the opportunity to participate in
cutting-edge science and technology in an innovative way. The investigators also
provide educational outreach activities in integrated photonic devices, machine
learning, and computer algorithms to promote the interests and participations of
K-12 students and broaden the participations from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) Division, the investigators
from the University of Pennsylvania and University of California, San Diego are
developing a disruptive system-level integrated nanophotonic circuits –
Programmable Photonic Computation Accelerators (PPCA) – through active control
via strategic engineering of quantum symmetry, to perform real-time programmable
mathematical operations and implement machine learning algorithms. Unique
symmetry-driven geometries will be explored to deliver novel topological
photonic components required for matrix multiplication, which can be dynamically
programmed by flexible control of spatial-variant optical modulation. On the
developed programmable photonic computation accelerator platform, different
iconic machine learning algorithms will be performed to demonstrate optical
machine learning for the first time and test its corresponding speed and
fidelity. The investigators have highly complementary expertise on active
photonic circuits, integrated devices, systems, and packaging, as well as
computation and machine learning, which will be actively synergized, enabling a
paradigmatic shift towards system-level integration of large-scale photonic
computation accelerators. If successful, the innovative programmable photonic
computation accelerators could be applied in the domains which demand extreme
speed, energy efficiency, parallelism, significant complexity, and high
scalability on an ultra-compact footprint, and full
programmability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.