* 2024597
* WORKSHOP: Support for the Academy of Management Organizational Communication and Information Systems 2020 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Marco Marabelli, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2021
* USD 29,275.00

This award supports a diverse group of approximately 25 dissertation-stage
students at U.S. institutions to participate in an international doctoral
consortium with distinguished research faculty. The Organizational Communication
and Information Systems (OCIS) doctoral consortium at the 2020 Academy of
Management (AoM) convention will consist of one and a half days of talks and
interactions among OCIS students and researchers. The doctoral consortium
provides students with feedback on their work from other students and faculty
members, allowing them to enhance their own dissertation research proposals.
Additionally, because of the diversity of the business sub-disciplines and
communities involved in the AoM conference, the consortium will allow students
to establish research connections beyond their own disciplines. Consequently,
participation will allow students to develop a better understanding of the
different research communities, which will facilitate their participation in
future interdisciplinary research and their progress toward becoming
professional researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OCIS division at the annual
AoM meeting provides a leading international forum for the presentation and
discussion of research and practical issues related to the use and impact of
information and communication technologies in organizations and society. This
project provides a forum for doctoral students to exchange insights and receive
feedback and guidance in order to enhance the quality of their dissertation
research. It also facilitates the establishment of new research collaborations
and professional networks and develops a greater awareness of ongoing cutting-
edge research in the field of organizational communication and information
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.