* 2024166
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Building Socio-Ecological Resilience through Urban Green, Blue and White Space
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Marlene Laruelle, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2025
* USD 438,106.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
focus on Resilience in a Rapidly Changing Arctic. Integrated teams of scientists
and stakeholders will address key areas of arctic resilience understanding and
action. This collaboration of academic and non-academic knowledge systems
constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that will advance not only
understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but also spur action,
inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for resilience. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Building Socio-Ecological Resilience through Urban
Green, Blue and White Space (SERUS) project will focus on expanding knowledge on
the impact of open space on urban resilience in Arctic cities, which are mainly
considered as outposts isolated from harsh climate and fragile northern nature.
This project is aimed at obtaining knowledge about future shifts of Arctic
ecosystems from observations using Arctic urban heat islands as a “time
machine.” Its main objective is to collect data and knowledge, to gain skills
and expertise, to exchange this knowledge with local communities, to integrate
diverse resilience indicators and to create a holistic understanding of urban
open space in the Arctic cities. The project seeks to advance a cross-
disciplinary climate-ecology-policy (CEP) approach for improvement of Arctic
urban resilience by targeting natural resilience elements of this ecosystem
through novel technologies of data collection, data fusion and analysis
documenting parallel changes observed in urban, disturbed and pristine (natural
backgrounds) types of open land-use/land-cover spaces. The project will
strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity of the urban Arctic through
integrating climate-ecosystem-social open space values into urban planning
efforts across many Arctic cities. The project is expected to provide
information that can be used to develop new ways to incorporate local and
indigenous knowledge in urban planning and climate mitigation. It will raise
local population and stakeholder awareness about urban climate anomalies and
ecosystem responses to global change, new construction materials and air quality
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.