* 2024217
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanotechnology-Enabled Implant for Controlling Intraocular Pressure
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Georgia Griggs, Avisi Technologies, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
Project is an improved treatment for patients suffering from glaucoma. Glaucoma
is the leading cause of irreversible blindness, affecting 3.4 million Americans
and 80 million people worldwide. The global glaucoma surgery devices market will
reach $1.74 billion by 2024, increasing at a compound annual growth rate of 20%.
In the U.S., glaucoma incurs over $4 billion in medical and societal costs
annually. For patients with glaucoma, elevated eye pressure must be lowered to
prevent optic nerve damage. However, conventional surgical implant treatments
are bulky, highly invasive, and cause chronic discomfort. Newer, smaller devices
are less invasive but affect long-term efficacy as they inadequately sustain
lower eye pressure when scarring occurs. This project will develop an implant
many times thinner than a human hair to safely reduce eye pressure while
minimizing patient discomfort and failure from scarring. The device will
facilitate patient comfort and surgical ease through a combination of mechanical
and materials engineering. Beyond glaucoma, the technology will play a key role
in future permanent and efficacious ocular implants - a rapidly growing
component of vision care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project continues development of an ultrathin implant
to treat glaucoma. Specifically, this project will optimize a novel corrugated
microstructure with a unique combination of mechanical and fluid flow
properties. These characteristics provide the implant with stiffness required
for handling, flexibility to conform to soft eye tissues, and flow properties
for controlling intraocular pressure. Devices will be fabricated using improved
micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) methods and validated on a new instrument
designed to evaluate flow resistance. This project will conduct
biocompatibility, toxicology, and performance studies, monitoring intraocular
pressure, levels of inflammation, adverse events, and implant
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.