* 2024414
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Intelligent Closed-Loop Neural Interface System for Studying Mechanisms of Somatosensory Feedback in Control of Functional and Stable Locomotion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Boris Prilutsky, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,999.00

Sensory feedback from moving legs is critical for functional and dynamically
stable locomotion. Although it is clear that motion-related sensory feedback
influences inter-leg coordination and selection of gaits (walking, trotting,
galloping, etc.), it is not known which sensory modalities (e.g., muscle length-
or force-related signals) and sources of feedback (e.g., hip or knee muscles)
mediate these locomotor changes. Therefore, this project aims to understand how
sensory neurons providing information about the length of hip muscles regulate
interlimb coordination and gait selection. This goal will be accomplished by
selectively and reversibly stimulating these sensory neurons in an intelligent,
closed-loop, and well-controlled manner. This project will lead to the
development of new neural implant tools and associated computational algorithms
for an in-vivo manipulation of motion-related sensory signals in a large animal
model, the cat. The new findings of this project and the developed methods will
substantially enhance our understanding of the mechanisms of sensory locomotor
control and contribute to developing novel therapeutic interventions. The
proposed multidisciplinary research approaches will also significantly expand
the utility and capabilities of the rapidly growing field of optogenetics,
enabling transformative research and providing unprecedented new experimental
tools for neuroscience. The most noticeable long-term benefits of this work to
society will be an improvement in the quality of life for a sizable population
of people affected by a wide range of movement deficits, from limb loss to
sensory neuropathy. These individuals will benefit from the development of
neural interfaces between the nervous and engineering systems controlled by
machine learning algorithms. Throughout this project, efforts will be made to
recruit and train graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups. Outreach activities will also be organized to share resources, tools,
and knowledge with teachers, students, and underrepresented groups. The results
of the proposed research and educational activities will be shared with
students, scientific communities, and the public through science fairs,
publications, workshops, conferences, and the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this proposal is to characterize the mechanisms of somatosensory
control of interlimb coordination and gait selection by spindle afferents of hip
muscles in the cat model by developing and utilizing in-vivo an intelligent and
closed-loop optoelectronic neural interface system. In particular, in this
proposal high-density, efficient, and wirelessly-powered implantable opto-
electro (WIOE) neural interface devices will be developed. Each WIOE
heterogeneously incorporates an optoelectronic array of 64 transparent
microelectrodes and 16 microscale light-emitting-diodes (ÂµLEDs), a system-on-a-
chip (SoC), and a power receiver (Rx) coil in an mm3-size package, capable of
optogenetic stimulation and electrical recording of neural activities. Wireless
telemetry links will be implemented for efficient transcutaneous power and
wideband data transmission between an external data-acquisition/control unit and
the distributed array of WIOE implants. Multiple WIOE devices will be implanted
in selected dorsal root ganglia (DRG) of the cat. Neural activities of DRG
neurons, EMG activities of selected muscles of the four limbs, and full-body
locomotor kinematics will be recorded, and spindle afferent activities will be
manipulated via optogenetic stimulation in selected DRGs during unconstrained
cat locomotion. Machine learning (ML) models leveraging the spatiotemporal
structures in the signals and mapping afferent activities in DRGs to limb
kinematics will be applied for achieving closed-loop control of the optogenetic
neuromodulation. The proposed research activities will be conducted by a team of
collaborators with complementary research expertise in the areas of bioMEMS,
wireless microelectronics, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and
behavioral neuroscience. The successful development of the proposed intelligent
and closed-loop optoelectronic neural interface will yield a robust building
block for a comprehensive set of minimally invasive neural interfaces to study
somatosensory control of movement, as well as monitor or treat somatosensory
pathological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.