* 2024048
* Do changes in monsoon intensity reposition Himalayan erosion? A combined cyclostratigraphic-detrital thermochronology approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Bruce Idleman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 182,010.00

Sediments eroded from active mountains contain a rich record of how those
mountains grew and how the combination of processes within the solid Earth
combine with the process of erosion to shape landscapes. An important question
concerns the significance of the erosional part of this system, and how much the
record is dominated by either solid-Earth processes, erosional changes, or both.
In Nepal, rocks provide a record of 15 million years of Himalayan topographic
change. During this time period the strong South Asian monsoon climate
developed, a phenomenon that now focuses intense erosion on the south flanks of
the Himalayan mountains in the summer months. There is strong evidence that the
strength of this monsoon changes over timespans of 20,000 to 100,000 years.
These changes can be used to precisely date sedimentary rocks formed from
sediment shed off of growing mountain ranges. By dating minerals found in the
sediment, specific locations of erosion can be determined as changes in the
strength and location of the monsoon varied. This project will develop a new
approach that combines different but complementary dating tools, an approach
that will provide a means of reading the sedimentary rock record in far greater
detail. This project will also help answer the question: What are the relative
roles of climate and rock deformation in shaping mountain landscapes? The
project will support training of a Ph.D. student and will also develop public-
education videos about the topographic evolution of mountains and the tools
geologists use to study sedimentary rock sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two technical goals. The first goal involves integrating the methods
of rock-magnetic cyclostratigraphy and detrital thermochronology to track
changes in the provenance of the Siwalik Group in Nepal through time. Rock
magnetics in sediments provide a way of detecting orbital cycles lasting tens of
thousands of years, thereby constraining the relative ages of sediments in
different locations with 1000-year resolution. Using this high-resolution dating
as a framework, single white-mica grains contained in the Siwalik Group
sediments will be dated using Ar-Ar analysis to determine when these grains
cooled from high temperatures and thus infer where they came from in the
sediment source area. The second project goal exploits a well-understood
sediment source area in the active Himalayan region. White-mica dating,
calibrated at the thousand-year scale by rock magnetic cyclostratigraphy, can be
used to examine possible correlations between the intensity of the South Asian
monsoon and foci of erosion within the Himalaya. Correlations at these short
time scales should be free of any solid-Earth tectonic signal, thus facilitating
the examination of climate variations alone, which are attributable to
variations in the South Asian monsoon. This project will develop and evaluate
combined cyclostratigraphy/detrital thermochronology as an approach to
provenance analysis, and then use the results to assess how tectonics, climate,
and erosion work together to shape landscapes. Results will also provide more
general guidance for interpreting cyclical changes in other mineralogical and
geochemical records from synorogenic sedimentary
rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.