* 2024872
* Collaborative Research: NRI: FND: Grounded Reasoning about Robot Capabilities for Law and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Cindy Grimm, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,233.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; This award supports a research project that focuses on
developing tools and best practices for promoting effective collaboration
between legal and policy experts and roboticists. This collaboration serves two
purposes: (1) to better ensure the safe and effective development of
collaborative robots; and (2) to create effective and appropriate laws and
policies governing their deployment in public spaces. The research team plans to
develop a specification language and interactive tools for enabling reasoning
about how robots and autonomous systems work, at a non-technical level. Combined
with “What If?” case studies, this will facilitate dialog between technical
experts and their legal and policy counterparts. The specification language and
reasoning toolkit will be designed to evolve simultaneously with, and support,
rapid changes in specific technology within the context of existing legal and
policy frameworks. The team will use the legal concept of case studies to ground
reasoning within a specific scenario. Each case study will consist of a complete
description of how the necessary robot capabilities might be implemented,
complete with assumptions and potential failures. The results of this research
will enable legal and policy experts and roboticists to more accurately reason
about the intersection of robotic systems and legal and policy frameworks before
either are implemented. Specifically, this will support legal and policy experts
in more accurately designing effective policy, legislation, and regulation
around robotics that is meaningful and feasible, and will support robotic
researchers in designing systems that incorporate legal and ethical questions
into their design choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will engage in
an interdisciplinary development of a structured language paradigm (comprised of
syntax, semantics, and system descriptions) that supports grounded reasoning
about robotics in law and policy contexts. These language paradigms will be
instantiated as interactive experiences that enable embodied reasoning and
metaphor exploration by experts and non-experts alike. These experiences will be
developed around a specific set of near-term, feasible robot tasks, existing
robot capabilities and known failure modes, metaphors to explain those
capabilities, and specific scenarios that highlight common misconceptions. These
experiences will be evaluated on their effectiveness in enabling non-technical
people to reason about, and predict, autonomous system behavior. On the legal
and policy side, the research team will engage with experts in these areas to
develop specific hypothetical case studies (based on the identified tasks) that
illustrate how to view technological choices through a law and policy lens.
Specifically, team members will work collaboratively to develop a set of
associated design patterns that assist in mapping technical concepts to the
structured language and the interactive visualizations, develop a prototype
suite of interactive training applications, and construct a set of case studies
for specific robot-use scenarios that enables meaningful dialog around law and
policy and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.