* 2024525
* Research Initiation: Long-Term Effect of Involvement in Humanitarian Engineering Projects on Student Professional Formation and Views of Diversity and Inclusion
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kirsten Dodson, David Lipscomb University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,981.00

As leaders in tackling the world’s biggest challenges, engineers need to
diversify their workforce and recognize their professional responsibility to
effect societal change. The engineering workplace suffers from a lack of
inclusion creating a climate that does not welcome professional who do not match
the white male majority in the field. Studies show that women and
underrepresented minorities tend to leave the engineering field because of
widespread discrimination, stereotyping, and systemic issues that plague the
field and society at-large. While strong efforts have been made to increase the
number of women and underrepresented minorities that pursue engineering, it is
clear that attracting these groups to engineering does not necessarily equate to
long-term retention in the field. In addition to these issues, engineers are
challenged to find technical solutions to problems that have social, economic,
and environmental implications. Service-learning in engineering and humanitarian
engineering are growing disciplines that attempt to address these complex
sociotechnical problems. Engineering educators have an opportunity to train
engineers that are prepared for an inclusive workforce and can effectively solve
these challenges. This research will investigate the connections between
involvement in humanitarian engineering projects and student professional
formation, specifically their views on diversity and inclusion. The research
team poses the following questions: (1) What perceived impact does student
involvement in humanitarian engineering projects have on professional formation
and perspectives of diversity and inclusion? and (2) How has involvement in
humanitarian engineering projects influenced the professional workplace culture
and perspectives of diversity and inclusion of alumni? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will survey students and alumni who were and were not involved in
humanitarian engineering projects. The survey will utilize the Attitudes Toward
Diversity Scale and the Engineering Professional Responsibilities Assessment.
Participants with varied experiences and views will be selected for interviews
on their perspectives of diversity and inclusion and professional responsibility
as well as shifts in perspective due to involvement in humanitarian engineering
projects. The study will leverage the PI’s personal background and motivations
to investigate the interconnections among these three ideas by studying the
effect of involvement in humanitarian engineering projects on student
professional formation of views on diversity and inclusion. An experienced
mentor, trained in social science and ethics, will guide this work by
supervising the research plan and providing mentoring to the PI and student
researchers. The project will incorporate outreach and educational efforts to
enhance student mentoring, promote humanitarian engineering initiatives, inform
future research, and encourage inclusive work environments. The project is
unique in that it will build on the results of past research into the
connections between these concepts in order to develop solutions to retaining
women and minority involvement in engineering careers. The benefits to the
engineering field of enhanced diversity and improved inclusivity will be
directly scalable and applicable to other professional fields that struggle with
these issues. Because traditionally underrepresented groups are more valued for
their diversity in the professional workplace, their career satisfaction and
retention will likely increase as a result of this work. Findings from the study
will be published in relevant journals to encourage other researchers to further
study how humanitarian projects have a long-term effect on professional
formation. Dissemination of this study to a broader audience outside of Lipscomb
engineering and engineering education researchers will have significant impact
on engineering programs and companies by informing diversity initiatives toward
an improved workplace culture for underrepresented groups in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.