* 2024688
* NRI: FND: A Novel Intervention Method to Promote Workers' Safety Awareness and Mental Health During Human-Robot Collaboration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yunan Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,244.00

Work involving human-robot collaboration is an increasingly prevalent work
configuration in U.S. manufacturing industries. Since co-robots and workers
perform tasks in close proximity, it is not an option to isolate workers from
co-robots to avoid accidents, as has been the practice in the past. To date,
multiple engineering approaches, including limiting robot speed and eliminating
sharp features on the robot, have been implemented in industrial co-robot design
to promote the safety of workers. However, the overall risk in human-robot
collaboration remains a concern because human workers have limited experience
working with co-robot teammates. This award supports fundamental research to
provide the new knowledge needed to develop intervention methods to promote the
safety awareness and mental health of workers during human-robot collaborations.
As the market for collaborative robots is expected to rapidly grow in the next
decade, results from this research will benefit workplace safety in the U.S. The
research involves multiple disciplines, including occupational safety, cognitive
science, computer vision, operations research, and production automation. This
multidisciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research and strengthen engineering and safety
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Psychological evidence has revealed that
monotonous human-robot collaboration tasks can lead to decreased safety
awareness. Human-robot collaboration can also increase workers’ greater mental
health risks, as workers treat co-robots as social entities. This research
systematically investigates workers' situational awareness and mental stress
states in response to interactions with co-robots. The research team will
investigate algorithms that interpret video images to enable co-robots to
recognize workers' situational awareness and mental stress, thereby enabling the
co-robot to perform safety interventions without increasing the mental stress of
their human coworkers. Experiments with co-robots will be conducted to evaluate
the performance and implementation feasibility of the safety intervention
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.