* 2024386
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Risk mapping and targeted snail control to support schistosomiasis elimination in Brazil and Cote d'Ivoire under future environmental change
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kamazima Lwiza, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 98,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to investigate the combined effect of
environmental and land use change, such as the development of water management
infrastructures, on the distribution of snail-borne schistosomiasis, a
debilitating parasitic disease of poverty, affecting more than 200 million
people worldwide. The study will focus on Brazil and Ivory Coast as these
countries are countries particularly vulnerable to this parasitic disease as a
consequence of projected climate change combined with growing human population,
deforestation, expansion of agriculture and of marginal urban settings and the
development of dams and irrigation canals. The project will couple different
model types to understand how species are distributed in response to relevant
socio-economic and environmental drivers of schistosomiasis to produce maps of
present and future risk for schistosomiasis under projected environmental
conditions. The project will provide a major step forward in the development of
novel ways to profile schistosomiasis risk by integrating models of
schistosomiasis transmission with remote sensing and GIS spatial representation
of other ecological, environmental and socioeconomic drivers of schistosomaisis
risk. The project will combine field data at different scales with theory to
investigate the linked human and natural drivers of parasite transmission to
improve understanding of the expected future distribution of schistosomiasis
risk. The project will provide a reference framework to investigate the
environmental determinants of a wide family of snail-borne and soil-transmitted
infections affecting over 1.5 billion of the worldâ€™s poorest
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.