* 2024675
* Collaborative Research: NRI: INT: Scalable, Customizable, Robot Learning with Humans
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Anca Dragan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Activities of daily living (ADLs) are both essential and routine aspects of
self-care, including the ability to independently eat, dress, transfer from one
position to another, bathe, and toilet. Robotic assistance with activities of
daily living could increase the independence of people with disabilities,
improve quality of life, and help address pressing societal needs, such as aging
populations, high healthcare costs, and shortages of healthcare workers. While
progress has been made towards such robotic-assistance, a key challenge is that
many activities of daily living require robots to manipulate ​fabric in
coordination with ​people​. Notably, many forms of bedside assistance include
dexterous manipulation of bedding, hygiene often involves dexterous manipulation
of washcloths and towels, and dressing involves a diverse array of clothes. This
project seeks to make foundational progress on this major challenge through
advancements in machine learning, simulation, and customizable human-robot
interaction. This project will result in new capabilities in robot-assisted
bedding adjustment, bathing, and dressing for people with disabilities. In
addition, this project and its participating research groups will broaden
participation by engaging under-represented groups, K-12 students, and
undergraduates in research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
aims to develop a co-robotic framework towards the Integrative Task:
Customizable Fabric Manipulation for Home Assistance, with specific emphasis on
bedding, bathing, and dressing, which have significant physical interaction
between the human and the robot. This project will make foundational progress
along three main thrusts, brought together under this overarching integrative
application: (1) Learning to Assist from Raw Sensory Observations, (2) Physics
Simulation for Learning Assistance, and (3) Customizable Robotic Assistance with
Human-in-the-Loop Feedback. Customizability here refers to the ability of our
system to adapt to the specific preferences and abilities of each individual.
Through open-sourced code development and physics simulations, this project also
seeks to lower the barrier to entry for others to work towards the general
problem of customizable home assistance. Overall, this research will develop new
techniques in robot-assisted dressing, bedding adjustment, and body bathing
(hygiene) for people with disabilities, which has the potential to help millions
of people achieve greater independence and a higher quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.