* 2024614
* NRI: FND: Intelligent Co-robots for Complex Welding Manufacturing through Learning and Generalization of Welders Capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* YuMing Zhang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 665,540.00

There is a dramatic and growing shortage of highly skilled welders, accentuated
by the fact that manufacturing complexity and production volumes are rising. As
a result, global use of robotic welding is expanding rapidly. However, current
welding robots are not as adaptive and creative as human welders in performing
complex welding tasks that require sophisticated skills. This award supports
fundamental research on advancing the robotic capabilities needed to realize
fully robotic automation of complex welding tasks. The research will endow
collaborative welding robots with sophisticated welding knowledge, expert
intelligence, and an interactive learning capability to enable them to address
dynamic welding scenarios. The research results will both enhance the scientific
base for robotic control and facilitate the realization of fully automatic,
robotic, and intelligent manufacturing. The research involves several
disciplines, including welding, process monitoring, data visualization, machine
learning, optimization, and robotic control. That multi-disciplinary approach
will broaden the participation of students from diverse backgrounds in research,
and the knowledge gained will be incorporated in curricula in robotic and
intelligent manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The double-electrode, gas
metal arc welding process is complex, requiring intense collaboration between
expert welders. As a result, the robotic automation of such a complex welding
process requires advances in the scientific base of robotic perception,
learning, and control. The project will research advanced methods for the
extraction of expert welding-domain knowledge and the quantification and
interpretation of that knowledge for use by collaborative robots, thereby
equipping collaborative welding robots to perform complex welding tasks. To
realize that goal, the research team will: 1) build an immersive virtual reality
system with a three-dimensional rendering of the weld pool and arc that can
characterize the weld scene and record human operations, 2) use an explainable
recurrent convolutional neural network to perform causal analysis of the torch
manipulation of human welders to obtain its relationship to dynamic weld
pool/arc evolution, 3) generalize the results in terms of human heterogeneity by
using transfer learning to extract common latent knowledge from different human
welders, and 4) develop an interactive learning module that allows collaborative
robots to be supervised by on-site human welders through the reinforcement
learning-based perception of language instructions and human
gestures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.