* 2024967
* Institute for Meta-Synthesis: A Practicum through the Lens of STEM Equity and Inclusion Literature
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Maria Ong, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 998,896.00

TERC, Inc. will implement an Institute in Research Methods that will build
capacity in qualitative meta-synthesis methods, with an emphasis on STEM equity
and inclusion literature. The institute responds to the need for greater
emphasis on meta-synthesis methods in STEM education research, the lack of
preparation among researchers to conduct these studies, and the need to
diversify the pool of STEM education researchers broadly. Institute participants
are expected to build capacity in meta-synthesis skills, including location of
relevant literature, identification of high-quality research, synthesis memo
creation, and systematic thematic analysis. Through the lens of equity and
inclusion literature, participants will learn how to identify and frame emergent
themes and theorize findings. Targeted participants will include graduate
students, post-doctoral scholars, and early career investigators in STEM
education research, particularly those from underrepresented groups. The project
team will pursue three primary objectives: (1) Develop a flexible set of
materials and experiences that provide participants with on-ramps for building
skills and competencies in qualitative meta-synthesis. (2) Implement workshops,
webinars, seminars, intensive coaching, and other hands-on activities that allow
participants to apply meta-synthesis methods. (3) Create and disseminate on-
demand modules, user guides, and other supporting materials for individual use
and future course offerings at participants’ institutions. In addition to
broadening the representation of underrepresented groups in the STEM education
research community, the institute can fill the knowledge gaps on equity and
inclusion topics in STEM education research literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
institute will capitalize on equity and inclusion STEM literature for systematic
meta-synthesis training. This approach employs systematic search and selection
processes and thematic analysis of findings. The team will use established pre-
search methods and a hybrid approach for coding that are substantiated in the
literature and grounded in theory to frame the modules. The pedagogical approach
involves creating an environment of reciprocity between learner and teacher and
among learners. The delivery formats include six intensive course modules, an
introductory level workshop, a short seminar, a synchronous webinar, and on-
demand modules. The modular nature of the meta-synthesis curriculum allows for
flexibility to address the learning needs of particular communities, and the
individualized coaching and technical assistance provided by the project team
will deepen participants’ understanding of synthesis techniques in a supportive
structure. The Institute also will offer coaching and technical support for a
subset of participants who complete the six modules and implement strong
participant recruitment efforts among minority-serving institutions. The
ultimate goal is that participants will be able to design and execute successful
meta-synthesis projects that can enrich the STEM education research knowledge
base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR: Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research Program
(ECR). ECR funds fundamental STEM education research projects that focus on STEM
learning/learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and
STEM professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.