* 2024864
* Novel Quantum Effects in Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Bruno Uchoa, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 11/30/2023
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
educational activities with an aim to understand and predict novel phases of
matter in quantum materials, physical systems with a large number of particles
where the laws of quantum mechanics are more prominently manifested. The PI will
investigate metals where electrons can behave in very odd ways: In some cases
they propagate as if they have no mass when they move in certain directions in
space; in others, they move in a completely incoherent fashion, reaching thermal
equilibrium at extremely fast time scales, unlike in conventional metals like
copper or aluminum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As they propagate in materials,
electrons can form phases of quantum matter with the most diverse properties.
The way the electrons interact with each other can lead to novel states of
matter; from metals that fail to conduct electricity to superconductors that
conduct electricity without any dissipation of heat, or even regimes where
electrons flow like a turbulent stream of water. The theoretical advances in
this project will enhance the understanding of such phases of matter, and may
lead to future device technologies and applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports the PI's outreach activities to undergraduate students
through the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates program at the University
of Oklahoma and to high school physics teachers in the metropolitan area of
Oklahoma City through the NSF Research Experience for Teachers program. The PI
will also enroll in the mentorship program at the Oklahoma School of Science and
Mathematics, the premier public residential high school in the state of Oklahoma
focused on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics disciplines, and
will offer open lectures about science to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities with an aim to enhance our
fundamental understanding about interactions and novel quantum effects in a
broad class of strongly correlated systems that host unconventional
quasiparticles or where the concept of quasiparticles is entirely absent. The
research will be focused on two main thrusts: 1) Correlations in unconventional
metals, where PI will explore novel quantum critical phenomena and hydrodynamic
behavior in systems with nodal-line semimetals and systems with semi-Dirac
fermions, and the physics of incoherent metals and their possible relation to
strange metal phases in various strongly correlated electron systems. 2) Many-
body effects in Moire heterostructures, where the PI will theoretically examine
the physics of interactions in twisted graphene bilayers at or near the magic
angle, where superconductivity and correlated insulating behavior have been
experimentally observed. The research team will investigate novel nematic
superconducting phases emerging in the vicinity of quantum critical points,
generalizations of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model, the nature of strange metal
phases from the point of view of experimental response functions, and the
magnetic and correlated metallic phases observed in twisted graphene
bilayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's outreach
activities to undergraduate students through the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates program at the University of Oklahoma and to high school physics
teachers in the metropolitan area of Oklahoma City through the NSF Research
Experience for Teachers program. The PI will also enroll in the mentorship
program at the Oklahoma School of Science and Mathematics, the premier public
residential STEM high school in the state of Oklahoma, and will offer open
lectures about science to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.