* 2024692
* Collaborative Research: NRI: FND: Flying Swarm for Safe Human Interaction in Unstructured Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Mark Yim, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

While flying robots are becoming commonplace, swarms of them have the potential
to be useful in a wide variety of cases such as surveillance and informational
displays. Currently, flying swarms of robots have difficulty interacting with
humans due to two factors: their almost ubiquitous reliance on external sensing,
such as GPS or motion-capture systems, and their inherent danger to humans due
to their use of hazardous high-speed propellers. The project will address these
two factors by designing and creating a novel swarm of over 200 flying robots
that are safe to operate around people. They will use only on-board sensing to
interact with each other and humans and can operate in a wide range of
unstructured environments. The swarm capabilities will be demonstrated in two
scenarios: autonomous 3D shape formation, where the swarm self-assembles a user-
specified shape, and a second scenario where a human uses their hands to move
the swarm into a desired shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
aspects of flying UAVs and their control to allow the creation of large flying
swarms that are not reliant on external positioning, can safely interact with
humans, and where the swarm has infinite endurance. The UAV uses a novel single
actuator design to enable the low-cost creation of the swarm, as well as
facilitate lightweight UAVs for human safety. The UAVs employ an infrared
transceiver on a rapidly spinning chassis to sense bearing, elevation, and
distance to neighboring UAVs, as well as transmit data to them. They also have a
time-of-flight range finder to sense passive objects nearby. This sensing will
be used to control the position of the individuals with respect to their
neighbors and to enable swarm behaviors controlled through natural human
interaction. The endurance of the swarm is extended by having UAVs take turns
participating in the swarm shape, and then fly back to the base station to
recharge. This cycle of swarming and then charging is repeated and staggered
amongst the swarm so there are always UAVs participating in the swarm
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.