* 2024081
* Documenting Experiences and Resources Supporting the Community College Transfer, Persistence, and Graduation of Black Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/13/2019,08/31/2022
* Bruk Berhane, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2022
* USD 446,914.00

While scholars have often focused on the role of K-12 schools and four-year
colleges and universities in the production of future Black engineers, far less
is known about the impact of community colleges in regard to their ability to
support this underrepresented population. Understanding the role of community
colleges is particularly important, given the large numbers of Black students
that enroll in these schools prior to transitioning to four-year engineering
programs. Furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that a substantial number of
Black engineering students who start their postsecondary careers at community
colleges may in fact be first-generation Americans from sub-Saharan African
countries. This study will illuminate factors that are cited by diverse Black
engineering prospective and current transfer students from Maryland community
colleges as critical to their ability to persist in their majors. The research
team will lead a three-year study of cohorts of Black American and Black African
undergraduates who plan to or have already transferred from a Maryland community
college to the A. James Clark School of Engineering at the University of
Maryland. Over the duration of the project, the team will not only query the
study participants about what has led to their ability to continue in their
majors, but will also reveal differences between the academic paths of students
born and educated in the U.S., compared to those who were educated in another
country. In the context of the recent announcement of the Building Together
campaign, which afforded the University of Maryland the largest gift in the
history of the campus and which includes specific support for engineering
transfer students, this project is especially relevant for the Clark School and
community colleges in the state. Furthermore, the project leverages the already
strong history that the state of Maryland has with regard to developing support
programs and policies for prospective transfer students. Through this study, the
University and state of Maryland will be poised to become national leaders in
identifying factors that lead to the production of diverse engineering transfer
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study builds upon the growing
number of studies in engineering education and higher education literature that
highlight the centrality of the community college experience to STEM students.
The project also leverages recent works in education and social science
scholarship that reveal the importance of documenting within-group differences
among students broadly classified as Black or African American. Collectively,
these works reveal noteworthy differences in the K-12 and college/university
experiences of students who represent various areas of the African diaspora.
Foregrounded by these studies, the research team in this project will examine
factors cited by diverse Black collegians as crucial to their success before,
during, and after transfer from a Maryland two-year college to the A. James
Clark School of Engineering at the University of Maryland. The team will employ
a longitudinal design that will enable them to study three cohorts of students
at multiple points along the engineering pipeline. Using primarily qualitative
methods that include focus groups and interviews, researchers will analyze
transcripts using systematic and inductive coding methods to identify prominent
themes that consistently appear throughout the study. In order to explicate the
academic experiences of two distinct Black populations - Blacks born and
educated in the U.S. and Blacks born and educated in sub-Saharan African
contexts - the team will develop separate interview and focus group protocols
that reflect potential areas of convergence and divergence between the two
populations. Broad dissemination of project results will be accomplished through
a website, brochure, and one or more webinars, as well as engagement with key
stakeholders representing diverse regions of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.