* 2024733
* NRI: FND: Extending Autonomy in Seemingly Sensory-Denied Environments Applied to Underwater Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ryan Smith, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 605,569.00

Many coastal communities in the U.S. are densely populated and highly urbanized,
presenting critical locations for assessing the effects of urbanization and
climate on the coastal ocean's physical and biological states. Effective study
requires long-term, persistent ocean monitoring utilizing autonomous vehicles to
enable a deeper understanding of these processes. This project aims to overcome
the theoretical and technical challenges to enable heterogeneous groups of
autonomous vehicles to perform intelligent sampling in dynamic and sensory-
denied environments, with a focus on the maritime domain. The success of these
endeavors will improve weather forecasting, underwater transport dynamics
understanding, and modeling and prediction of various physical phenomena in
aquatic environments. The team of researchers will engage underrepresented
groups in STEM in the research program by leveraging a diverse student
population at Florida International University (a minority-serving institution).
The educational activities aim to positively impact a generation of young
technologists and equip them with a strong interdisciplinary
skillset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance robotics and ocean
sciences by creating novel mapping, localization, navigation, and robot-human
communication techniques that will enable autonomous aquatic vehicles to sample
intelligently in sensor-denied, dynamic environments. The research activities
are divided into four tasks. The first task develops 3D representations of
aquatic environments and features from physical and biological models,
bathymetry, and in situ samples that are devoid of world reference models. The
second task develops a new framework for dynamic mapping and localization for
aquatic robots to perform targeted sampling within dynamically evolving aquatic
features. Task 3 develops map representations that are both human-friendly and
robot-digestible to facilitate knowledge transfer with low data exchange. Task 4
includes the experimental validation of the developed approaches using
simulation, laboratory experiments, and full-scale field trials. The planned
novel frameworks to map representation, localization, and navigation can find
applications in mobile robot systems beyond aquatic vehicles such as
subterranean and space robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.