* 2024269
* An Indigenous Data Governance Approach for Enhancing Ethical Research Policies and Practices
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* John Hildebrand, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,994.00

This project creates resources and a conceptual schema for developing informed
policies that support ethical and responsible research and data practices at
academic institutions working with Indigenous Peoples. Although public
investment in science has led to numerous societal benefits, research has not
always been conducted in ethical and responsible ways, especially in studies
involving Indigenous populations. Moreover, efforts to address harmful research
practices have tended to be reactive and superficial rather than systematic and
collaborative. These issues are addressed by using an innovative Indigenous data
governance framework to review institutional norms and practices that promote or
inhibit ethical design, outcomes, and approaches across the STEM research
landscape and address barriers to developing institutional policies and
practices that are responsive to the ethical concerns and priorities of
Indigenous Peoples. In so doing it provides research leadership opportunities
for early career, women, and Indigenous scholars, and improves institutional
guidelines and practices by providing tools to address historical barriers to
inclusive and ethical research infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops an Indigenous data governance framework by drawing on
international norms (i.e., the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples) and relevant data governance standards (i.e., the CARE
Principles for Indigenous Data Governance). These sources are used to form a
normative matrix that guides project activities. Major goals include: (1)
analyzing scholarly literature and institutional policies to develop indicators
for assessing ethical research and data practices when working with Indigenous
communities; (2) conducting surveys and interviews to identify strategies
adopted in similar colonial contexts (e.g., New Zealand, Australia, Canada); and
(3) identifying factors that support or inhibit ethical research and data
practices with respect to Indigenous communities. A central feature of the
project is bi-directional engagement of relevant constituents, rights-holders,
and stakeholders in developing indicators, factors, and resources. Indigenous
and mainstream experts and Indigenous leaders and community members will help
inform the projectâ€™s early stages and participate in co-developing guidelines.
These activities will advance knowledge of ethical research practices with
respect to marginalized communities, outline methods for increasing ethical and
responsible research more generally, and promote ethical and responsible
research by engaging diverse knowledge systems and communities to increase
research data relevance, quality, and reproducibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was co-funded by the BIO and CISE
directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.