* 2024124
* RAPID: Influences of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Outbreak on Racial Discrimination, Identity Development and Socialization
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Shimei Pan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 125,428.00

The ongoing Coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak has, as of February 23rd, 2020,
resulted in more than 78,811 infected and at least 2,445 deaths. Beyond the
tragic health toll of this outbreak, there has been increased targeting of
minority groups of U.S. residents. The Coronavirus outbreak has refueled
stereotypes (e.g., eating “strange” foods, having unsanitary lifestyles, being
disease-ridden) that are veiled under health-related fears. Racial
discrimination significantly decreases well-being and increases psychological
distress as well as mental and physical health. Most studies on the effects of
racism on identity, resilience, and parental socialization, have focused on
discrimination among adolescents and emerging adults. This innovative
interdisciplinary study will significantly advance our understanding of risk and
resilience in response to acute social stress among families with children in
three different age groups, early childhood (4-7 years), middle childhood (8-11
years) and early-to-mid adolescence (12-15 years). Findings will identify key
developmental and social processes that influence how identities of racial
minority parents and their children are formed. The influence of an acute but
prolonged threat to their social identities resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak
may provide insight into the general nature of this process as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary team comprising a cultural
developmental scientist, a school psychologist, and a computer scientist will
study multiple forms of COVID-19 racial discrimination and the subsequent impact
on the identity development and adjustment of minority parents and children. The
study will focus on how parents socialize their children about issues of race
and identity in reaction to this event at the early part of 2020 and again 6-9
months later. Protective factors for adjustment in parents and children will
also be identified. In addition, large scale texts of outbreak-related social
media (Twitter) posts will be analyzed to account for how public opinion,
anxiety, and discriminatory attitudes evolve with the peaking and fading of this
epidemic and provide objective indicators of the larger public social discourse
climate across the year. Infectious diseases will continue to emerge and re-
emerge globally, and their negative impact on psychological and social health is
understudied but highly significant, leading to both significant social and
economic consequences. Knowledge from this research may help inform the types of
services and education that can promote well-being in targeted marginalized
groups and the larger public during future similar
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.