* 2024397
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Geoarchaeology of Estuarine Seascapes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Thomas Pluckhahn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 22,249.00

The focus of this doctoral dissertation research project is to reconstruct the
roles that coastal Native American societies played in the establishment and
transformation of nearshore estuarine ecosystems. Previous geoscientific and
archaeological work has studied the evolution of estuaries as non-anthropogenic
or ‘pre-anthropogenic’ ecotones, and conceptualized Indigenous maritime
societies as passive inhabitants of bountiful and dynamic environments. This
dissertation research will integrate geoarchaeological and paleoecological
approaches to reconceptualize coastal peoples as ecosystem engineers and tidal
estuarine habitats as the products of deep-time human-environmental interaction.
This dissertation research will produce historical reconstructions for the
process of marine transgression along the Gulf Coastal strand, knowledge of
estuary management by Native Americans, and pre-industrial baseline data for
measuring modern sea-level rise and historical degradation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the general hypothesis that
ancient Indigenous societies engineered nearshore ecosystems through the
construction and maintenance of terraformed shellworks. The research will be
conducted at several well-preserved archaeological complexes along a large open-
water estuary system that was intensively occupied by Native American
populations. Sedimentological, paleobotanical, and radiocarbon analyses on
sediment cores and archaeological excavation units will be correlated to
reconstruct the geological and ecological relationships between Indigenous
shell-terraforming and the establishment of protected, low-energy intertidal
habitats. Feedbacks between anthropogenic habitat modification, subsistence
production, and the emplacement of civic architecture will be assessed by
comparing the core records with zooarchaeological assemblages and construction
sequences of midden-mounds. This interdisciplinary dataset will contribute to
improved ecological and anthropological understanding of intertidal ecosystems.
The study will be carried out in consultation with local and regional land
managers and conservation agencies with the explicit intent that results and
research products may be integrated into management, conservation, and
restoration planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.