* 2024541
* Collaborative Research: NRI: INT: Cooperative Underwater Structure Inspection and Mapping
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jesse Casana, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 403,352.00

This project develops a system of co-robots collaborating with a human operator
to map underwater structures. Underwater structure mapping is an important
capability applicable to multiple domains: marine archaeology, infrastructure
maintenance, resource utilization, security, and environmental monitoring. The
underwater environment is challenging and dangerous for humans in many aspects,
while robotic operations face additional challenges compared to the above-water
ones. In particular, both sensing and communications are restricted, and
planning is required in three dimensions with limited information. The project
will generate a 3D model of the underwater structure providing a high-resolution
photo-realistic representation. Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs)will be
operating in close cooperation, generating a dense vision-based reconstruction
of the observed surface, and coordinated with remote human operators.. The
project integrates research and education through training of undergraduate and
graduate students, who will have the opportunity to work in an inclusive,
interdisciplinary team across South Carolina, New Jersey, and New Hampshire. The
system will be integrated and tested for archaeological mapping at field sites.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted along three directions. (1)
Robust underwater state estimation based on a deep learning approach and a
hybrid representation for 3-D reconstruction that will encode probabilistic
occupancy for both navigation and initial inspection from users. (2)
Collaborative planning, for the proximal observers based on a local optimization
framework that originally considers multiple criteria, including information
gain, uncertainty reduction, and loop closure, active positioning of distal
observers, and user preference to make joint measurements and inform proximal
observers on where to go. (3) Information driven communications, with careful
design of efficient data representation of the 3-D reconstruction and of a
cross-layer optimization for deciding when and how to share. These three
components will contribute towards the overarching goal of enabling a team of
co-robots to operate autonomously and produce a realistic map of an underwater
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.