* 2024972
* Scalable Manufacturing of Single Crystalline Halide Perovskite Film via Interface Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2023
* USD 419,659.00

Epitaxy is a process of growing a material of a well-defined orientation on a
host substrate and is critical to forming useful materials for the
semiconductor-based microelectronics and renewable energy industries. This award
supports research into remote epitaxy in which an epitaxial relation is
established remotely between film and substrate though an intervening layer
possessing a different structure and symmetry than present at the interface.
Remote epitaxy potentially allows for the formation of thin films which can be
removed from the host substrate and integrated into other systems increasing
flexibility in the design of innovative semiconductor devices. This award looks
to the use of a novel intervening layer of amorphous materials which would allow
the scalable manufacturing of remote epitaxial films. The award supports
research generating basic knowledge important to scalability including
suppressing dislocations and grain boundaries critical to the subsequent
applications. Wafer-scale single crystalline halide perovskite films are studied
for emerging optoelectronics and electronics for energy and information
applications. This award will benefit the U.S. economy and advance national
prosperity by promoting the progress of science in advanced manufacturing within
critical technologies. The award will also promote engineering research training
of underrepresented groups and undergraduate/graduate engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award establishes the theoretical,
computational, and experimental knowledge bases enabling defect-controlled
wafer-scale epitaxial thin film growth. Iterative computational and experimental
approaches are used to understand the atomic mechanisms controlling remote
heteroepitaxy by tuning the film-substrate interaction through use of ultrathin
amorphous buffer layers of controlled thickness and dielectric constant.
Supported by molecular-level simulations and structural/chemical and
optical/electrical characterization studies, a basic understanding is developed
on the role of thickness, chemistry and dielectric properties of the amorphous
buffer layer and lattice mismatch of substrate on strain, orientation, defects,
morphology and optoelectronic/electronic property of remote epitaxial films. An
interface engineering strategy to achieve defects-controlled wafer-scale
transferable epitaxial thin film. The award will advance the fundamental
knowledge of epitaxy science, interface engineering and optoelectronic property-
structure relation of technologically important semiconducting halide
perovskites for energy and electronic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.