* 2024950
* NRI: FND: Assistive Child-Robot Interventions for Infants with Motor Disabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Geoffrey Hollinger, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 738,063.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI 2.0) project will conduct fundamental
research on novel robot-mediated physical therapy interventions encouraging
desired motor behaviors in infants with developmental delays. About 7% of
children in the US experience developmental disabilities that impact
sensorimotor, social, and cognitive functioning. Because these functions are
closely interrelated, children may benefit broadly from early motion
interventions, such as body-weight-supported locomotion, designed to encourage
motor exploration and practice. This project will employ iterative design
techniques to develop and then test an intelligent mobile robot capable of
learning how best to elicit desired motor behaviors in body-weight-supported
infants. The project will advance the progress of science and advance the
national health by developing novel hardware and algorithms that will advance
the ability of assistive robots to personalize therapeutic interventions for
infants with developmental delays. Additional broader impacts include education
and outreach activities engaging women and underrepresented minorities in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop and assess a novel mobile robot system that engages infants
with developmental delays in play activities that encourage desired sensorimotor
functioning. The proposed work is organized into three "thrusts": (1)
iteratively designing an appropriate and robust co-robot, (2) establishing an
adaptive "behavior-planning" framework for implementing intelligent robot-
mediated engagement strategies, and (3) performing human subject experiments to
evaluate the framework and assess the robotic system’s potential to assist in
physical therapy interventions. This project will yield algorithms that can
personalize sensorimotor interactions to individual infant needs. The project
will compare the physical and social behaviors of children participating in
motor interventions with and without an assistive robot. This project will yield
the hardware and computational framework for future randomized controlled trials
and long-term studies of the robotic system in natural environments of interest,
such as in clinics and homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.