* 2024936
* NRI: FND: Improving Human-Robot Collaboration on Assembly Tasks by Anticipating Human Actions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stefanos Nikolaidis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 749,693.00

The realization of human-safe robots would present opportunities for the
deployment of human-robot teams in complex assembly tasks. Humans can perform
complex tasks that require dexterity, while robots can perform supporting tasks
that do not require a high degree of dexterity. Having humans and robots operate
in close proximity, while utilizing their complementary strengths, can
significantly enhance human productivity and reduce job stress for humans. When
humans work in teams, it is important for the team members to develop fluent
team behavior and the same should hold for a human-robot team. This requires
robotic assistants to adapt to the preferences of human teammates, anticipate
their actions and support them in performing the task. This award supports
fundamental research to enable adaptation of the actions of multiple robots
collaborating with a human teammate in an assembly manufacturing task. Results
from the research will facilitate introduction of multiple industrial robots in
assembly manufacturing tasks and will result in growth opportunities for the US
manufacturing industry. The integration of the research with graduate and
undergraduate courses will enhance robotics and manufacturing curricula and
enrich the learning experiences of the participating students. Outreach
activities will educate and inform K-12 students about career opportunities in
robotics and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective adaptation of
multiple robots in human-robot hybrid cells requires fundamental advances in
human preference modeling, human action prediction and human-aware task and
motion planning. This research will investigate computational foundations for
the design of machine learning algorithms that identify the dominant preferences
of human operators in canonical assembly tasks. Algorithms will be developed for
generating task plans that specify tasks that need to be performed and assigning
them to various agents in the system and for predicting the next human action
using task plan cues and work cell monitoring. This research will explore and
characterize methods for using the predicted actions to adapt the actions of
multiple robots interacting with a human teammate on an assembly
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.