* 2024109
* RoL: Collaborative Proposal: Integrating responses to environmental change across the biological hierarchy: interactions between behavior, plasticity, and genetic change
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* William McMillan, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 11/30/2025
* USD 352,885.00

The environments in which animals live are changing rapidly as a result of human
actions, but species have also had to deal with rapidly changing environments
during Earth’s past, long before humans were on the scene. Species have adapted
to abrupt climate oscillations during the Pleistocene and to novel environments
when they colonized new land masses via natural dispersal events. Thus,
adaptation to rapid environmental change is an important phenomenon that many
species have experienced throughout their evolutionary history. Nevertheless,
scientists lack a detailed understanding of the factors that allow some species
to avoid extinction during environmental upheaval, while others perish. One
major reason that faster progress has not been made in this field is that
organisms can respond in several distinct ways when their environments begin to
change. Some of these responses, like behavioral adjustments, occur within the
lifetime of individual organisms, whereas others, like genetic adaptation, occur
over multiple generations. Critically, these responses can interact in complex
ways, and to truly understand how species adapt to rapid environmental change we
must examine when and how these various responses interact in the wild. This
project leverages a unique field experiment to directly measure the responses of
wild animals to abrupt shifts in their local environments. The researchers will
transplant hundreds of slender anole lizards from a population on mainland
Panama to islands in the Panama Canal. These islands differ in their
environments. The researchers will then measure behavioral, genetic, and
physiological responses in real time to understand how species can adapt to
rapid environmental change. The results of this study will be used to help
improve predictions of the responses of species to human driven phenomena like
climate change, and to understand why some species have gone extinct during
prehistoric periods of environmental change whereas others persisted. Finally,
the researchers will implement their Evolution in Action (EIA) program, which
includes an online, live-action children’s science education show where student
scientists from diverse backgrounds will interact with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We currently lack a compelling framework by which
to understand and predict the responses of populations to rapid changes in their
environment because studies 1) rarely consider the simultaneous impact of rapid
environmental change on multiple levels of the biological hierarchy (e.g. genes,
individuals, populations), 2) are infrequently conducted on contemporary time
scales, and 3) tend to focus on one adaptive process (e.g. genetic change) to
the exclusion of others (e.g. behavior) when these processes are likely to
interact in dynamic feedback loops. For this project, researchers will move
Anolis lizards from a single source population to islands in the Panama Canal
that vary in habitat structure and climate. They will combine a diverse array of
field and laboratory studies to understand how interactions between behavior,
plasticity, and genetic change mediate population persistence when environments
change. The results of this project will lend themselves towards next-generation
predictive models for the responses of organisms to human-mediated environmental
change and may reveal new rules by which cross-generational processes such as
behavioral inertia and genetic accommodation mediate extinction risk during
rapid environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.