* 2024136
* 2020 hackseq RNA Workshop
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Sarah Woodson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,992.00

The genetic material or “genomes” of all living things is made of DNA and
carries the instructions for creating each individual. A large part of each
genome does not code for any protein and was previously thought to be “junk”. We
now understand that these “non-coding” regions of the genomes are often copied
into RNA, and contain an important part of the instructions that define each
species, such as the different tissues of the body or adaptation to different
growth conditions. Deciphering the information contained in the non-coding
genome and the RNA molecules that it produces is an enormous challenge today. We
lack computer software that can analyze non-coding RNA sequences for patterns
that will allow us to understand what the sequences mean and how these RNA
molecules act in the cell. This project supports young US scientists to
participate in an RNA bioinformatics “hackathon”, planned to be held in May of
2020. The hackathon involves 8-10 teams that work for three days to develop
software prototypes that solve one or more challenges in RNA sequence analysis
(bioinformatics) and in deciphering the non-coding genome. The scientists will
also participate in the RNA 2020 conference following the hackathon, where the
latest research on non-coding RNA will be presented. This project will increase
US competitiveness in biotechnology by creating a base for the development of
commercial software for genetics analysis. It will also expand and diversify the
US workforce in RNA bioinformatics by exposing computer science students from
under-represented groups to the science of non-coding RNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to support the first "RNA
bioinformatics hackathon” and to advance the integration of the state-of-the-art
computational techniques with the challenge of deciphering non-coding RNA and
the “dark” genome. The hackathon will be a three-day coding intensive workshop
where graduate students, post-docs and PIs prototype novel ideas and software
specifically focused on RNA sequence and structure. Following the hackathon,
participants will attend the RNA Society meeting. The RNA hackathon will
leverage an established infrastructure for hackathons at the University of
British Columbia. It will also leverage the convention of world-experts in RNA
science at the RNA Society meeting in Vancouver. The RNA hackathon is intended
to produce new software or computational methods for analyzing RNA sequencing
data. The hackathon operates on an open source platform, and all products of the
hackathon will be made available to the public on github. Some projects are
expected to ultimately lead to professional software that will advance the
development of technology companies in the US. The results of this project will
be available at https://github.com/hackseq.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.