* 2024345
* Advancing the Use of Professional Decision-Making Strategies in a Culturally Diverse Research Community
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Tristan McIntosh, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 396,599.00

Contemporary science is a global enterprise. International research
collaborations continue to increase with globalization and as research becomes
more complex and specialized. In the United States (U.S.), international
researchers, especially from East Asian countries (e.g., China, Taiwan, Korea,
Japan), make up a large portion of the research workforce. Researchers from
different cultures may take different approaches to problems depending on their
cultural upbringing. Decision-making strategies help researchers navigate
complex and ambiguous professional and ethical problems they face throughout
their careers. Yet, there is little evidence of how cultural upbringing shapes
the approaches researchers take when making decisions about ethical problems in
research. Educational approaches to fostering responsible conduct of research
(RCR) in the U.S. have generally overlooked this issue as well. There is an
urgent need to examine cultural differences in decision making and develop RCR
training that is more culturally inclusive and effective for researchers from
Eastern and Western cultural backgrounds. The goal of the present project is to
identify and understand the similarities and differences in decision-making
strategies among East Asian and U.S. researchers and use this knowledge to
refine and evaluate the effectiveness of a culturally inclusive RCR training
curriculum focused on decision-making skills. Data from this project will foster
awareness of the perspectives of East Asian researchers. This awareness will
contribute to improved communication, problem solving, and conflict resolution
skills among researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three
objectives: 1) identify similarities and differences in ethical and professional
decision-making strategies among East Asian and U.S. researchers using
qualitative think-aloud interviews, 2) refine and deliver a culturally inclusive
RCR training curriculum and assess the learning outcomes of decision-making
strategies, behavioral indicators of strategy use, and implementation
intentions, and 3) evaluate whether participants in the refined RCR training
apply decision-making strategies in their daily research activities and test the
effect of a monthly learning transfer intervention on strategy use over time. A
vignette-based measure of professional decision-making in research will be
completed by hundreds of U.S. and East Asian faculty, postdoctoral researchers,
and graduate students. In-depth interviews will then be conducted with U.S. and
East Asian researchers with both low and high scores on the professional-
decision making measure to ensure a comprehensive range of perspectives about
strategies for approaching decision-making. Data from interviews will then be
used to refine, deliver, and evaluate a RCR training program that will be
delivered to multiple cohorts of students. Longitudinal data will be collected
from RCR training program participants to determine the effects of the refined
RCR training and a learning transfer intervention on learning outcomes and
behavior. Overall, greater awareness of cultural influences on the workplace
perspectives and behaviors of researchers lays the groundwork for open dialogue
among the research community and strengthening research, teaching, and community
roles that researchers play in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
funded through the ER2 program by the SBE Directorate and Office of
International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.