* 2024797
* Studies of neurospheres and diseased neurospheres on chip under magnetic field stimulation and drug treatment
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* David Jiles, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2024
* USD 406,903.00

In the United States, about one in five Americans above the age of 18 suffer
from diagnosable neurological disorders with no cure insight. As such, new,
safe, non-invasive methods for the treatment of brain disorders are critically
needed. Non-invasive techniques including repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation have had some
success. However, progress has been limited due to poor understanding of the
interactions of magnetic fields with nervous tissue. The molecular/cellular
mechanisms of nervous tissue under TMS are still lacking. Hence, investigation
of effects of transient magnetic fields on adult neurogenesis, cell
differentiation and plasticity of nervous tissue (neurospheres) is essential in
developing new treatment procedures and achieving the use of TMS as a
neuromodulation tool for treating neurological disorders. The educational goal
of this project is to effectively integrate research with educational activities
and to train both undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary
studies to produce next-generation bioengineers. The PIs will develop a new
Vertically Integrated Program (VIP) based on this research proposal entitled:
Targeting Neurodegenerative Diseases Using Bioengineering Approaches. The VIP
will unite undergraduate education and faculty research in a team-based context.
The overall educational goal is to help next-generation workforce development by
training students to carry out research with sound technical background and
allowing them to gain hands-on laboratory skills for their advanced careers. The
long-term goal is to design an automatic technical platform to synthesize a
variety of in vitro central nervous system disease models to mimic in vivo
conditions as closely as possible. This will facilitate the studies of TMS
effects and drug screening assays for neurodegenerative
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to develop a chip-
based microfluidics platform that facilitates the rapid formation of three-
dimensional in vitro cell culture models of the central nervous system, which
will permit the investigation of mechanisms of organ development, cellular
interactions, disease model progression under magnetic field stimulation and
drug treatments within deﬁned microenvironments. Specifically, the proposed
efforts include (1) the development of a chip consisting of microchamber arrays
so that neurospheres including diseased neurospheres such as Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) neurospheres can be fabricated in an efficient manner; and (2) the studies
of the behavior of healthy neurospheres and AD neurospheres under transient
magnetic stimulation (MS) and drug treatment using this chip. Major innovations
of this proposed project can be summarized as the following: (1) Using this type
of microfluidic chip, large-scale neurospheres with tunable and quantitative
compositions can be synthesized rapidly and inexpensively, facilitating studies
of different types of neurospheres; (2) Using a concentration gradient generator
at the upper stream of this chip, a series of AD models (AD neurospheres) with
known concentrations of amyloid-β and/or phosphorylated-tau can be readily
fabricated; and (3) developing this chip will thus facilitate studies of the
effects of both MS and drug treatment on AD models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.