* 2024962
* EAR/IF: Acquisition of Bench Top SEM and Field Equipment for Research and Teaching
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Swindle, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 273,136.00

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation
and Facilities and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). The award will support acquisition of a scanning electron microscope
(SEM) and ancillary field equipment including a water quality sonde, data
logger, and a weather station, to support research and research training at
Wichita State University. The equipment will benefit multiple WSU researchers
for studies in geology, biology, chemistry, anthropology, and engineering with
relevance to societal interests including reducing and remediating toxic
elements introduced into the subsurface, studies of hydrophobic composite
materials to harvest water vapor in arid regions, and studies of mineral-microbe
interactions in hypersaline environments. The instrumentation will support
graduate and undergraduate student experiential learning and research training
and the investigators intend to conduct instrument-mediated outreach to local
K-12 students and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will be used
foremost for investigations of the transport and fate of natural and man-made
colloidal materials in groundwaters and soils, with field equipment deployed at
a local University managed nature preserve (the Ninnescah Reserve). The SEM will
facilitate micron to sub-micron scale imaging of the interactions between
natural and synthetic colloids with mineral surfaces with implications for
understanding the subsurface transport and fate of metal contaminants adsorbed
to natural organic materials and studies of potential remediation techniques for
neutralizing acid mine drainage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.