* 2024316
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Legacies of Colonial  Dislocation and Resettlement
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Steven Wernke, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 25,187.00

Using the concept of landesque capital—the cumulative investments of labor on
durable improvements to the land and its continued maintenance—this research
examines how a traditional colonized community responded to forced changes in
their traditional settlement pattern. First required to abandon a long-occupied
homeland the group was resettled in centralized villages. However following
resettlement in some cases group members reclaimed traditional areas. This
research examines in detail both the abandonment and reclaimation process. It
asks, what are the spatial and temporal patterns of the abandonment of some
irrigation and field systems (and not others), and what are the spatial and
temporal patterns of those that were later reclaimed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will use a pedestrian archaeological survey and satellite remote sensing
image analysis to investigate the construction, maintenance, abandonment, and
reclamation of agricultural field and irrigation systems. These methods provide
a unique opportunity to scale up beyond locality-level case studies toward
regional scale analysis. The research complements traditional analyses of
colonial written sources through a spatially-integrated archaeological, remote
sensing, and ethnohistorical approach, which will, in turn, enable locality- to
regional-perspectives on colonial mass resettlement. Ultimately, this research
will enable a clearer understanding of both the traumas caused by forced
resettlement and the varied forms of resilience of communities, as they forged
new relationships to their built agricultural
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.