* 2024795
* NRI: FND: Collaborative Mobile Manufacturing in Uncertain Scenarios
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marcio de Queiroz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 746,943.00

Large-scale manufacturing is common in industries such as aerospace,
transportation, maritime, energy, and construction. The final manufacturing
steps are finishing operations (e.g. trimming, surface treatment, grinding,
sanding, or painting) that are needed to achieve the required geometrical
tolerances and surface properties. Finishing operations on large-scale
components often require repositioning of the part, as well as multiple workers.
These tasks are tedious for humans, leading to physical discomfort and
repetitive strain injuries. In the composites manufacturing industry, where
human workers are predominant in performing finishing operations, specific
barriers hinder the automation of such processes: (1) final part shapes may vary
from the planned geometry, (2) the nature and duration of tasks varies from one
part to the next, and (3) task completion is based on human judgment and
experience. The project will address these barriers by improving the quality and
cost-effectiveness of large-scale manufacturing and enhancing safety for human
workers. Research outcomes will be integrated into outreach and educational
activities to provide K12, undergraduate, and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds with learning and training opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will research a collaborative robotic system that leverages robot-robot
collaboration with trained human supervisors in the finishing of composite wind
turbine blades. The implemented architecture will create scalable and
customizable capabilities for high-dimensional robotic systems performing tasks
in dynamic and uncertain environments and will include research thrusts in
computer vision, control theory, motion planning, and artificial intelligence.
Affordable sensing capabilities, machine learning and localization techniques
will be employed to develop autonomous environment characterization and
cognitive systems for robotic task completion through human-robot interaction.
Furthermore, a decentralized planning-control architecture based on reachable
set analysis will be designed to coordinate motion and interaction capabilities
for teams of robots in human-occupied spaces. The researched theories will
facilitate simple, but comprehensive, human-robot information exchange and
ensure safe human-robot cooperation. This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.