* 2024198
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Transition from Ion-Coupled to Electron-Only Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Shay, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 268,659.00

Magnetic reconnection plays a fundamental role in energy transport from the
solar wind magnetic fields to the Earth’s magnetic field. This process drives
global energy releases in the magnetotail through sub-storms and in the
magnetosheath. This project studies how reconnection in the magnetosheath
occurs, focusing on the relative contributions from ion-coupled and electron-
only reconnection. Understanding of magnetic reconnection is important to
national security priorities related to satellites as these events produce space
weather affects that can damage or destroy these systems. Additionally, the
project will support the next generation of STEM scientists through training of
a post-doc and a graduate student and providing internships for at-risk minority
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a systematic study of
key controlling factors and energy release properties of the transition from
ion-coupled to electron-only magnetic reconnection. The primary sub-questions
are: (1) What are the factors controlling the transition from ion-coupled to
electron-only reconnection? (2) What are the factors controlling heating during
reconnection with little or no ion coupling? And (3) Does 3D physics impact the
transition from ion-coupled to electron-only reconnection? Kinetic particle-in-
cell simulations will be conducted in 2-1/2 and 3 dimensions. The degree of ion
coupling, ion exhaust velocities, electron exhaust velocities, and heating in
the exhaust will be determined and compared with inflow conditions to determine
the key controlling factors and ultimately all the creation of physical models.
The simulations and models will be compared with MMS satellite observations of
reconnection in the turbulent magnetosheath to both validate the models and find
clues to the degree of ion coupling in the
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.