* 2024671
* SBIR Phase II:  Synthetic biology platform for production of stabilized high-value proteins
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Daniel Mandell, GRO BIOSCIENCES INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 1,199,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to help patients living with diabetes. The disease accounts for 12%
of deaths in the US and patients face major lifestyle changes. Most patients
transition to insulin replacement therapy, which carries a complex dosing
schedule that, if not followed closely, can leave patients in dangerous states
of glucose dysregulation. More than 50 million diabetics currently use basal
insulin analogs designed for longer activity than human insulin. The convenience
and improved safety of these analogs has led to widespread adoption and a global
market surpassing $10B. However, all current basal insulins require daily
injections, a dosing burden that leads to poor treatment adherence, leaving
patients vulnerable to dangerous fluctuations in blood glucose. The modified
insulin described in this Phase II project is intended to provide the stability
necessary to achieve once-weekly dosing. Relaxing the injection schedule should
dramatically improve compliance and safety for patients; furthermore, the
solution can be delivered at lower cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses
a scalable in vivo protein production platform to produce long-acting insulin
analogs for the diabetes market. The project utilizes the platformâ€™s unique
capability to site-specifically install non-standard amino acids into proteins,
and to produce the modified proteins at scale. By replacing key bond-forming
amino acids in insulin with non-standard amino acids that form stronger bonds,
the modified insulins can achieve the stability necessary to support once-weekly
dosing. The research objectives are to: produce sufficient quantities of
variants of this insulin analog to support an experimental program, demonstrate
improved stability of the variants over wild-type insulin in cell-based assays,
and demonstrate sufficiently prolongated pharmacodynamics of the insulin analogs
in an animal study to support once-weekly dosing. Potential outcomes include the
first insulin analog capable of filling a major clinical and commercial need for
affordable, safe insulin analogs with relaxed dosing schedules. Further, the
work provides technical validation of a novel protein production
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.