* 2024569
* Understanding the Role of Affinity Groups on the Advancement of Women of Color in the Engineering Academy  a Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Tonya Peeples, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 10/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

This workshop will study the intersection of professional organizations and
affinity groups within those organizations, and the role that they play for
women of color (WoC) in engineering academia as they traverse their career
pathways. The purpose of the workshop is to discover the reach, structure, and
impact of affinity groups, and to learn from successful models from other
professional societies. The dearth of WoC in the engineering academy and their
advancement in the profession can be correlated to obstacles faced by this
population. In contrast from the environment in the engineering academy for
underrepresented groups (URGs), corporate settings have embraced and understood
the value that diversity offers. Corporate settings have gone beyond the goal of
achieving diversity, but recognize that inclusion is essential for the growth of
their diverse environment. To foster an inclusive environment, corporations have
learned that affinity groups within the organization are key as they provide a
means for individuals to articulate concerns and impart change. The perception
by WoC in the engineering academy is that industry offers a more tolerable
environment supporting professional career advancement. Therefore, similar
efforts as those in corporate settings have been implemented organically by WoC
in large professional societies. This workshop will bring together leaders from
government, academia, professional societies and industry to address critical
issues around the entry, persistence and advancement of WoC in the engineering
academy. Participants from diverse institutions (2-year, 4-year, research
intensive, minority serving) will examine this critical element of community
support and belonging in broadening participation. Strategic initiatives and
cross-sector collaboratives will support the development of future and current
faculty to advance through professional engagement in national settings. This
work is aligned with the big ideas of NSF such as
INCLUDES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will assess the effect of the
presence of affinity groups within discipline-specific professional
organizations on the promotion, tenure, and progression into leadership within
the academy for WoC. Due to the limited availability of literature, the proposed
workshop is designed to gain an understanding of the current landscape of
discipline specific professional organizations, their affinity groups, and their
roles leading to assess their reach and impact on the advancement of WoC in the
engineering academy. A motivation driving the conceptualization of this workshop
is to contribute towards supporting the career progression of underrepresented
groups (URG) females in the engineering academy. &lt;br/&gt; To better
understand how affinity groups can support the progression of WoC in the
engineering academy this workshop will seek to answer the following research
questions: (1) Can the reach that professional organizations and related
affinity groups within those organizations have on engaging WoC be quantified?
(2) Is there a prescribed structure within affinity groups that is associated
with a proportion of its population achieving academic career advancement? (3)
Can the impact that professional organizations and related affinity groups have
on the advancement of WoC in engineering academia be quantified? (i.e.
percentages of WoC promoted to full professor, percentages of WoC in academic
leadership, etc.)&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will draw upon Positive Organizational
Scholarship (POS) to conceptualize and design best practices for affinity groups
of WoC in the engineering academy. This workshop will anchor in the POS research
on career development to explore the potential of affinity groups with an
emphasis on professional and psychosocial support, communal practices, mutual
learning and growth, and network-based model of
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.