* 2024000
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Combining quantitative analysis and corpus-based methodologies in the documentation of an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Paige Wheeler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2023
* USD 18,787.00

Most phonological linguistic theory, and the cross-linguistic studies which
inform it, is based on studies of a few, well-studied languages. Much less is
known about the sound systems (phonology) of languages with fewer speakers.
Furthermore, descriptions of understudied languages, particularly of sound
systems, are easily biased by linguists' native languages. Non-native listener
biases often lead to contradictory descriptions which are therefore unsuitable
for cross-linguistic comparisons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the phonological system of an understudied and endangered language. Previous
description of its phonological system is sparse, but existing documentation
indicates that this language includes some features which are of special
theoretical or typological interest. For example, the language uses uvular
sounds, glottalized sonorants, and a voiceless lateral fricative. Each of these
sounds (or sets of sounds) is cross-linguistically uncommon. Their appearance in
this particular language is also unexpected; in comparison to other languages'
sound systems, the set of sounds and features which co-occur in this system is
unusual. In addition, the study is of regional interest; it will expand
linguists' understanding of contact-driven language change and shed light on
long-term histories of contact among groups in the region. This study combines
traditional methodologies—including recording an audio-video corpus of speech,
written transcription, and controlled elicitation—with quantitative experimental
methodologies. The experimental component of the project targets questions of
theoretical and typological interest. For example, what acoustic cues to
speakers use to produce and perceive stress? Are long vowels separate segments
from shorter vowels? Should 'creaky voice' be analyzed as a feature of
individual segments, words, or phrases? Results from controlled experiments will
be integrated with traditional, corpus-driven conclusions to develop a
comprehensive phonological description of a previously undescribed system.
Precise, quantitative analysis, integrated with a holistic description and
publicly-available corpus of language data, will allow these results to
contribute to broader questions related to sound patterns, language typology,
language contact, and diachronic change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.