* 2024989
* IrecognizeU: Finding the Pathway to Increasing Women Civil Engineering Students’ Feeling of Recognition to Develop an Engineering Identity
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Evrim Baran Jovanovic, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,965.00

Women remain dramatically underrepresented in the engineering profession, and
far fewer women than men persist in the field. There is considerable evidence
that a lack of identification with engineering causes students to drop out
despite demonstrated technical skills. Recognition is vitally important to the
development of identity and the persistence of women students. Previous research
has shown when women engineering students were not recognized by their peers and
instructors, they had weaker identities as engineers and did not feel as if they
belonged in the culture of engineering. This research will focus on addressing
the critical need for improved feeling of recognition for women engineering
students. This work will provide insight into strategies that would improve
recruitment and retention of women engineering students. The results of this
study will be used by engineering educators across the country to help create a
positive classroom and campus environment for students, thus increasing the
potential retention of underrepresented groups in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main goals. Goal 1:
Identify factors impacting women civil engineers’ feelings of recognition as
civil engineers. Goal 2: Develop targeted recognition activities as
interventions to increase women civil engineering students’ feelings of
recognition as civil engineers. Goal 3: Determine the impact of interventions on
women civil engineering students’ feelings of recognition as civil engineering
students and engineering identity development. A mixed-methods approach will be
used to examine women engineering students’ identity development over a duration
of two years. The research will investigate the effects of targeted recognition
activities (interventions) on the women engineering students’ formation of
engineering identity. More specifically, the project will determine whether, and
to what extent, recognition interventions strengthen the engineering identity of
women students in civil engineering. Formal interventions that enable women to
be more readily recognized as engineers and to recognize themselves as engineers
are an important aspect of recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups
in engineering. This project will also help to develop the expertise of the
engineering faculty in conducting engineering education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.