* 2024622
* Collaborative Research:NCS-FO: How cognitive maps potentiate new learning: constraining a computational model by decoding the thoughts of superior memorists
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Christopher Baldassano, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 516,701.00

This project will break new ground in the study of memory by partnering with
competitors in the USA Memory Championship. These competitors are not savants,
but instead are well-practiced in the use of mnemonic techniques and, as a
result, exhibit enhanced powers of memory on a range of real-world tasks, such
as memorizing the items on a shopping list. All of these techniques rely on the
practitioner structuring prior knowledge in very specific ways that facilitate
the incorporation of new information. By scanning the brains of these trained
memorists with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and comparing their
brain activity to participants who are learning these mnemonic systems for the
first time, the researchers will identify principles for optimal scaffolding:
How can prior knowledge be structured and used to most effectively support new
learning? Identifying these principles will improve our fundamental
understanding of real world-memory and will also lay the foundation for future
educational interventions based on these principles. This project is funded by
Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS), a
multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to extend theories of memory
to address how people can optimally use cognitive maps (structured prior
knowledge) to support new learning. Reinforcement learning algorithms will be
applied to computational models of memory to make predictions about which
strategies will result in the best performance, factoring in biological
constraints on the human memory system. Model predictions about optimal memory
strategies will be tested using fMRI data from memory experts who have spent
years optimizing their ability to bind arbitrary information to an internal
cognitive map (a “memory palace”), and who therefore serve as a unique
comparison group for optimized memory models; these subjects will be compared to
a sample of young adult subjects who are being trained to use these memorization
techniques. New neuroimaging approaches developed by the researchers will allow
them to map the brain patterns corresponding to each room of the memory palace
and the patterns corresponding to each individual memory, and then track the
activation of these patterns as subjects recall memories using mental walks
through their palace. Results of these analyses will be used to test detailed
model predictions about how memory training will alter the structure and use of
subjects’ cognitive maps, and how these changes relate to memory performance. As
a final test of the models, the researchers will use neural measurements of
individual subjects’ cognitive maps to predict which specific items they will
recall. By examining how prior knowledge is deployed to support learning in
experts and novices at a much finer resolution than was previously possible,
this work will provide the foundation for understanding why wide variations in
memory performance exist across individuals and how memory can be improved,
paving the way for targeted interventions to improve memory
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.