* 2024013
* 30th Goldschmidt Conference – Geochemistry and Society Special Sessions
* GEO,RISE
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2022
* USD 12,600.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The Earth, environmental and space sciences (EESS) depend on
growing international teams, collaboration, diverse research groups, and open,
interoperable data. As a celebration of the 30th Goldschmidt conference at
Goldschmidt 2020, Theme 15 “Geochemistry and Society” will focus on core topics
of interest to all delegates across the disciplines, with emphasis on issues
relevant to society and related to the location of the conference (Hawaii and
the Pacific Rim). This Theme will explore the future of our science—the major
scientific and social challenges, the growing connections with society, human
and environmental health, and what workforce is needed to engage and address
these opportunities in the future. Career advancement, incentives, and rewards
could be better aligned to support workforce needs, as could efforts to enhance
diversity, inclusiveness and participation in (and awareness of) EESS in many
regions of the world. This travel grant will support key invited experts who
would traditionally not participate in the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;Theme 15 (Geochemistry and Society) at Goldschmidt 2020 is about the
future of our planet and how we live on it, the solar system beyond, our
science, and our involvement in society, from a geochemical perspective. The
Theme will focus on 5 topics of interest (1) Geochemistry and GeoHazards, (2)
Origin of Life on Earth and Beyond, (3) Future of Land and Sea in the Face of
Climate Change and Biodiversity Loss, (4) Diversity and Inclusion in the
Geosciences, and (5) Teaching and Communicating Science in the Age of Social
Media. A diverse set of speakers are sought to help address all topics with
particular emphasis on topics 1, 4 and 5. These are topics highly relevant to
society and early career geoscientists are poised to assist in the solution
creation for issues and questions related to these topics. Career advancement,
incentives, and rewards could be better aligned to support related geoscience
workforce needs, as could efforts to enhance diversity, inclusiveness and
participation in (and awareness of) EESS in many regions of the world. The talks
will be open to the general public and invitee high school and college students
from under represented groups will be invited to participate. The talks will be
recorded and available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.