* 2024287
* RI: Small: Computational Social Choice: For the People
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Ariel Procaccia, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 251,239.00

The field of social choice theory deals with aggregating the preferences or
opinions of individuals towards a collective decision; voting is a paradigmatic
example. This rich space of problems has long been studied in economics and
mathematics, leading to a slew of striking theoretical results. But real-world
applications have been sparse. From the AI viewpoint, the study of computational
social choice is seen by many researchers as a central component in the effort
to build the foundations of multiagent systems. This research extends this
theoretical work in computational social choice to enable people to make joint
decisions. This project aims to put human decision making at the center of
computational social choice, while leveraging the very approaches and techniques
developed for voting in multiagent systems. The research plan is directly
motivated by the not-for-profit website RoboVote.org, which enables people to
implement whichever voting methods appear to be best based on analysis and
empirical evidence. This project will realize the full potential of RoboVote for
education, outreach, and societal impact with the aim of transforming the way
people make group decisions in a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific challenges that will be tackled
are divided into two subsets, corresponding to the two fundamentally different
types of polls currently modeled on RoboVote. 1. Subjective preferences:
Preferences are subjective when the desirability of each alternative is a matter
of taste. RoboVote aggregates subjective rankings by assuming that voters have
latent utilities for the alternatives, and selecting an outcome that maximizes
the sum of utilities by using the reported rankings as a proxy for those
utilities. An immediate gap that must be addressed is that the approach does not
extend to the case where the outcome is a ranking. A second, far-reaching
challenge is to rethink the way voters express their preferences, in order to
obtain more useful information regarding their actual utility functions while
keeping the cognitive burden low. Finally, the project includes a study of the
axiomatic properties of optimal aggregation methods in the foregoing framework.
2. Objective opinions: In this scenario, some alternatives are objectively
better than others, but this objective comparison is not known to voters. The
solutions deployed on RoboVote aim to handle worst-case noise. The research aims
to create and test algorithms that improve upon naïve approaches, especially by
building on synergistic advances in the design of fixed-parameter tractable
algorithms.