* 2024024
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Establishing immortalized cell lines from the European honey bee, Apis mellifera
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Rollie Clem, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 177,191.00

This EAGER will advance the national prosperity and add to national bioeconomy
by creating a new bee cell line that will help identify how bees succumb to
microbial infections. Populations of bees and other pollinators are in decline
worldwide, which has major implications for ecosystem health and agricultural
production interests. Colony collapse disorder, involving colonies of the
European honey bee, Apis mellifera, is just one dramatic example of rapid loss
of pollinators. Although a large number of viruses infect bees, it is not known
how these viruses impact bee decline. A bee cell line would benefit science
because it would allow scientists to identify how bee viruses infect and kill
bees. The goal of this research is to establish and characterize the first
immortalized cell lines from Apis mellifera. The resulting immortalized cell
line(s) will provide an invaluable resources for the virology research field. In
addition to helping the honey bee scientific community, this research may help
understand disease dynamics in other pollinator species, many of which are
important for US agriculture. This cell line may be the basis for commercially-
available testing kits to identify or track bee diseases. The research uses
funding to train graduate and undergraduate students, including under-
represented students. As such this funding is training the next generation of
leaders in science. Researchers will share their findings to the public through
the use of beekeeping workshops, and honey bee health and research awareness
activities through farmerâ€™s markets and video documentaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of immortalized bee cell lines has greatly
hampered research on bee viruses. Thus far, only primary cell cultures have been
established from Apis mellifera, the European honey bee. These primary cell
cultures are difficult to establish and maintain, and suffer from several major
drawbacks including the presence of multiple resident viruses, extremely slow
cell division rates, and limitations on the number of passages before reaching
senescence. This research will examine the ability of candidate honey bee genes
to immortalize A. mellifera embryonic cells. This will be accomplished by stably
expressing candidate genes in primary embryonic cells isolated from embryos and
monitoring growth and survival of the resulting cells. Primary cells isolated
from different developmental stages of the embryo will be used, in order to
attempt to obtain immortalized cell lines that represent various cell types.
Cell clones with optimum growth characteristics that are able to be stably
passaged will be selected. The resulting immortalized cell lines will be
screened for resident viruses by deep sequencing, and any viruses present will
be cleared by using a combination of RNA interference and single cell cloning.
The resulting virus-free, immortalized honey bee cell lines will be made
available to the research community. If successful, this approach will also
provide a template for researchers to isolate immortalized cell lines from other
bee species. This research was supported by the Symbiosis, Defense and Self-
Recognition program of the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.