* 2024554
* NRI: FND: Dexterous Manipulation Using Multi-Serial Manipulator Systems with Real-Time Compliance Modulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Joseph Schimmels, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 773,656.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will promote the progress of science
and advance the national health, prosperity and welfare by discovering
foundational scientific knowledge needed to allow robots to achieve human-like
dexterity in constrained manipulation tasks. Current robots are better than
people at executing desired motions in free space, but they are not nearly as
adept at performing tasks in which motion is constrained in some way. Examples
of such tasks in everyday life include peeling potatoes, opening a bottle,
closing a container, cleaning a surface, or assembling furniture. Robots have
great difficulty in performing these types of tasks because inevitable
uncertainties in object exact locations often cause robot commanded positions to
conflict with physical constraints, resulting in excessive contact forces and
task failure. This award supports fundamental research into improving robot
dexterity by providing a robot system the human-like ability to continuously
adjust its inherent mechanical behavior as a task progresses so that it can be
compliant in directions that are constrained and to be stiff in directions for
which the commanded motion is needed to complete the task. Human-like dexterous
manipulation is needed for robots to be widely used in senior living-assistance,
agriculture, construction, space exploration, healthcare, nuclear remediation,
and manufacturing. The robustness of the approach will be demonstrated in a
manufacturing assembly testbed application. Therefore, results from this
research will provide broad benefit to society and the U.S. economy. The
technologies developed will be in the areas of mechanical engineering
(kinematics, dynamics, and control) and computer science and will engage and
educate students, including members of underrepresented groups, in these areas
of national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain improved dexterity, multiple
collaborating serial manipulators will be used to achieve a desired time-varying
compliance, one specifically optimized for a given task so that it is properly
executed despite uncertainties in task geometry and associated physical
constraints. The compliance will be passively realized using variable stiffness
actuators in each joint of the multi-manipulator system. With this optimized
modulated passive compliance approach, the inherent mechanical behavior of the
robot system is guaranteed to regulate contact force to not exceed specified
limits and to move as desired to attain task objectives. The three specific aims
of this research project are: 1) identify necessary and sufficient conditions
and general synthesis procedures to achieve any specified passive compliance for
different multi-serial manipulator topologies, 2) identify procedures for
continuously and simultaneously attaining the desired object position and
passive elastic behavior as an object is moved by redundant collaborating robots
for different multi-serial manipulator topologies, and 3) demonstrate
customizable dexterous manipulation using a three-finger planar robot hand with
modulated passive compliance (using novel antagonistic tendon-driven variable
stiffness actuators) performing a variety of different planar assembly tasks
quickly and reliably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.