* 2024200
* Fostering a Culture of Openness and Transparency with Institutional Authorship Policies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Thomas Reynolds, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 581,653.00

Collaboration and co-authorship are essential for establishing credit and
accountability in science, and co-authorship disputes and unethical behavior
related to it are a growing concern. Moreover, authorship disputes are often
asymmetrical in terms of the relative power of those involved, systematically
disadvantaging some parties in the dispute. This project is a multi-year
intervention study designed to test the efficacy of institutional authorship
policies and ethical authorship training for promoting ethical authorship
practices and improving perceptions of research culture and climate across STEM
disciplines at research universities. An institutional authorship policy will be
developed and publicized at a research university, and an experimental test will
be used to the effectiveness of different forms of the intervention for
encouraging STEM trainees and faculty to complete quality authorship agreements,
and for improving their perceptions of ethical authorship practices and the
institutional research culture. This research will produce a model institutional
authorship policy based on best practices that can be used by other
institutions, new training materials for educating researchers about ethical
authorship, and open-source materials to facilitate the implementation of open
cultures of research and authorship practices at research-intensive
institutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops and tests the effects of
a campus-wide institutional authorship policy to assess its effects on ethical
authorship practices and improving perceptions of ethical research climates. To
do so, an institutional authorship policy will be created and educational tools
regarding the policy and ethical authorship practices are designed. STEM
doctoral and post-doctoral trainees are then recruited to complete an authorship
agreement with their research advisor. Participants are randomly assigned to a
low-engagement or high-engagement treatment and surveys would be administered to
experimentally test the relative effects of each training approach on the
completion of quality authorship agreements and perceptions of institutional
authorship practices and ethical culture. This project results in generalizable
evidence about the effectiveness of different engagement strategies for
encouraging researchers to adopt ethical processes for determining authorship
and if institutional efforts to address authorship ethics can improve the
institutional climate for authorship and research
ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.