* 2024230
* EAGER: Soil Microhabitats and the Generation, Maintenance, and Significance of Microbial Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Thea Whitman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,821.00

Earth’s soils host extraordinary biological diversity, and soil microbes such as
bacteria and fungi govern many important processes, including cycling nutrients,
decomposing dead plants and animals, and producing or consuming atmospheric
gases such as CO2 and methane. Soils are generally poorly mixed environments and
can be extremely variable in both time and space, with fundamental properties
such as pH or nutrient availability changing over less than 1 millimeter, and
water and oxygen content varying dramatically over the course of just minutes.
This spatial and temporal variation is likely a core part of the reason why
soils harbor such a vast diversity of microbes - the simultaneous existence of a
multitude of different “microhabitats” within the soil supports a wide range of
ecological strategies. The simple fact that soils are poorly mixed is likely
also a core reason soils are so microbially diverse: specific organisms or
groups of microbes that would be out-competed by other microbes in a well-mixed
environment may thrive when they are isolated within soil aggregates or pores,
simply because they are disconnected from other similar microhabitats. The goal
of this research is to characterize the relative importance of the different
processes that generate and maintain the exceptional microbial diversity found
in soils. The proposed research will address a critical question - which
specific processes and characteristics of the soil environment drive this great
biodiversity? There is inherent risk in attempting to identify these phenomena
at the micro-scale. The project will provide research training for a graduate
student. The results from this study could have a high payoff through better
management and understanding of soil microbes and the processes that they
govern, and could also enhance or transform our understanding of the ecological
processes structuring the microbial communities of numerous other environments,
ranging from the ocean to the human body. In conjunction with the proposed
experiments, researchers will develop an explorable virtual reality (VR) soil
environment. This VR experience will engender a sense of scale: the viewer will
start at human-scale, from which they will zoom in to the aggregate, where they
will be able to enter and explore the soil pore network at the scale of a
microbe using a VR headset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this EAGER project, the PI
proposes to use creative and high risk approaches to test mechanistic aspects of
how changes in microbial diversity at the microscale might result in changes in
ecosystem function. The conceptual and research designs to address this
challenging question will have to tackle making linkages between carbon use
efficiency, diversity and ecosystem function. The key questions of this research
are: What are the relative contributions of selection, dispersal, and drift in
determining soil bacterial community composition in (A) unmixed vs. frequently
mixed soil? (B) ambient vs. low-oxygen conditions? (C) unsaturated vs. saturated
conditions? The corresponding hypotheses are: (A) Mixing soil will result in
increasingly similar communities, largely through increased dispersal; (B) Low-
oxygen conditions will impose selective pressure for communities adapted to
those conditions, but will not significantly affect dispersal; (C) The selective
effects of the reduced oxygen that accompanies increased moisture will be
greater than the increased dispersal facilitated by moisture. The approach will
use natural soil communities in “microhabitats” of 50 mg in a nested series of
experiments where the microhabitat moisture and oxygen conditions are adjusted,
while also varying frequencies at which soils are mixed. The researchers will
draw on high-throughput amplicon sequencing to characterize bacterial community
composition and statistical modelling to quantify the relative importance of
selection, dispersal, and drift in determining soil bacterial community
composition. A graduate student will be trained in microbial ecology methods as
part of these studies. Using a 3D model of a soil aggregate created using X-ray
scanning and modelling, the the PI and her team will develop a VR experience
that will allow viewers to “take a tour” of the world of a
microbe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.