* 2024267
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: IDEANet: Integrating Data Exchange and Analysis of Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Peter Mucha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 383,608.00

In this project, the Integrated Data Exchange and Analysis for Networks
(IDEANet) platform is constructed with the aim of solving several problems that
have confronted researchers using network analysis. Over the last 30 years,
network analysis — a method for measuring and modeling the patterns of
connections between objects (people, places, proteins, etc.) — has emerged as a
prominent data-intensive research theme with broad applications and with
significant Federal research investment. Network analysis is unique amongst
methodologies in its focus on interdependence, allowing investigators to
understand how, for example, diseases spread through populations, hostile groups
organize, or predator/prey patterns of species shape an ecosystem, as well as
myriad other substantive applications. Despite the wide use of network analysis,
the analytical and computational tools are highly specialized and often have
domain-specific idiosyncrasies that severely limit integration across fields and
creates unnaturally high barriers to entry for investigators new to network
analysis who want to apply these methods to their problems. Moreover, current
computational tools manage data in ways that make errors undetectable and easy
to make, lowering rigor and reproducibility in network analysis studies. The new
computational toolkit and data storage framework developed in IDEANet aims to
solve these problems through its integration of analytic methods and data
archiving, discovery, and distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make network
data easier to find, use and share, four integrated objectives are pursued in
IDEANet: (1) Provision of an easy-to-use software tool, integrated via the R
statistical programming language, with methodologically state-of-the-art
analysis routines and metrics, developed in parallel with a ShinyR app that
allows GUI use for R novices; (2) Construction of a network data translation
engine that allows users to easily move data between the myriad extant formats
found across application fields; (3) Provision of a core metrics compute engine
that automatically generates vetted best practice metrics on network data of
multiple types; (4) Development of a data repository and archival system that
leverages the compute tools to build harmonized network data releases in
multiple formats with pre-computed summary statistics and metrics, tailored to
different levels of security. The secure-data archive capacity makes use of
ImPACT (Infrastructure for Privacy-Assured CompuTations) distributed secure data
services developed under prior NSF investment (#1659367). This award by the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences is jointly supported
by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.