* 2024792
* NRI: FND: Foundations for Physical Co-Manipulation with Mixed Teams of Humans and Soft Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* John Salmon, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2023
* USD 717,030.00

The goal of this National Robotics Initiative (NRI) project is to enable mixed
teams of humans and robots to work together to accomplish physically demanding
object manipulation tasks in complex environments. For this project, soft robots
are exclusively considered, because traditional robots are too heavy and
potentially dangerous to work closely with people. Humans can effectively work
together to move a bulky, heavy object because they are able to use their
understanding of group goals and individual capabilities to interpret physical
cues and quickly infer each other's intention. Thus, the first step in extending
this ability to robots is to understand how groups of people recognize and react
to pushing and pulling from other team members. The project also emphasizes the
necessity of managing uncertainty when working with soft robots and with people
-- soft robots because they deform significantly under typical task loads, and
people because their movements may be difficult for robots to predict. Potential
applications of the research can range from expediting logistics and material
handling, to improving human safety in dangerous and/or hard-to-reach
environments such as mining, oil rigs, logging, and search and rescue. To this
end, a collaboration with a local search and rescue team will solicit feedback
on human-robot co-manipulation throughout the project. Underrepresented
undergraduate students will be trained with a STEM education tool leveraging
soft robotics, and the students will then work to disseminate this training to
local K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Co-manipulation can be defined as
the actions taken and the signals sent by many collaborating agents while moving
a single large object. This research will enable co-manipulation between humans
and robots, and is focused on the following three main thrusts: 1) modeling,
controlling, and planning effective stiffness trajectories for soft robots to
deal with task uncertainty, 2) quantifying and modeling human intention and
consensus during manipulation, and 3) developing algorithms that incorporate
intention, consensus, and uncertainty to execute co-manipulation tasks. Building
on prior work on model predictive control algorithms for large-degree-of-freedom
soft robots, stiffness trajectories will be generated as part of the soft robot
control based on estimates of task uncertainty. Trials with human collaborators
moving large objects in real life and in virtual reality will allow the
development of algorithms that predict consensus and motion of the group.
Finally, given a reasonable estimate of the short-term motion goal of a group,
the resulting algorithms will also generate robot motion and stiffness
trajectories to help a group reach consensus more efficiently by reducing
uncertainty. This research will pioneer the novel combination of natural
physical interaction, control for safe robots, multi-agent coordination, and
planning/acting in a distributed manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.