* 2024823
* RAPID: Impact of extreme heat-induced mortality on avian cooperative social systems
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Daizaburo Shizuka, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Extreme weather events such as heatwaves, droughts, and storms can have dire
consequences for local ecosystems, sparking population decline or range shifts.
While physiological and morphological adaptations may help buffer animals
against ecological shifts, little is known about how sociality—a trait which can
help animals cope with unpredictable or harsh environments—might mitigate (or
exacerbate) the consequences of abrupt, prolonged climatic events. This year,
wildlife in South Australia were subject to extended heatwaves which resulted in
mortality in nearby animal communities. This project will take advantage of
long-term data collected on social behavior of two social species of birds -
splendid and purple-backed fairywrens - to ask whether social group membership
can improve survival outcomes following extreme environmental stressors. This
work will help elucidate how different social systems and communities will
respond to climatic events in the future by capturing both the population-wide
and individual level response to this weather event in two social species with
varying degrees of social participation. Broader impacts will include training
of students and a post-doctoral researcher and dissemination of findings to the
broader non-scientific community to help general audiences understand how
extreme weather events impact natural populations of animals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Australia has recently experienced numerous catastrophic
droughts, heat waves, and fires that have led to heat-induced avian mortality
events where assessment of population responses could provide insight on the
impact of increasingly common extreme climatic events on populations. Previous
work has focused on critical temperature, demography, and morphological changes;
no work has addressed cooperative breeding — a behavior linked to environmental
variability. This project will address two research aims: 1) Determine whether
differential survival occurred with respect to group size and 2) Determine the
impact of catastrophic mortality on subsequent social structure and dynamics in
two different cooperatively breeding systems. Group composition and reproductive
success of both splendid and purple-backed fairywrens were last monitored in the
days immediately prior to the December 2019 heatwave. This project will consist
of a survey in autumn to assess survival and population composition, and a
second trip spanning the pre-breeding and breeding seasons to assess the impact
of demographic changes on the strength and structure of social groups. During
each trip social associations and individual presence will be assessed through
re-sighting of individually unique color bands. Unbanded individuals will be
captured and banded, and their social status within the population assessed.
These methods will allow 2019 social behavior to be linked to survival of the
heat event, and allow team members to subsequently assess how dispersal
behavior, group structure, and reproductive success in the 2020 breeding season
is impacted by demographic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.