* 2024882
* NRI: FND: Collaborative Research: DeepSoRo: High-dimensional Proprioceptive and Tactile Sensing and Modeling for Soft Grippers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Chen Feng, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 398,096.00

This National Robotics Initiative 2.0 award supports fundamental research on
fast, high-dimensional, and scalable sensing and modeling methods for soft
grippers. The research will create soft grippers with significantly improved
ability to handle objects in complicated environments. Soft grippers are
constructed from flexible and soft materials that passively adapt to external
forces, making them intrinsically safe for collaborating with humans and for
handling delicate objects such as fruits and vegetables. Soft materials deform
easily in response to applied forces, making them promising candidates for self-
sensing. This project harnesses that promise, using embedded cameras and
sophisticated algorithms to translate complex images into quantitative
configuration and contact force information. Self-sensing enables soft grippers
that are not limited to a preset passive response but can actively modify their
operation according to their status. The active soft grippers arising from this
project will find application in fields such as food industries, agriculture,
assisted living for senior citizens or people with disabilities, increasing
productivity and improving the quality of human life. The project follows a
convergent research approach involving robotics and artificial intelligence,
culminating in formal and informal learning activities to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of DeepSoRo as a new framework of
integrated proprioceptive and tactile sensing using embedded cameras to provide
high-dimensional sensory input, and advanced deep learning models of the
gripperâ€™s full-body kinematics and dynamics. This framework will overcome the
key limitations of existing soft grippers in modeling and sensing of their own
states, including the over-simplified low-resolution representation, low-speed,
and difficulty in scalability and adaptability to various gripper designs. To
unleash the full potential of soft grippers, several scientific boundaries must
be pushed, ensuring more holistic situational awareness of those grippers to
perform dexterous and safe manipulations in complex environments. This research
will fill critical knowledge gaps in soft robot sensing, sensor design, and deep
learning, to realize the online shape estimation and feedback control of soft
grippers, especially when the grippers are in contact with external objects.
This interdisciplinary research program will unfold along three directions: high
dimensional shape modeling in a latent space, joint proprioceptive and tactile
sensing, and sensor design and integration in hardware prototypes. Theoretical
advancements will proceed alongside with experimental research toward
demonstrating the potential of DeepSoRo to accurately and efficiently model and
sense soft grippers in real-world settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.