* 2024317
* NSF Student Travel Fund for the 2020 Annual International Cryptology Conference (Crypto)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Leonid Reyzin, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2024
* USD 18,000.00

This proposal supports 20 students' travel to attend the 2020 The International
Association of Cryptologic Research (IACR)'s annual International Cryptology
Conference (Crypto) to be held at the University of California, Santa Barbara
August 16-20, 2020. Since the first conference in 1981, Crypto has been held in
Santa Barbara, California, and has become the flagship conference in cryptology,
attracting researchers from all over the world. The scope of the work discussed
and presented at the conference ranges from the theoretical foundation of
cryptology to applications and the implementation of cryptographic schemes. This
travel grant will enable career development and learning opportunities for US-
based and/or US citizen graduate students. Attending conferences is an important
component of graduate school education for our society's future computer
security researchers. Students will have the opportunity to discuss leading edge
research with world-class computer security researchers, and establish networks,
connections, and mentoring relationships that will serve them well during their
research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support to
encourage participation in the 2020 conference by students who would normally
find it difficult to attend. Criteria for selection include evidence of a
serious interest in the field, as demonstrated by research output, coursework
and/or project experience. Organizers encourage participation of women and
students from other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.