* 2024279
* Collaborative Research: Foundational Community-Based Research for Ethics in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Rochelle Tractenberg, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2022
* USD 58,135.00

Professional ethics standards for mathematicians is both a relatively novel
issue and a critical one at this moment in time. The use of big data and
algorithms in today's technological society has been shown to perpetuate
inequalities. The design of algorithms and use of big data often involve the
work of mathematicians. Professional codes of ethics for many mathematical
professional societies tend to focus on academic issues and do not explicitly
address these newer issues and contexts. Moreover, there is a sense within the
field of mathematics that mathematics is abstract and as such free from ethical
considerations. This one-year Ethical and Responsible Research incubation grant
aims to gather information on what ethical guidelines mathematicians believe are
relevant to mathematics and which elements of ethics are missing from current
professional codes and guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes use of
ethics codes from mathematics-adjacent fields and professional societies such as
the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and the American Statistical
Association (ASA). These societies have recently updated their codes to better
reflect contemporary issues of ethics in areas such as big data and algorithm
design. Using survey and focus group methods, the project interrogates which
elements from the current codes of the two major academic mathematics
professional societies, the Mathematics Association of America (MAA) and the
American Mathematical Society (AMS) mathematicians see as most relevant to their
work. The survey and focus group work will also evaluate the extent to which
mathematicians feel that the ethical guidelines from the mathematics-adjacent
professional societies are relevant to their work and what additional guidelines
might be necessary that are specific to the field of mathematics. The work of
this study lays the groundwork for broader impacts as this foundational work
will guide discussions within the field of mathematics, revisions to codes of
ethics by mathematics professional organizations, and stronger ethical behavior
on the part of mathematicians in university and industry contexts. This grant is
intended to be followed by a three-year Ethical and Responsible Research
proposal to extend the data collection and white paper work of the incubation
project into the construction of informed ethical practice guidelines and
educational materials for mathematicians and their professional
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.