* 2024149
* NSF Student Travel Support for the Doctoral Colloquium at 2020 IEEE Visualization Conference (IEEE VIS)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Bei Phillips, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Visualization, the graphical representation of information and data, has become
an integral part of data science with diverse and practical applications. This
project is a travel grant that supports student attendees of the Doctoral
Colloquium at the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Visualization Conference (IEEE VIS) 2020. The IEEE VIS conference is the premier
forum for advances in visualization, which consists of IEEE Visual Analytics
Science and Technology (VAST), IEEE Information Visualization (InfoVis), IEEE
Scientific Visualization (SciVis), together with various workshops and
associated events. The IEEE VIS 2020 conference will take place in Salt Lake
City, Utah, between October 25 and October 30, 2020. The Doctoral Colloquium at
IEEE VIS is a single-day event taking place the day before the IEEE VIS
conference. It is a forum that fosters the growth of young researchers in the
field of visualization. The colloquium began in 2006 and has been a highly
successful event where Ph.D. students present their proposed dissertation work
and receive mentorship from senior researchers. Many of its previous attendees
have become leaders in visualization. The colloquium aims at diversity among the
student participants. The diversity among students presenters and faculty
panelists across multi-dimensions will help all participants to appreciate
different perspectives and to think critically about diversity in education. The
colloquium also helps to establish and strengthen professional networks and
research collaborations among junior and senior researchers, which are
beneficial for the junior researchers, and critical for the advancement of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports 18 Ph.D. students in
visualization who are in the process of formulating or have just formulated a
dissertation topic. During the colloquium, these students will discuss their
research topics in a supportive environment with a panel of 6 to 8 distinguished
researchers and faculties. They will also interact closely with their peers.
They will receive feedback on their dissertation as well as advice on their
career paths. The Doctoral Colloquium is a community-building experience that
connects junior and senior researchers. It focuses on the participantsâ€™ doctoral
dissertation research. The student participants are selected based on their
research excellence and experiences. The colloquium also provides a forum for
students to exchange research ideas, communicate their on-going works, and
improve upon their research agendas. It encourages intellectual conversations
and stimulating discussions. The works presented at the event also reflects the
state-of-the-art in visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.