* 2024746
* I-Corps:  Thermal Infrared Sensitivity Enhancer Supported Breast Cancer Screening Method
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Junqiao Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The Broader impacts/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of thermal imaging tools to target breast cancer screening. With
future incorporation of artificial intelligence, a home screening kit is
envisioned that detects breast cancer without the assistance of technicians or
doctors. The large amount of data collected in the process could be used for
computer analysis to further improve oncology diagnosis and treatment, saving
thousands of lives. In addition, the method is painless, economical, and
convenient, enabling broader screening. In the longer term, the enhanced thermal
imaging tool used for screening may be also applied to screening and monitoring
of other diseases. Other applications are far-ranging and include diagnosis of
animal diseases, or improved integrated circuit inspection methods for the
semiconductor industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to explore
development of the Thermal Infrared Sensitivity Enhancer (TISE), a thin film
with an engineered materials structure, for thermography (use of a thermal
camera to image temperature distributions). Laboratory results show that TISE
improves the temperature resolution from 40 mK to approximately 3 mK, pushing
the application boundary of ambient thermography. The proposed technology
enables thermal cameras to capture more temperature details. In combination with
a thermal infrared camera, the technology provides an enhanced thermography
breast cancer screening method expected to offer similar sensitivity to
mammography, the current standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.