* 2024923
* NCS-FO: Neural mechanisms of agency in motor control and sensorimotor learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Howard Nusbaum, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 994,065.00

Reaching for a pen to write or a tool to hammer a nail are the kinds of
intentional actions produced every day. This project will advance our
understanding the conscious control of behavior by investigating the neural
mechanisms that underlie the sense of agency â€“ the feeling that one has both
intended to and executed a particular movement. Scientists are now able to
stimulate muscles electrically in order to enhance the performance of such
routine movements. For some people, this externally stimulated action is felt to
be the result of their own intentional control; for others, the action feels
externally produced and not of their own agency. By measuring the distribution
and timing of neural signals in these two situations of stimulated action that
is felt to be intentional compared to movements that are felt to be externally
controlled, the research will test cognitive and neural theories of
consciousness and subjective experience in the initiation and control of
behavior. The findings can lead to new ways of thinking about the neuroscience
of action. They can also provide guidance for the improvement of user-system
interfaces for robotic control and training methods for the future of work at
the human-technology frontier, the development of new prosthetics as well as new
rehabilitation therapies for the recovery of motor function following disease or
trauma. This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding
Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly
supported by the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will enhance typically controlled human motor movements by manipulating
them externally through functional electrical stimulation (FES), the use of a
robotic exoskeleton, or the induction of illusory motion in order to probe the
role of corollary discharge and reafferent signals in determining the time
course and strength of the sense of agency. A set of six experiments will
identify the role of agency in motor learning, the conditions under which agency
is lost, and the extent to which voluntary movements can be externally modified
without losing the sense of agency. Measurements of the activity and timing in
the motor system and in somatosensory cortex using human electroencephalography
(EEG) and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) will be used to model
neural responses. Measurements taken when enhanced movement is felt to be self-
initiated will be compared to those taken when the movement is experienced as
externally guided. This contrast between a sense of intentional agency in
enhanced movement and passive unintentional movement will be related to the
patterns of neural activity across different forms of external movement
enhancement. The sense of agency for external stimulation of action has been
predictive of improved motor learning and the neural signals related to agency
will be used to model motor learning. These analyses will be used to test
specific models of agency and consciousness in intentional action relating
efferent motor cues, the striatal reward system, and learning. Understanding the
neural mechanisms of conscious control of behavior can lead to new models for
neuroengineering and brain-inspired design, provide new information about
individual differences and variation in cognitive control of behavior and
learning, and yield new understanding of how neural processes operate in
realistic and complex environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.