* 2024418
* NCS-FO: SOUND: Understanding the Functional Neural Dynamics Underpinning Auditory Processing Dysfunctions through a Multiscale Recording-Stimulation Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kevin Spencer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 554,602.00

Auditory processing dysfunction (APD) is a common feature of many types of
psychosis, including schizophrenia, and is associated with multiple core
symptoms, including auditory verbal hallucinations (i.e. hearing voices).
Despite APDâ€™s high prevalence, affecting up to 80% of the psychotic population,
pharmaceutical therapy is ineffective: 70% of patients either have undesirable
side effects or experience persistent symptoms despite treatment. A non-
pharmacological treatment strategy, such as neuromodulation (targeted
stimulation of nerves), would meet an important medical need. Although
neuromodulation has recently emerged as a plausible therapeutic tool for a range
of neuropsychological conditions, little is understood of the abnormal neural
patterns underlying APD. This project will utilize an innovative framework,
integrating multiscale recording and stimulation, to explore APD and to
elucidate its underlying mechanisms. The project unites a multidisciplinary team
of researchers, including experts in neural signal processing, neuroscience,
psychiatry, and deep learning. The proposed work will develop computational,
data-driven approaches in real-world settings. These will investigate multimodal
signals with distinct spatiotemporal properties, integrated with a neuroimaging
study of psychosis with APD. In addition to the scientific impacts of this
proposal, the proposed work will advance national health by addressing multiple
existing gaps in neuroscience and psychiatry. The educational and outreach plans
will provide training opportunities for women and under-represented minoroties,
promoting STEM diversity in the Northeastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main thrusts. All of the
proposed frameworks are data-driven and will be tested on healthy controls and
patients with schizophrenia, in whom APD is a core feature. The first thrust
will develop a computational statistical approach to quantify hierarchical
couplings between hemodynamic infra-slow oscillations (using fNIRS), and
electrical high-frequency oscillations (using EEG), through a nested multimodal
approach in auditory task-related settings. The second thrust introduces an
innovative multimodal data fusion approach to exploit complementary strengths
from electrical and vascular dynamics, toward an integrative understanding of
APD. This will enable identification of across-subject and within-subject
signals underlying APD. The third thrust will extent beyond functional
investigations and into causal dynamics across large-scale networks. The
research will develop fused causal models, to identify subject-specific causal
patterns of APD, and to create individualized spatial target mapping for optimal
site stimulation. The precise locations of aberrant causal patterns will be
targets for transcranial direct-current stimulation (tDCS). Project outcomes
include the introduction of an innovative computational data fusion approach to
bridge distinct spatiotemporal scales; discovery of latent signatures and causal
patterns of APD through novel neural information processing; insight into APD
hierarchical mechanisms, and understanding of the cortical modulatory properties
of APD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.