* 2024973
* Research Initiation: Expanding the Boundaries of Ethical Reasoning and Professional Responsibility in Engineering Education Through Critical Narrative
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Jeff Brown, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2023
* USD 151,837.00

Future employers, institutions of higher education, and accreditors like ABET
expect undergraduate engineering graduates to possess critical thinking skills.
Critical thinking requires engineering students to make informed technical
decisions that include diverse stakeholders and complex solutions. To achieve
growth in their critical thinking, engineering students should also learn about
ethics and professional responsibility. As research shows, engineering students
need opportunities to practice the emotional infrastructure that’s required for
engagement with myriad issues related to complex real-world solutions. The basic
and foundational tenets of engineering require a commitment to professional
ideals that elevate public health, safety, and the welfare of communities, while
also acknowledging the complex interactions between social, environmental, and
economic factors. This research project will focus on engineering ethics and
professional responsibility by investigating the use of critical narratives as a
teaching and learning tool in the professional formation of engineers. Critical
narratives are structured, placed-based stories, intended to foster connections
between the audience as well as specific cultures and communities. This research
supports stated goals of the NSF Professional Formation of Engineers (PFE)
program by gathering empirical evidence related to engineering students’
critical thinking, ethics, and professional responsibility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing an understanding of how engineering students
perceive the broader impacts of their chosen profession, especially as
articulated through the lens of ethics and professional responsibility, is an
important first step in addressing professional formation. The current model of
engineering education, focused primarily on technical proficiency, leaves little
room for the structured and integrated exploration of these broader impacts.
Therefore, this project’s goal is to improve critical thinking in undergraduate
engineering students through a new educational intervention aimed at enhancing
ethics and professional responsibility in undergraduate engineering students.
Evaluation of the intervention will be performed using experimental and control
groups. Quantitative data will consist of engineering student responses to the
Ethics and Professional Responsibility Assessment (EPRA) survey. Qualitative
data will consist of engineering students’ written responses to critical
narratives completed throughout their two-semester Senior Design sequence,
including responses to publicly-available critical narratives and students’
final design reports. Researchers will code these written artifacts for evidence
of critical thinking related to ethics and professional responsibility. This
research will provide much-needed validation of a potentially transformative
teaching method for undergraduate engineering education. By connecting the
engineering curriculum more closely to the development of students’ values
around ethics and professional responsibility, this project will lay the
foundation for future engineering professionals to more effectively engage with
complex problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.