* 2024958
* SBIR Phase II:  Determination of complex outcome measures using narrative clinical data to enable observational trials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Daniel Riskin, VERANTOS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,198,117.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a software application that
identifies clinical outcomes to support high validity real-world evidence (RWE).
Approaches to ensure data accuracy and protocol validity are critical to
maintain safety and efficacy in healthcare. This project will analyze electronic
health data to generate clinically meaningful information for personalized
treatment plans for patients with multiple conditions that can confound
treatment. This technology will fulfill an unmet need to improve patient
outcomes, improve healthcare delivery and chronic disease care management, and
reduce healthcare costs for patients. This technology can also improve
regulatory and reimbursement decision-making for therapeutic
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will address the
need for consideration of using additional health data to allow for
individualized personalized therapeutic plans for patients with multiple co-
morbidities. Subgroup analysis or individualized therapy plans for precision
medicine are currently not available based upon the structure of randomized
controlled trials for broad conditions like breast cancer or hypertension. This
proposal seeks to identify clinical outcomes from unstructured Electronic Health
Records (EHR). The proposed work is to develop analytics using natural language
processing and inference to leverage the large amounts of health data from real-
world evidence (RWE) and observational studies to augment data provided in
randomized controlled trials (RCT). The analytic tools will allow a comparison
of the effectiveness of various treatment protocols in defined cohorts of
patients and develop a personalized treatment plan for an individual patient
with multiple co-morbidities. The tasks include: 1) Leverage linguistic phrases
extracted by natural language processing (NLP) to recognize outcome-related
clinical findings to be maintained as clinical feature metadata; 2) Combine NLP
and inference to accurately identify candidate clinical outcomes; and 3) Apply
machine-learned and expert knowledge to accurately define complex outcome
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.