* 2024208
* An AON-USArray observing network in Arctic Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Michael West, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,069,279.00

PUBLIC ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a distributed
network of multi-sensor platforms (i.e., an AON-USArray) across the U.S. Arctic.
The Arctic is changing rapidly. Arctic temperatures are increasing at more than
twice the global average. Sea ice is retreating. Permafrost is thawing.
Collectively, these factors are altering Arctic landscapes as well as the
behavior and ranges of wildlife. Wildfire is extending into areas that
previously did not burn. Retreating glaciers and thawing ground are increasing
landslides. Real-time data are crucial to understanding these impacts and the
underlying drivers. This new project is repurposing transportable array stations
in Alaska to track environmental change by transitioning ownership and
operational responsibilities for 45 stations in northern and western Alaska.
These 45 stations cover 8% of the U.S. land area in a region where monitoring is
sparse at best, and nonexistent in many places. These stations fill critical
data gaps and support a range of science by streaming data types from co-located
sensors. Meteorological sensors fill major holes in weather and climate
observations. Soil temperature probes track the progressive warming of the soil
and decay of permafrost. Weather and soil observations, in turn, support
wildfire modeling. In addition to earthquakes and landslides, signals from the
seismic sensors can track environmental changes tied to glacier movement and sea
ice thickness. Infrasound, sound waves below the threshold of human hearing,
track these observations from the solid earth into the atmosphere. The facility
operating under this award provides wide benefit because of its large geographic
extent, grid-like spacing, and the broad assemblage of sensor types that
combines atmospheric with solid earth capabilities. All data from the facility
are open-access and disseminated through well-established community data
portals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-sensor AON-USArray stations define the
state-of-the-art in lightweight, remote Arctic sensor platforms. The AON-USArray
stations capture wind speed and direction, precipitation, barometric pressure,
temperature, relative humidity, broadband seismic, infrasound, and soil
temperature at depths up to 3 meters. The value of the network is enhanced by
the variety of instruments located at each station, encouraging cross-
disciplinary research. This network includes an evaluation of the AON-USArray
data in the context of comparable datasets. The research evaluation of the data
is important for deciding (i) whether the network should be sustained beyond the
end of the project; (ii) what changes or enhancements will improve the data; and
(iii) how to engage new stakeholders in the projects. These evaluations will be
conducted within the context of larger studies already underway by the PIs and
collaborators. Except for soil temperature (which is retrieved on-site), data
are streamed in real-time through satellite and cellular telemetry, providing
important tests of these evolving technologies and their feasibility for use in
remote science applications. Beyond research, real-time data from the project
are in use by other federal agencies including the Bureau of Land Management,
the Department of Defense, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
and the US Geological Survey. The project has the potential to expand this set
of stakeholders and partnerships significantly by providing long-term time-
series data and by expanding the current sensor capabilities. These partnerships
will grow the suite of sensor capabilities and sustain the facility as a long-
term platform beyond the lifespan of this AON project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.