* 2024488
* NRI: INT: Co-Robot Controllers for Human-Like Physical Interaction and Improved Motor Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jose Pons, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,499,013.00

Human-like robots, which perform shared tasks with humans in common workspaces,
have increased application in home and office services, in rehabilitation and
skill training, and in capability enhancement. Digital technologies have enabled
these ubiquitous robots with easier and faster human-like audio-visual
interactions. However, the lack of physical interaction has posed a significant
barrier to human-robot shared tasks, which is essential in applications that
require complex physical interactions during the shared tasks. A great number of
studies on physical interaction between human dyads or pairs have been conducted
during the past decade. Several studies showed that dyadic physical interaction
improves the performance of two individuals working together on shared tasks
compared to working alone. Amazingly, results showed that human dyads not only
perform better, but also learn new tasks faster. Therefore, understanding how
human dyads physically interact can be applied while provide insight in
developing human-like robots, which to mimic human behavior when performing
shared tasks with other humans or robots. The vision of this work is to
understand the underlying mechanisms of human dyadic physical interaction that
lead to improvement in motor performances and learning rates, and to integrate
this knowledge in developing new robotic controllers. Additionally, the
infrastructure of the controller and findings will be shared as open source, and
educational programs will be developed to support the advancement of the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many factors that define the physical
interaction between dyads, such as the interactive behavior (i.e.,
collaboration, competition, cooperation), haptic connection (i.e., impedance
levels), and skill levels of the dyads (i.e., novice-novice and expert-novice).
Therefore, a systematic approach that can quantitatively compare each condition
is crucial. To realize the vision of this work, a novel exoskeleton-based dyadic
interaction infrastructure will be implemented to study physical dyadic
interaction with multiple DOF and multiple contact points by providing virtual
connections of varying and controllable impedance between the exoskeleton
systems. This infrastructure will be utilized to reveal comprehensive knowledge
of how the task performance and motor learning of peers in dyadic haptic
interaction are affected by 1) physical interactive behaviors, 2) impedance of
the multi-joint virtual connection, and 3) the skill level of peers. Then, new
human-like controllers, namely, co3-robot controllers where the suffix co3
refers to robots endowed with collaborative, competitive, and cooperative human-
like interactive motor behaviors, will be synthesized based on a force-impedance
adaptation model and a neural network feedback error learning model of
interacting peers. Finally, the co3-robot controller will be implemented to a
lower limb exoskeleton and will be validated by passing a haptic Turing test,
showing that the controller is indistinguishable from a human partner during
dyadic physical interactions. As a result of this research, this work has the
potential to enhance existing tools and devices with a haptic communication
modality, thus supporting joint physical action between humans and
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.