* 2024774
* NRI: INT: Robotic Shepherding for Flow Control in Uncertain Dynamic Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kevin Lynch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,429,410.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will promote the progress of science,
advance the national prosperity and welfare, and secure the national defense by
advancing multi-robot team abilities to assist in disaster evacuation and crowd
control to protect humans, minimize casualty and economic damage. To achieve
this goal, the team will develop hardware and software for distributed
estimation, control, and machine learning for networked multi-robot shepherding.
The developed algorithms will have broad applicability in a variety of other
applications, including cloud robotics, machine learning, and automated
fulfillment. This project will produce one hundred low-cost wheeled mobile
robots to experimentally test the algorithms on a large-scale flock of robots.
The ’shepherd’ and ’sheep’ robots will be capable of being teleoperated,
allowing humans to participate in heterogeneous teleoperated-autonomous teams.
The algorithms developed in this project will be tested in collaboration with
the Army Research Lab (ARL), increasing the likelihood of transition of the
theory to near-term application. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
supported with this grant, who will also have opportunity to demonstrate their
work to thousands of school children each year at the Chicago Museum of Science
and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve effective shepherding,
this project will develop novel algorithms for distributed estimation of the
shape of the herded flock, distributed optimal control of the shape of the
flock, and machine learning of the dynamics of the flock. These algorithms will
be supplemented by a rigorous analysis of the stability of the interacting
estimation, learning, and control laws. The ambitious objectives of this work
require fundamental advances in several related areas, including distributed
optimization and estimation; distributed machine learning; stability of coupled
learning and control systems; network controllability and observability. To
achieve these breakthroughs, the research will build on recent results by the
team of PIs on passivity theory for coupled distributed estimators and
controllers, flexible first order distributed optimization algorithms. The
experimental validation and human-interaction studies require a new generation
of teleoperable swarm robots. Taking advantage of the latest generation of low-
cost high-performance hardware, this project will create a flock of one hundred
small but highly capable wheeled robots, at a price point an order of magnitude
less expensive than any comparable commercially available swarm
robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.