* 2024466
* Research Initiation: Infusing Culturally Relevant Pedagogy (CRP) at the Start of the Engineering Mechanics Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Daniel Castaneda, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Engineering students are entering the profession at a time when technical
challenges are increasingly complex and societal inequities abound. There are
countless examples, though, where the engineering profession has not met the
needs of this increasingly diverse society. In one example, facial recognition
security software is failing to uniquely identify African-American and Asian
faces at rates of 10 to 100 times higher than Caucasian faces. In another,
artificial intelligence systems misconstrue disabled persons as ‘obstacles’
rather than as ‘humans’ in algorithmic decisions in collision avoidance
scenarios. A recurring theme in these examples is engineers designing artifacts
that meet the needs of the majority while failing to meet the needs of
underrepresented groups. These inequities are not intentionally fueled by the
engineering profession alone; rather, they are fueled by many of the professions
– engineering among them – simply not knowing or acknowledging the full
ramification of their decisions and decision-making processes toward non-
dominant groups. This shortcoming in mindset must be challenged so that the
United States can uncover the full range of opportunities associated with
broadening both participation and perspectives in curricula, design processes,
and professional practices. This project will generate evidence toward a
teaching practice that seeks to broaden students’ mindset to be more critical of
societal inequities in the context of an introductory engineering mechanics
course. The study will be led by a PI who is new to the field of engineering
formation research, and the PI will be mentored and guided through research
methods by an education researcher, which aligns with the RIEF program’s goals
of initiating new researchers into engineering formation research that seeks to
meet the needs of the dynamic and diverse workforce. Undertaking such research
holds the promise of realizing new teaching practices that influence both
instructors’ and students’ ability to emerge as change agents. This project will
also provide evidence to support inclusive practices in the classroom and in the
workplace, which helps respond to the needs of an increasingly complex and
diverse society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a curricular intervention
will be grounded in a culturally relevant pedagogy (CRP) framework and explored
for its ability to foster a change-agent mindset in engineering students in a
targeted course: statics and dynamics – which is the typical entry point to the
engineering mechanics curriculum. A mixed-methods (sequential design) approach
will be used to measure student attitudes, perceptions, and successes in meeting
the three tenets of CRP, namely the development of students’ academic
achievement, sociocultural (or multicultural) competence, and critical
consciousness. The extent of students’ mindset development will be measured by
three specific research questions: 1) to what extent does the intervention shift
students’ academic preparedness; 2) how are students’ multicultural competence
and racial attitudes developed as a result of the intervention; and 3) how are
students’ sense of social-, environmental-, and economic-justice issues in
engineering influenced by the intervention? A blend of validated instruments
found in the social sciences literature will be used to quantitively answer
those research questions. Focus groups will be conducted to generate qualitative
narratives that add value and insight to the quantitative measures. The outcomes
of this study will generate valuable knowledge in this intervention’s design
toward teaching practices that foster inclusive and critically conscious
teaching and learning practices. The overall goal of this research is to explore
a curricular intervention’s ability to enhance engineering students’ mindset
toward change advocacy when the intervention is grounded in a CRP
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.