* 2024226
* I-Corps:  New image processing programs and data modeling algorithms for education environments
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Amir Miri, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an AI (artificial intelligence) solution that is aimed at
enhancing student active learning. This technology platform is aimed at
providing dynamic assessments of student performance throughout the academic
year. The AI technology triggers timely interventions by providing early
detection of struggling students as well as students with special talents.
Unlike traditional platforms, this solution uses a combination of factors such
as students’ behavior in the classroom, homework grades ,and regular test scores
to evaluate risk levels and recommends generalized and personalized feedback
plus identified routines for improving student learning performance. The
platform also will communicate students’ progress to students/parents/teachers
regularly. The proposed technology may enhance the learning experience by taking
an approach that excludes the flaws of current system surfaced by the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an AI (artificial intelligence) solution that uses advanced analytics to
enhance students' learning performance. The proposed technology uses a a
combination of AI tools such as computer vision, deep learning, machine
learning, and natural language processing to thoroughly analyze students’
behavior inside and outside the classroom. It provides important prescriptive
analytics and uses recommendation systems and collaborative filtering to provide
dynamic feedback and identifies successful routines for improving the student
learning performance. This project is based on several behavior data science
studies and the power of advanced analytics for generating data-driven insights
in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.