* 2024520
* NRI: INT: Adaptive Bio-inspired Co-Robot algorithms for volcano monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,495,437.00

There are an estimated 500 volcanoes that emit volcanic gases to the atmosphere.
This project will design, build, and field-test a collaborative swarm of flying
robots called the Volcano Co-robot Adaptive Natural algorithms (VolCAN) swarm.
The VolCAN swarm will transform our ability to forecast volcanic eruptions. The
swarm consists of multiple autonomous aerial drones that use algorithms inspired
by biology to monitor the unpredictable environments surrounding volcanoes. In
addition to monitoring gasses that precede volcanic eruptions, thereby
protecting human lives, it will also measure how much carbon dioxide is emitted
from volcanoes to better understand how they contribute to the global carbon
budget. The VolCAN swarm can adapt to environmental conditions autonomously in
real time, and it can also be guided by scientists to collect scientific data
during the battery-limited flights of small drones. Our approach leverages the
advantages of bio-inspired algorithms that are fast rather than perfectly
accurate, and resilient rather than centrally controlled. The project will
broaden participation in computing by involving students from underrepresented
groups in both robotics research and programming
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop, analyze and rigorously
test a co-robot swarm of unpiloted air vehicles (UAVs) that collect valuable
scientific data in dynamic and unpredictable environments. The VolCAN swarm will
use bio-inspired algorithms to detect CO2 plumes, descend plume gradients to
measure maximum flux of CO2 from ground sources, estimate plume size, and infer
maps of multiple CO2 sources over hundreds of square kilometers. Given battery
limitations on flight times and dangerous, unpredictable conditions, the
algorithms prioritize speed, robustness and interpretability over high accuracy.
The novel bio-inspired algorithms scale to cover vast areas, adapt to the sensed
environment to focus monitoring on the most important regions in real time, and
are fast enough to collect many simultaneous emissions within the limited
battery life of small UAV. Theoretical analyses will determine bounds on the
speed and convergence times of the algorithms, and simulations and frequent
field tests will measure the performance of the VolCAN system in rigorous,
replicated experiments. Additionally, the project will demonstrate that
scientists can operate the VolCAN swarm to collect data in the field with either
fully autonomous adaptive surveillance or with scientist guidance. This approach
combines human flexibility and judgment with the speed and mobility of a UAV
swarm. The project will demonstrate the broad applicability of the VolCAN swarm
in environmental monitoring applications in experiments to measure methane
emissions from pipelines and assess ecological health of plant communities. It
will also show that bio-inspired robots can function outside of highly-
structured factories, labs, and warehouses to gather valuable scientific data in
the hazardous and unpredictable environments of active
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.