* 2024426
* EAGER: An exploratory investigation of the impact of the Center for Diverse Leadership in Science logic model on faculty and student development
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Robert Eagle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2023
* USD 359,994.00

The goal of this EAGER project is to examine the impacts of the UCLA Center for
Diverse Leadership in Science (CDLS) faculty and trainee development models on
ocean science education. The CDLS faculty development model aims to grow faculty
skills in inclusive mentoring, inclusive teaching, and cultural awareness, and
put these skills into practice. The trainee development model includes
constructing learning environments to promote experiential learning, science
identity, and social belonging, through team-based research, team-based
outreach, and technical and higher skills development, with vertical and peer
mentorship. For both faculty and trainees, CDLS builds communities of learning
and practice. This project would do exploratory work to adapt and assess a new
set of logic models for broadening participation in ocean sciences. It would
create new curricular materials and implement them to transition a traditional
theoretical undergraduate curriculum in a non-diverse department (Atmospheric
and Oceanic Sciences) into one that includes extracurricular field
opportunities, problems-based activities, community outreach, and service
learning. It will also impact teaching in two additional departments (Earth,
Planetary, and Space Sciences, Environmental Science) where participants and
collaborators teach. A broader aim will be to reach 200+ students/year once
created, of which 25% will be from underrepresented groups. The project would
support multiple trainees including undergraduates and graduate students from
underrepresented groups, and an early career project scientist, as well as
support partnerships with multiple high schools and youth centers in low-income
minority neighborhoods, and a non-profit. Through assessment, conference
presentations, and an initial manuscript on the results, the PIs will document
learning gains, engagement, higher skills, persistence, and broadening
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the impact of the
CDLS logic models in ocean science education, and specifically will assess the
impacts of the team's approaches on growth of 1) inclusive mentoring and
teaching practices, and actions that relate to enhanced cultural awareness in
faculty, and 2) engagement, grades, retention, science identity, and social
belonging in trainees through stated activities. This approach should increase
opportunities for undergraduate students to have hands-on and meaningful
learning experiences in oceanography, that also promotes inclusion and the
recruitment and retention of students from underrepresented groups in the field,
while at the same time supporting the persistence of graduate students and early
career scientists from underrepresented groups in the field. To achieve project
goals, PIs will 1) grow cultural awareness skills and practices in current and
future ocean science educators, through completion of mentoring curriculum by
project participants, 2) undergraduate students working in teams with project
participants from underrepresented groups by 3) curriculum modification, 4)
field-based experiences, 5) service-learning projects with a local non-profit,
and 6) student-created public ocean science engagement projects. PIs predict the
focus on using oceanographic knowledge in service to address current problems,
community outreach, and experiential learning, along with the provision of team-
based work and concordant role models, will support high levels of recruitment,
persistence, and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.