* 2024794
* NRI: INT: Dexterous Compliant Manipulation Using Delta Robot Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Henny Admoni, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,514,476.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will promote the progress of science
and advance the national prosperity and welfare by creating novel dexterous
robotic manipulators consisting of arrays of compliant delta robots. Many
collaborative robot (co-robot) applications require safe, dexterous, and
delicate manipulation around people. For example, in the physically assistive
task of helping people take medication, a robot must be able to open a pill
bottle, grasp a small pill, and gently feed that pill to a human. All of these
tasks require sophisticated manipulation abilities, which are naturally
performed by humans using their fingers and fingertips, but most current robot
manipulators are lacking. The human hand is not the only form factor capable of
achieving dexterous and delicate manipulation. This grant focuses on building
dexterous manipulators consisting of arrays of small compliant robots that work
in sync to achieve sophisticated manipulation skills. Accessible fabrication
techniques like 3D printing lower barriers to access for robotic technologies,
which makes these robots great candidates not only as assistive co-robots in
healthcare and other applications but also as educational tools from K-12 to
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project covers the full pipeline of
development for a novel co-robot manipulation system, contributing: (1) Hardware
design and fabrication of individual delta robots, investigating novel
combinations of geometry, materials, actuation, and sensorization using modular
and easily replicable components; (2) Control models that can actively calibrate
themselves and handle real-time variations caused by fabrication imperfections
or wear and tear; (3) Manipulation strategies that coordinate a distributed
array of delta robots into a single effective manipulator, capable of
sophisticated manipulations such as in-hand object rotation; and (4) Design of
human-robot interactions that address performance, safety, and human perception
in close-proximity physically assistive tasks. This transformative research
expands the design space of parallel manipulators, enabling them to be used as
safe and compliant robotic fingers. The delta robot arrays are customizable for
a specific task and scale well through their modular design and unified
framework for coordination. Accessible manufacturing methods like 3D printing
and laser machining, along with the robots' self-calibrating control models,
lower barriers to entry for widespread use. Last but not least, these safe,
dexterous, and compliant robotic fingers can have an impact on society by
enabling the development of manipulators that assist humans with important
physical activities such as taking medication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.