* 2024233
* Collaborative Research: RUI: HNDS-I: Data Resources and Analytic Tools to Understand Population Scale Human Mobility for Applications in SBE Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Paul Muniz, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,143.00

This project develops privacy-centric methods along with data and software
resources for understanding population-scale human mobility and its relationship
with social, behavioral, and economic (SBE) dynamics through the creation of a
large-scale database and tools. Human mobility, which includes knowing where
people are, have been, and go to, is an essential feature for understanding SBE
issues emerging from transitions through physical space. By better understanding
the movement behavior of people, researchers can explore important areas of
inquiry including economic patterns, segregation, inter-group dynamics, as well
as a range of other SBE areas of interest. The project provides new
opportunities for advancing such research. It will also provide educational and
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops community-level mobility models based on the
aggregate movement of groups of cell devices through cell tower coverage areas
of a national network. The project creates a privacy-centric alternative to
mapping human spatial mobility that does not rely on device-level geolocation
data. Specifically, the project will provide (1) a data repository containing
human mobility network captured over various temporal intervals; (2) open-source
software tools and user-friendly web applications for retrieving, processing,
visualizing, and preparing these data for analyses in standard software
packages; (3) interactive tutorials and instructional materials suitable for
self-guided learning to familiarize users with the use of provided data, tools,
and software packages; and (4) case use examples and illustrative studies to
further our understanding of the relationship between the social world and human
movement. Using the tools this project provides, researchers from a wide range
of disciplines can answer important questions broadly concerned with the
projection of social reality onto dynamic physical
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.