* 2024588
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Learning and Improving Alzheimer's Patient-Caregiver Relationships via Smart Healthcare Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Karen Rose, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 426,192.00

Over 80% of people with Alzheimer's disease or a related dementia are cared for
in their home environments by family members. Family caregivers often report
increased anxiety and depression, and many forego their own health needs as the
demands of being a family caregiver are sustained over many years. It is also
known that poor interactions between patient and caregiver increase the
difficulty of providing care. Monitoring reactivity between patient and
caregiver could signal when problematic interactions might occur. Just-in-time
or even predictive recommendations in those moments could improve these
interactions and reduce strain on caregivers. This project develops a
monitoring, modeling, and interactive recommendation solution (for caregivers)
for in-home dementia patient care that focuses on caregiver-patient
relationships. This includes monitoring for mood and stress and analyzing the
significance of monitoring those attributes to dementia patient care and
subsequent behavior dynamics between patient and caregiver. In addition, novel
and adaptive behavioral suggestions at the right moments aim at helping improve
familial interactions related to caregiving, which over time should ameliorate
the stressful effects of the patient's illness and decrease strain on
caregivers. This work could also benefit nursing homes and assisted living
facilities by improving care for their residents, and could be useful for other
caregiving situations, including the care of children with emotional/behavioral
challenges who are cared for at home by their families. Educational modules
introduce both healthcare students and technology students to this
multidisciplinary area of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical solution
consists of a core set of statistical learning based techniques for automated
generation of specialized modules required by in-home dementia patient care.
Personalization, context, and stages of dementia all contribute to the need for
specialized modules; and without new solutions for rapid and automatic
generation of these specialized modules, progress in effective treatment and
patient/caregiver relationship improvement will be very difficult and slow.
There are three main technical components in the solution. The first obtains
textual content and prosody from voice and uses machine learning techniques to
create classification models. This approach not only monitors patients'
behavior, but also caregivers', and infers the underlying dynamics of their
interactions, such as changes in mood and stress. The second is the automated
creation of classifiers and inference modules tailored to the particular
patients and dementia conditions (such as different stages of dementia). The
third is an adaptive recommendation system that closes the loop of an in-home
behavior monitoring system. The main technical contribution is the quick and
accurate development of personalized smart and connected health platforms and
the potential for reduced medical costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.