* 2024018
* U.S. annual dues support for the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC) and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) – 2020-2022
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Laurie Geller, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 87,854.00

The Polar Research Board (PRB) of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine serves as the U.S. National Committee to two
international organizations: the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC),
and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). SCAR helps advance
Antarctic research by implementing new research initiatives, identifying
emerging scientific themes, promoting international cooperation and
partnerships, and providing scientific advice to the Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty on issues related to the management and protection of the Antarctic
region and the Southern Ocean. IASC encourages and facilitates international
cooperation in Arctic research, provides scientific input to the Arctic Council
and other international policy organizations, and helps support international
science development, including numerous opportunities for early career
researchers. U.S. annual dues for these organizations provides a foundation for
advancing opportunities and interests of the U.S. polar research community, and
for assuring continued progress in international-level research and
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Arctic Science Committee
(IASC) and Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) are unique
organizations that provide opportunities for U.S. scientists to develop research
partnerships with polar science colleagues in other countries around the world.
IASC’s efforts to facilitate international cooperation in Arctic research are
advanced through activities such as: the annual Arctic Science Summit Week
gatherings; the individual and cross-cutting initiatives of IASC’s Working
Groups (Atmosphere, Cryosphere, Marine, Social and Human, Terrestrial); the
Arctic Data Committee and Sustaining Arctic Observing Networks; and the IASC
Fellowship Program, which helps early career researchers get involved in
workshops, science planning activities and research programs. SCAR’s efforts to
promote international scientific cooperation in Antarctica are advanced through
activities such as the biennial business meetings and Open Science Conference;
the SCAR Biology Symposium and Antarctic Earth Sciences Symposia; the SCAR Early
Career Fellowship and Visiting Professor programs; the program planning efforts
of SCAR's Scientific Groups (Geosciences, Life Sciences, Physical Sciences); and
the Scientific Research Programmes that are the main focus of SCAR’s
international scientific coordination. These SCAR and IASC activities help early
career scientists expand research interests and develop professional
connections; they help ensure that important policy decisions about managing and
protecting the polar regions are based on sound scientific assessment; and they
help advance scientific objectives that would be impossible for single
investigators, programs, or countries to do alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.