* 2024574
* Collaborative Research: Effects of sulfate on boron incorporation into calcite:  Relevance and implications for foraminiferal boron isotope and B/Ca paleo-proxies.
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Noah Planavsky, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 69,378.00

Microscopic fossil shells can provide records of ocean chemistry in the past.
The boron to calcium ratio (B/Ca) and boron isotopic composition (d11B) of such
fossils are widely used to record seawater pH and carbon chemistry. These
records provide valuable insights into past changes in atmospheric carbon
dioxide and the global carbon cycle. Recent experiments show that the addition
of sulfate ions increases the amount of B incorporated into carbonate minerals.
The proposed study will explore how and why B incorporation is enhanced by
sulfate. It also will examine if sulfate influences the d11B of synthetic
calcite. And the study will use culture experiments to assess whether the boron
chemistry of biogenic calcite is impacted by seawater sulfate. This will be a
crucial test of the reliability of d11B and B/Ca fossil records, since seawater
sulfate has varied substantially over the last 60 million years. The project
also will provide training for graduate and undergraduate students and
educational outreach activities to local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study integrates inorganic calcite precipitation experiments and foraminiferal
culturing to investigate the mechanistic link between B incorporation and
sulfate (SO42−) and its relevance to biological systems using benthic
foraminifers as the model organism. First, we will comprehensively analyze δ11B,
B/Ca and other trace elements (S/Ca and Na/Ca) of synthetic calcite precipitated
in solutions added with aqueous B and variable amounts of SO42−. Second, we will
grow sub-mm scale calcite crystals in growth solutions added with aqueous B
and/or SO42−, and compare the intra-crystal distribution/zonation of B and S
using a secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS). Finally, we will culture a well-
studied species of benthic foraminifera under various seawater SO42−
concentrations. If foraminiferal δ11B and B/Ca are indeed sensitive to changes
in seawater SO42−, we will provide the equations to account for the SO42−
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.