* 2024813
* NRI: FND: The Robotic Rehab Gym: Specialized co-robot trainers working with multiple human trainees for optimal learning outcomes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Vesna Novak, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 565,169.00

This award will support research that will obtain new fundamental knowledge
about how groups of robots can effectively teach different skills to groups of
humans. While groups of robots can already assist groups of humans, existing
research has mainly focused on short-term performance enhancement and/or safety
and health. Instead, this project will advance the concept of a "robotic gym":
multiple specialized robotic trainers that teach multiple different skills to
groups of humans, with each robotic trainer focusing on different skills and
each human learner having different initial abilities and different potential
for improvement. This represents a long-term planning problem with significant
uncertainty (especially since current performance cannot always predict future
improvement), and will be addressed with advanced artificial intelligence
techniques that will be evaluated both in simulations and in actual human
subjects studies. Results of the research will advance national health and
wellbeing in many ways. They can most directly be used for robot-aided training
in motor rehabilitation, sports, and surgery; furthermore, they can be broadly
applied to any setting where machines are used to train groups of humans,
including education and weight loss. The team will also develop new
interdisciplinary courses in human-robot interaction, and will perform outreach
about robotics to multiple groups, especially K-12 and community college
students and teachers around Wyoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be
divided into three complementary work packages that will develop three elements
of a proposed "robotic gym" - a multi-robot system that teaches multiple skills
to groups of humans. The first work package will create an intelligent system
that dynamically allocates multiple human trainees to multiple robotic trainers
with the goal of maximizing individual and group training outcomes. The second
work package will create ways of predicting future training outcome based on
measurements of current and past performance, which can be used as a basis for
decision-making by the intelligent allocation system. Finally, the third work
package will create a collaborative human-robot planning framework that allows
the robotic gym to learn training strategies from human experts (e.g.,
therapists) and to provide decision support to human experts, thus combining the
complementary advantages of human and machine intelligence. The robotic gym will
be evaluated in two ways throughout the project. First, the created software
will be evaluated in simulations with many different variables (e.g., number of
robots and humans, degree of uncertainty about current performance), providing
the research community with detailed information about expected effectiveness in
different scenarios. Second, it will be used to teach multiple challenging arm
motions to groups of human participants using multiple robots available at the
University of Wyoming, providing proof of feasibility for future applied
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.