* 2024103
* I-Corps: Smart Street Parking Assistant
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Wei Cheng, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology for smart street parking. An estimated thirty percent
of all traffic in the average U.S. city consists of vehicles searching for
parking spots. Finding street parking in big cities can be challenging; the time
spent searching is long, signage may be confusing or misinterpreted, and errors
can be expensive (ticketed or towed). This could be mitigated with: (i) Street
parking planning identifying suitable parking areas in advance of a trip, and
(ii) curb-surfing verify the parking rules. The estimated market size for smart
parking is $3.8 B. The proposed technology offers these two essential street
parking services to drivers, delivery providers, and smart vehicle/smart city
infrastructure through apps and APIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a series of machine learning algorithms and IoT
technologies. Specifically, the novel techniques are developed and used in the
following steps: (i) Street parking sign detection from pictures/videos taken by
cameras on smartphones/vehicles; (ii) text recognition from the detected street
parking signs; (iii) Natural language processing (NLP) used to generate parking
rules; (iv) allowed parking time calculation; and (v) trust evaluation in
crowdsourcing. This technology focuses on street parking sign recognition and
interpretation. Although there are many AI-based object detection and text
recognition techniques, typically they do not work well in these applications as
the text on street parking signs is different and signs vary among cities. In
addition, the technology addresses the challenge of distinguishing parking signs
from other co-located signs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.