* 2024493
* EAGER: Distributed Network Optimization and Consensus with Event-Driven Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Eyad Abed, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The objective of this research is to develop techniques to allow multiple
decision makers to jointly solve optimization and learning problems through
individual computations and with limited communications among the decision
makers contributing to an area known as distributed optimization and learning.
Here, each decision maker is viewed as an intelligent agent, modeled as a node
in a network of agents. Communication between the agents can occur only if their
nodes are connected by a link of the network graph. This framework allows
modeling of large systems consisting of multiple agents where each agent
collects data from the environment as well as from its neighboring agents. The
agents process the received data and communicate with one another over time.
This research project aims to extend existing knowledge by reducing the
requirement that nodes must communicate acknowledgments from neighboring nodes
and reducing the amount of communication by using event-driven communications,
where communication between neighboring nodes is triggered by the occurrence of
pre-defined events. Applications considered include networks of unmanned aerial
vehicles and electric power grids. The project will provide an impact on
students at the university and through outreach to local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will pose novel
problems for distributed networks of communicating agents tasked with achieving
goals defined globally while using limited communication. The project also aims
to define new applications-motivated distributed network problems, to make
theoretical headway on these problems, and to pursue several applications of the
theory in detail. A main goal of this work is to extend existing algorithms to
the event-triggered framework. These events can be defined in terms of local
system variables meeting certain conditions, or as arrival events where certain
types of information are received from the external environment. The research
project will model both types of events as well as their influence on the
dynamics of distributed decision making. For exogenous arriving information, the
researchers will consider occasional arrivals of exogenous data at a smaller set
of specialized nodes. Stability of the designed distributed algorithms will be
analyzed relative to the arrival processes, the network dynamics, and the graph
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.