* 2024283
* HNDS-I: Linked Administrative Data in Social Services
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hilary Hoynes, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,999.00

The Linkage Initiative for Policy Evaluation and Research (LIPER) will create
unique databases&lt;br/&gt;to support innovative social science research. The
new databases will support new&lt;br/&gt;understandings of how households use
debt and assets to weather volatility and make longterm&lt;br/&gt;decisions;
better diagnosis of the strengths and weaknesses of the social safety net and
its&lt;br/&gt;efficacy in supporting self-sufficiency; and new insights into the
impacts of the full suite of&lt;br/&gt;government programs and services on a
variety of outcomes, from health to housing stability to&lt;br/&gt;justice
involvement. The databases will use administrative microdata, which is person-
level data&lt;br/&gt;that is collected by state and local agencies in the
process of providing services. Government is&lt;br/&gt;already collecting these
data, and the project will unlock their value for understanding
population&lt;br/&gt;needs and the efficacy of policies in meeting these needs.
The LIPER databases will be&lt;br/&gt;particularly valuable for inclusive
research involving a wide range of underrepresented groups&lt;br/&gt;and for
understanding the complex dynamics of racial and economic equity. Access to
the&lt;br/&gt;LIPER databases will allow investigators across a wide range of
social science fields to&lt;br/&gt;generate accurate and actionable insights
leading to more informed public policy and,&lt;br/&gt;ultimately, to improved
individual well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIPER databases will each link
data from multiple agencies. Linked data of this type is&lt;br/&gt;increasingly
important for breakthrough research. Yet in the United States, legal and
technical&lt;br/&gt;barriers often prevent it from being used by researchers.
LIPER will develop data resources,&lt;br/&gt;including linkages across
previously separate data systems; build mechanisms and&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure
to support wide access of researchers to the data for a range of projects,
while&lt;br/&gt;preserving privacy and security; and provide opportunities for
the next generation of social&lt;br/&gt;science researchers to build their
research programs with LIPER data resources. It will build on&lt;br/&gt;existing
relationships that the LIPER project researchers have with California agencies
and will&lt;br/&gt;be housed within the California Policy Lab at UC Berkeley and
UCLA, which is dedicated to&lt;br/&gt;using data driven insights to address
urgent social problems. LIPER will be built within a secure&lt;br/&gt;computer
infrastructure that allows remote access for approved researchers. The
LIPER&lt;br/&gt;website will allow researchers to explore public metadata and
the team will review applications&lt;br/&gt;for researchers to access the data
in a streamlined fashion. The team will also innovate on&lt;br/&gt;methods for
linking data without access to personally identifiable
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.