* 2024775
* NRI: FND: Immersive whole-body teleoperation of wheeled humanoid robots for dynamic mobil manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kris Hauser, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Physically demanding labor is required of workers in construction and logistics,
as well as dangerous jobs such as disaster relief, firefighting, policework,
logging, and mining. Many of these workers in the US are injured, disabled, or
die due to workplace incidents. Although robots have the potential to protect
the well-being of these workers, they do not yet possess the capability to
perform the demanding physical tasks which are inherent to these activities. A
key missing aspect is the intelligence to intuitively coordinate their body to
amplify the forces that they apply to objects, such as when humans naturally
lean against a heavy door to open it. This project focuses on developing the
technology to combine the control intelligence of humans with the physical
strength and endurance of machines. In this framework, a wearable device
measures the posture of the entire body of a human operator such that the remote
human-like robot may reproduce the same whole-body position at the same time.
The novelty of this project is to enable the human operator to simultaneously
feel the forces that the robot applies to its surroundings. For instance, a
firefighter commands the robot to push heavy debris by performing the motion
herself, while simultaneously feeling whether the robot is exerting insufficient
force and the object isn’t moving, or whether it is exerting excessive effort
and losing balance. The impact of this research is the protection of the well-
being of human workers by taking them away from danger, while leveraging their
domain expertise and their motor intelligence to perform physically demanding
labor. This research promotes the inclusion of undergraduate and
underrepresented minorities in research, creates outreach activities with K-12
students, and proposes demonstrations of the system during conferences and
University events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a novel bilateral
teleoperation framework which enables a human operator to control a remote
wheeled humanoid robot to perform Dynamic Mobile Manipulation (DMM). DMM are
physical tasks which combine forceful manipulation and agile locomotion. The key
hypothesis in this proposal is that bilateral teleoperation via a whole-body
haptic device can achieve safe and intuitive DMM in unstructured field
environments. To validate this hypothesis, three specific aims will be pursued
over three years. Aim 1: Implement the hardware that enables this research,
composed of (i) a prototype whole-body haptic device which reads the operator’s
posture to control the remote robot, and provides rich kinesthetic, visual, and
audial feedback from the robot’s interaction with its environment, and (ii) the
robot named SATYRR, which combines advantages of legged systems, wheeled
locomotion, and an anthropomorphic upper-body for dual-arm manipulation. Aim 2:
Study whole-body bilateral teleoperation strategies for DMM. Devise a human-to-
robot motion mapping for intuitive, high-bandwidth control, and implement force
feedback schemes that deliver interpretable feedback to the operator even under
large impacts. And Aim 3: Improve DMM safety using shared autonomy. Devise model
predictive control schemes to follow the user's input as closely as possible
while preventing operator inputs that would damage the robot. To evaluate the
planned framework, a realistic laboratory task environment will be built with an
obstacle course that includes pushing large objects, opening blocked doors,
balancing under external disturbances, and carrying and throwing a
payload.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.