* 2024252
* Mechanisms of viral protein trafficking in polarized insect cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gary Blissard, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 779,871.00

Arthropods represent the largest animal biomass on earth. Their populations are
regulated by many viral diseases, and they vector many viruses that cause
diseases of plants and animals. Typically, a virus enters the insect by the oral
route and must penetrate the cells of the gut to spread to other tissues.
Because little is known in this area, these studies will focus on the specific
mechanisms by which viruses move through the insect gut cells. Typically, a
virus will infect and replicate in the gut cells and newly-produced particles
will bud from the other side, into the insect's blood. These studies will
examine how the virus and its components move through the cell in a highly
specific directional manner, so that the virus can enter the insect's blood and
eventually infect other tissues. In another component of these studies, viral
protein signals that are recognized by the cell, for recruitment into cellular
trafficking pathways will be identified. These studies capitalize on the
powerful genetic system in the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster. This system
will be used in combination with cell culture systems and other modern molecular
techniques, to identify the insect proteins and viral signals that are required
for polarized virus trafficking through insect gut cells. The studies will have
impacts across a wide variety of virus-insect interactions, with applications in
diverse areas such as agricultural crop protection, forestry, animal science,
and human health. In addition, undergraduate and graduate student student
training will be supported by this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viral transport across the insect
midgut epithelium is an important infection step for most viruses that infect
insects, and for those viruses vectored by insects. However, this process is not
well-understood even in the best characterized systems due to the difficult
nature of experimental manipulation in the insect gut. These studies incorporate
an experimental design that leverages two powerful model systems for identifying
specific proteins, pathways, and signals involved in virus-midgut trafficking.
Using ectopic expression of viral proteins in Drosophila midgut cells, followed
by RNAi screens using comprehensive libraries of RNAi fly strains, candidate
pathways will be screened to identify specific proteins and pathways necessary
for polarized trafficking of two model viral proteins, baculovirus GP64 and VSV
G. To identify viral protein signals or motifs necessary for midgut trafficking,
the baculovirus GP64 protein will be analyzed in a natural host insect, the
lepidopteran Trichoplusia ni. Existing libraries of viruses containing
previously characterized envelope protein mutations will be used to identify the
viral protein signals recognized for recruitment to trafficking pathways. The
identification of viral signals and host midgut proteins and pathways for
polarized trafficking will establish new paradigms for pathogen-insect
interactions and will dramatically advance the understanding of how viruses
productively interact with insects as hosts and
vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.