* 2024253
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Pinpointing and Resolving Scalability Culprits Hidden in Different Components of the Whole System Stack
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Tongping Liu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2023
* USD 430,501.00

Modern computers leverage multi-core or many-core processors to accelerate
parallel applications. Unfortunately, the speedup of these applications is
typically far from ideal, due to some hidden scalability issues. Previous
research mainly focuses on application code to identify scalability bottlenecks,
neglecting the fact that the application code interacts with numerous external
components, including memory allocator, third-party runtime libraries, and the
operating system. Understanding and fixing scalability problems should hence go
beyond application code and consider the whole software stack. The project's
novelties are to pinpoint scalability culprits hidden in different components of
the whole stack and automatically fix the scalability bottlenecks. The project's
impacts are significantly improved performance for applications running on
multi-core processors and thus accelerated scientific discoveries and energy
saving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to systematically pinpoint and
resolve latent software contention in all components of the whole software stack
from user space. The proposed approaches are urgent due to the pervasive use of
multi-core and many-core hardware. Also, according to Amdahl's law, a small
degree of latent contention in any of the components may substantially limit the
speedup potential on these modern hardware. The research plans to design low-
overhead profilers to obtain runtime information for system calls, memory
allocator behaviors, and all interacting events between components, as well as
analyzers to automatically pinpoint the root causes of scalability bottlenecks.
Through a runtime optimizer, the research aims to fix the identified scalability
issues without intervention from the programmer. The project has potential to
dramatically reduce manual effort for software optimization and improve
performance for parallel applications on modern
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.