* 2024213
* Long Term Settlement Pattern and Environmental Patterning Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* Anabel Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 289,806.00

This project investigates past human adaptations to tropical forests and the
environmental impacts of past land-use strategies. Tropical forests are
regularly dismissed as fragile landscapes, providing inadequate resources to
sustain large populations without substantial modification. Yet long-surviving
traditional food-production practices, involving sophisticated understandings of
forest ecology and the benefits of managing vegetation for land cover, suggest
that populations developed sustainable methods to support themselves over
millennia of interactions with their environment. This project examines past
settlement remains and environmental proxy data to assess interpretations of
land use, sustainability, and adaptations to tropical forests. It will identify
potentially sustainable agricultural practices from the past that can inform
future development programs and policies. Long term land-management is essential
in the contemporary tropics, which have endured extreme changes from
deforestation and are projected to host the highest levels of future population
growth. The project will provide opportunities for students, professional
colleagues, and volunteers to engage in the research. Investigators will expand
local networks and partnerships by coordinating activities with community-based
organizations, governmental agencies, and non-governmental organizations to
promote greater scientific knowledge of long term tropical lowland ecology. New
data generated by this project will be available to aid in planning projects for
education and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will examine how a
past society created and sustained dense settlements and a farming system that
flourished in the tropical forest. The occupants built monumental centers and
large populations once inhabited a tropical environment considered marginal
today. Many archaeologists believe that growing populations in tropical regions
have outstripped the ability of the forest to sustain them, creating conditions
of environmental vulnerability that lead to “collapse.” Yet in some cases
populations increased steadily for centuries and the composition of the
contemporary forest indicates long-term management, raising the possibility that
traditional adaptations to the forest were sustainable. The research team,
comprising archaeologists, botanists, geographers, palynologists, and soil
scientists, will examine data to address this question. Archaeological and
environmental data derived from field survey, remotely sensed Lidar imagery,
soil and lake cores, and modern vegetation assessment will be integrated into a
Geographic Information Systems to build models of agricultural land suitability
and human environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.