* 2024965
* Modeling and measuring critical data literacies in informal learning environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Golnaz Arastoopour Irgens, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 314,271.00

Society’s reliance on digital technologies has resulted in enormous amounts of
data being recorded, sorted, and analyzed. While improving human efficiency and
life quality, data analytics can also reproduce inequities and further
marginalize those from non-dominant populations, including women, people of
color, and those who live in poverty. This two-year Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research Individual Investigator Development project addresses this
issue by developing a data science education program for middle school students
that examines the social and ethical dimensions of digital technologies. By
engaging over 100 counselors, parents, students, and researchers as co-designers
of the data science education program at an after-school community-based
program, the project has potential to educate a range of stakeholders in
computing education. Moreover, it has potential to broaden participation in STEM
by providing youth who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM with rich and
culturally relevant experiences that may motivate them to pursue STEM majors and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project research objectives are to: (1)
measure and model youth’s data science knowledge and practices in the context of
social, ethical, and political issues related to digital technologies; and (2)
measure youth’s sense of empowerment to enact change in their communities in
terms of the ethical use of digital technologies. The project integrates data
science education research and sociocultural learning theories to build new
theoretical understandings about the nature of data science learning in the
context of social/ethical/political issues. This approach can advance knowledge
and understanding of how middle school aged youth engage in data practices in
ways that are valued within their own cultures and within broader STEM
communities. The project also supports the long-term goal of developing theories
of critical data science learning and how to engage youth in community programs
that promote ethical, culturally responsive, and critical STEM learning
opportunities. The professional development objectives are to develop the
Principal Investigator’s understanding of participatory design, ability to
design for youth in informal learning environments and access to quantitative
ethnography tools and methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported
through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
(ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build individuals’ capacity to
carry out high quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.