* 2024933
* Robot-Mediated Learning: Exploring School-Deployed Collaborative Robots for Homebound Children
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Jacquelynne Eccles, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Over 2.5 million children in the US are medically homebound. They are socially
isolated, physically segregated, and current educational practices largely
exclude them from their school communities. Telepresence robots have emerged as
a possible means to support these children to return to their local schools,
however, it is not yet understood how homebound children can effectively use
these robots for optimal learning and social development experiences. The goal
of this project is to advance robot-mediated learning in schools, and
investigate how co-robots can facilitate optimal learning experiences. The
investigators will 1) Identify best practices and guidelines for the use of
embodied co-robots in schools to best facilitate learning and social
development; 2) Design new inclusive interfaces and control modalities for
homebound children to use mobile telemanipulators, and 3) Pioneer new inclusive
robotics curricula to support children with disabilities entering the STEM
workforce. This project will yield new knowledge in multiple fields, including
human-robot interaction, education, and healthcare. This project will also
promote the progress of science by exploring how to make mobile telemanipulators
accessible to people with disabilities, including new insights in the creation
of future robot systems that can be dynamically reconfigured by end users
without requiring domain expertise. This work will benefit society through
insights into robot-mediated interaction which can extend to other domains, such
as telemedicine, telehealth, and others who experience barriers to remaining
socially connected to their real-world communities. The results of this project
will bring to the forefront societal, educational, fiscal, and ethical issues
concerning human-operated co-robots in public spaces, and explore new ways to be
inclusive of students underrepresented both in society at large as well as in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will inform several key research
questions including: 1) Identifying robot-mediated learning tasks that
contribute to optimal learning; 2) Creating best practices and guidelines that
incorporate social norms for daily co-robot interactions; 3) Designing new
accessible, adaptable, and usable control modalities for mobile telemanipulation
for homebound children; 4) Leveraging interaction with an embodied co-robot to
motivate interest in STEM, with a particular focus on medically homebound
children and children with disabilities. The project will employ a case study
research methodology, exploring stakeholder interconnectedness in the robot-
mediated learning experience. The project will consist of 48 case studies, where
each case will typically consist of 22 participants: a homebound child, a
parent, a teacher, 18 classmates, and a school administrator. Multiple sources
of data will be used, consisting of direct observations, semi-structured
interviews, surveys, and focus groups. Transcripts from interviews, observation
notes, and survey responses will undergo open-coding to identify
commonalities/differences within and between cases. The themes and concepts that
emerge from the analysis will be repeatedly compared with the data to ensure
their validity. The research team will work with homebound children to co-design
accessible and adaptable control interfaces to reflect the unique educational
and social needs of this population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the National Robotics Initiative 2.0: Ubiquitous Collaborative Robots
(NRI-2.0) program, and the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.