* 2024462
* NCS-FO: Dynamic computational phenotyping of human cognition and brain function
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Samuel Gershman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 916,029.00

A long-term goal of cognitive neuroscience is to understand which aspects of
cognition are shared across individuals and which are unique to an individual.
Studies of the latter are typically concerned with traits that are relatively
stable over time, constituting what is referred to as a static phenotype.
Phenotyping has proven to be a powerful approach for predicting behavior across
time and tasks. For example, individual differences in the ability to delay
gratification at age 4 years predict academic, verbal, and socioemotional
competence in adolescence. But a major limitation to the predictability of such
static approaches to phenotyping is that they do not capture within-individual
variation. Static phenotypes are derived from performances on tasks measured at
a specific time and context, whereas we know that cognitive performances (and
brain measures of it) vary within individuals in relatively short time frames
depending on such factors as sleep, stress, mood, alertness, and motivation. To
predict an individual's cognitive performance across time, one needs to
understand how the individual's cognitive state changes and what drives those
changes. This research project, conducted by investigators at Harvard
University, will fill this gap by collecting individual data repeatedly over
time. By fitting computational models to the data, the researchers will extract
a dynamic "computational phenotype” of each individual. They hypothesize that
changes will be captured computationally by a relatively small set of dynamical
parameters and that a small set of brain networks will be found to map onto
those parameters. If this hypothesis is correct, then the project will have the
potential to open the door to targeted, precise, and individual-specific
training interventions to improve cognitive performance. This project is funded
by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS),
a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources
(EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational phenotyping has recently emerged as a
powerful technique for characterizing variation between individuals. By fitting
computational cognitive models to behavioral data, investigators can use the
resulting parameter estimates as a cognitive “fingerprint” for an individual.
Computational phenotypes have the advantage over other kinds of phenotypes
(e.g., those based on surveys) of being more closely linked to underlying
cognitive and neural mechanisms. Research has shown the utility of computational
phenotyping in predicting individual-level outcomes, designing interventions,
and providing an alternative to traditional diagnostic criteria. A critical
limitation of this approach is that it has typically conceptualized the
phenotype as a trait—a static descriptor of an individual. In the first aim, the
investigators will formalize and experimentally validate a dynamic
conceptualization of the computational phenotype. To accomplish this aim, the
investigators will have participants complete a battery of behavioral tasks–
weekly over three months – for which established computational models exist.
Data from this longitudinal study will be used to estimate how each
participant’s computational phenotype uniquely changes over time, and the
investigators will employ statistical methods to extract low-dimensional
structure in the phenotype. In the second aim, the investigators will use
longitudinal neuroimaging in conjunction with the behavioral battery to identify
networks in the brain that track the low-dimensional phenotype structure,
allowing them to pinpoint the neural locus of intra-individual
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.