* 2024446
* NRI: INT: Collaborative Research: An Open-Source Framework for Continuous Torque Control of Intuitive Robotic Prosthetic Legs
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Eric Rombokas, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 560,000.00

This project will establish an open source set of software control algorithms
that will allow an open source robotic prosthetic leg to facilitate rhythmic and
non-rhythmic interactions between the human user and the environment. This
project builds upon the Open-Source Leg, which is a robust, inexpensive, robotic
leg platform that can be easily manufactured, assembled, and programmed. The
project's overarching goal is to enable customizable behaviors that are
continuously cued by the movement of the user’s body. The project promotes the
progress of science by creating open source control hardware and software for
compliant actuators that extend the capabilities of the Open-Source Leg. The
advantages of compliant torque control, combined with intuitive, expressive
control from the user, represents a significant improvement over currently-
available prosthetic legs. The project will advance the national health by
developing and testing high-level control software that will allow users of the
Open Source Leg to seamlessly navigate around obstacles and perform dynamic
activities. The improved mobility provided by these technologies will improve
the quality of life and functional capabilities of many people living with
mobility impairment. Open source hardware and software lower barriers to access
for robotic technologies, which makes these robots great candidates not only as
assistive co-robots in healthcare and other applications but also as educational
tools for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging
powered prostheses such as the NSF-funded Open-Source Leg have motors that can
restore normative biomechanics to above-knee amputees, but these devices are
limited by their control strategies to a small set of pre-defined, steady-state
activities. Each activity is typically divided into a discrete progression of
gait periods called phases, resulting in a large set of distinct controllers
that struggle to continuously coordinate prosthetic limb motion with the user.
Discrete control paradigms have not been able to facilitate transient behaviors
like transitions between activities or non-rhythmic motions like stepping
backwards or stepping over obstacles. Recently, a new control paradigm has
emerged that continuously synchronizes or coordinates prosthetic limb motion to
the user based on inertial measurements from the user’s body (e.g., the residual
limb). However, prior implementations have been limited to lab-specific
prosthetic leg designs with stiff actuators that rigidly enforce the kinematic
mappings from user motion to prosthetic joint position rather than complying to
varying environmental interactions. The recently developed Open-Source Leg
presents a unique opportunity to integrate this state-of-the-art control
paradigm in a universally accessible testbed with series elastic actuators that
soften interactions between the user, prosthesis, and environment. The overall
goals of this project are to 1) understand how to achieve closed-loop torque and
impedance control in the series elastic actuator of the open-source leg despite
unmodeled dynamics from its low-cost design, and 2) understand how to integrate
high-fidelity joint impedance control with two novel continuous controllers that
promise to allow users to flexibly and seamlessly navigate obstacles and perform
dynamic activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.