* 2024706
* NRI: FND: Barriers and Solutions for Small and Medium Sized Manufacturers Collaborative Robot Adoption
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nancey Green Leigh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 749,958.00

This award supports a mixed-methods (quantitative and qualitative) approach to
identify the barriers and solutions for the adoption of collaborative robots by
small- and medium-sized manufacturers (SMMs). The research team will identify
barriers to robot adoption by SMMs, analyze labor market and firm data to
identify supportive environments for robot adoption, and analyze policy
approaches supporting robot adoption among SMMs through two case studies of
regions that have a substantially higher level of robot use. The rate of
technology and robot adoption among SMMs is much lower than that of large
manufacturing firms, and that may be one reason for growing inequality in
production. An aging workforce and vacant jobs are also hindering SMMs. If women
and minority manufacturing workers who are concentrated in low skill jobs shift
to work with collaborative robots, they have the potential for up-skilling
without having college level STEM skills and moving into mid-skill/wage jobs.
Thus, greater adoption of collaborative robots by SMMs has the potential to
increase productivity and competitiveness, upskill jobs and wages, attract women
and minority workers, and counter growing inequality. The comparative case
studies will provide further insights about the competitiveness of SMMs across
the US with respect to regions with significantly higher levels of robot
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide a comprehensive
understanding of the barriers to the adoption of collaborative robot adoption.
Such barriers disadvantage small and medium size manufacturers (SMMs), their
workforce, and local economies. The research team’s mixed-methods approach
includes the use of machine learning and topic modeling on novel data such as
real time labor market data and microdata from the first census questions on
robotics use in manufacturing. This approach contrasts with the usual approach
to studying robot adoption, which focuses on measuring the impacts of existing
robots on economic out-comes like employment and wages. SMMs can lag in co-robot
adoption, not because the technology is inadequate, but because there is
insufficient knowledge on how to incorporate it. While a collaborative robot has
the capability to aid a company in its manufacturing processes, other
prerequisites for full adoption are lacking such as staff with prior robotics
knowledge or experience, partners in their supply chain with prior robotics
knowledge or experience, and incentives for the robot distributor or supplier to
provide more free or low-cost training. The failure to meet these prerequisites
acts as barriers to co-robot adoption. This proposal identifies the barriers and
strategies for surmounting them, based on insights derived from studying co-
robot use in the most robot intensive regions, and, evolving skill demand in
small and medium size manufacturers that is correlated with robot
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.