* 2024584
* A Phenomenological Analysis of STEM Interest, Access, and Persistence of Latina English Learners
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Qi Shi, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 193,853.00

This capacity building project includes a study to examine the experiences of
Latina English Learners to identify the resources and assets that impact their
academic and career development and persistence in STEM. Guided by the culture
wealth model and social cognitive career theory, the investigator will conduct a
qualitative study using a phenomenology design to understand the meaning of
these students’ experiences using three developmental milestones: interest,
access, and persistence. The investigator will use an anti-deficit view to
interpret and make meaning of the experiences and assets that may have impacted
Latina English Learners’ outcomes. The study will provide insights concerning
the career development and counseling support for this student population in
both secondary and postsecondary schools. The findings will provide a deeper
understanding, interpretation, and analysis of Latina English Learners’ STEM
experiences and career decisions to inform interventions and initiatives to
broaden the participation of Latina students in STEM. The investigator proposes
to increase proficiency in qualitative research methods from a phenomenological
perspective and acquire expertise in qualitative data analysis through a
professional development plan that includes formal graduate courses, workshops,
and mentor support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will investigate
four research questions: (1) What are Latina English Learners’ lived experiences
in STEM from PreK-12 to college? , (2) What assets and resources do Latina
English Learners describe as being beneficial to their academic and career
development in STEM?,(3) How do Latina English Language Learners develop and
maintain their interest, access, and persistence in STEM from PreK-12 to
college? and (4) What barriers do Latina English Learners experience in STEM
academic and career development from PreK-12 to college? A demographic
questionnaire, individual semi-structured interviews, and a focus group will be
used to collect data from participants at six institutions in three states. The
study will address some of the major limitations in quantitative research from
previous literature on STEM education of either Latinas or English Learners, by
providing much needed qualitative information on the “when,” “how,” and “why”.
It will also provide a deeper understanding of those resources and assets they
have and meanings of those experiences that may have played a key role in Latina
ELs’ STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (BCSER) competition that enables early- and
mid-career researchers to acquire expertise to investigate topics relevant to
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.