* 2024378
* EAGER: High-Energy-Density Storage for Renewable Energy Sources for Environmental Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Trung Nguyen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 100,001.00

The environmental impact of the use of fossil fuels for energy can be greatly
reduced if electricity, which represents one third of all energy uses, can be
generated totally from renewable/sustainable sources such as wind and solar.
However, this requires cost-effective long-duration (3-5 days) energy storage
technologies, which would allow the highly variable and unpredictable wind and
solar energy sources to become as reliable as baseline energy sources like coal
or natural gases. Redox flow battery (RFB) energy storage systems are
potentially highly suitable for this large-scale, long-duration storage
application. To make this technology more cost-effective for this application,
its cost must be reduced. This is the focus of this proposed work. An innovative
technical approach will be explored that, if successful, would increase storage
capacity significantly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electricity generation totally
from renewable energy sources like wind and solar would greatly reduce the
effect of fossil fuel emission on the environment and world climate. The
proposed high energy density storage technology would facilitate reaching the
goal of 100% electricity generation from renewable sources by making highly
variable and unpredictable renewable energy sources as reliable as coal, oil,
and natural gases. Leadership in this area will generate many economic
opportunities for the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.