* 2024903
* Robust methods for estimating conspecific negative density dependence
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Joseph LaManna, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 154,075.00

To conserve plant diversity, scientists must first understand how individuals
and species affect their neighbors. There are many processes that drive these
neighborly interactions and they are related to each other in confusing ways.
This award will support a series of workshops with the goal helping scientists
understand one particularly important process that maintains plant diversity.
When plants of the same type grow too close together, many of them die from
shared disease or intense competition. Those deaths create opportunities for
plants of different types to move in, enhancing diversity. In short, this
process prevents one species from growing everywhere and taking over everything.
Although this may seem like common sense, scientists disagree a lot about how to
measure it and what it really means for diversity. This award will bring many of
those scientists together to figure out a path forward. Scientists from many
types of institutions and career stages will be invited, including from
primarily undergraduate institutions, early career researchers and members of
underrepresented groups. All participants will be given opportunities to
contribute to products resulting from the workshops, which will have important
implications for predicting how plants will respond to environmental stresses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This series of workshops has two main objectives. First,
organizers will bring together top researchers to develop robust approaches that
use cutting-edge modeling techniques to assess whether local interactions among
plants – specifically, conspecific negative density-dependence -- contribute to
plant species diversity. The approaches that emerge from these meetings will
likely become standardized methodologies, providing a much-needed common
currency to evaluate ecological influences on the maintenance of plant species
diversity. Second, organizers will apply these newly developed approaches to
long-term data on plant survival and growth from sites around the world. These
analyses will test how diversity-maintaining interactions among plants change
across climatic gradients and among different plant species as a function of
their traits. Synthesized examination of these basic questions is the first step
to transformational insights and further experimental studies into the
importance of local interactions among plants in determining regional and global
patterns of plant species diversity. To ensure these goals, multiple
perspectives are essential. Therefore, the proposed series of workshops will
actively engage and involve participants from a variety of career stages and
backgrounds, including groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.