* 2024949
* NRI: INT: Collaborative Research: Buoyancy-assisted Collaborative Robots That are Cheap, Safe, and Never Fall Down.
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Joseph Lim, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will promote the progress of science,
advance the national prosperity, welfare, and security; by developing novel
buoyancy-assisted collaborative robots that are cheap, safe, and never fall
down. The current state of robotics systems is not ready to be deployable to
human daily environments, which are challenging for a robot to navigate,
especially for legged robots. While they are naturally well-suited for human
environments by design, legged robots are often too expensive to scale up for a
multi-agent setup, heavy and dangerous to operate near humans, and hard to
guarantee stable locomotion. To this end, the ultimate goal of this research is
to build collaborative robots that are cheap, safe, and never fall down by
exploiting buoyancy to defy a significant amount of gravity This research has
the potential for significant impact in enabling deployed locomotion for safe
robotic systems interactively assisting humans in daily environments. It
provides a principled way for leveraging large amounts of safe and scalable
hardware designs with recent advances in machine learning techniques to develop
compact representations that are transferable across different robotic systems
and human environments. This will innovate how one can utilize a deployable
multi-agent system in disaster relief zones and large outdoor environments. The
project team will invite general public participation by publicizing the
hardware designs and open-sourcing all the deployed software infrastructure. The
grant will also support a competition for middle and high school students using
the developed low-cost platforms with the goal to foster studentsâ€™ interest in
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Creating
a new class of locomotion systems has two major challenges: designing a new
hardware that is cheap and safe and developing an algorithm for locomotion and
collaboration. In order to address these two challenges, this grant will support
development of a novel framework that (1) addresses a fundamentally new family
of legged robots, namely buoyancy assisted robots (BARs), which are constantly
stood-up and highly light-weight by leveraging the inherent "lifting power" of
buoyancy; and (2) empowers BARs with reliable locomotion and collaboration
skills using deep reinforcement learning algorithms. To this end, the research
team will perform interrelated research thrusts centered around the goal of
safe, scalable multi-robot systems: developing multiple BARs with each unique
locomotion style, learning primitive motor skills for a single agent, extending
individually trained agents to orchestrate in a large-scale multi-agent friendly
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.