* 2024526
* NCS-FO: Identification and control of neural cognitive systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jochen Ditterich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 995,777.00

Implantable devices provide an alternative for treating neurological disorders
in patients who do not respond well to available drugs. A good example are deep
brain stimulators for the treatment of Parkinsonâ€™s Disease, which have been very
successful. Many neurological and psychiatric disorders are associated with
cognitive deficits, which tend to be difficult to ameliorate through drug
therapy. In the future, it might be possible to treat cognitive deficits with
implantable devices, but this requires much more advanced technology than the
currently available stimulators. This project will lay the foundation for
interfacing technology with neural cognitive systems. Being able to steer or
control a system of any kind requires a model or mathematical description of the
system. The project will establish a framework for deriving such a model
directly from neural activity. It will further develop strategies for moving the
cognitive system into a desired target state through the application of
electrical microstimulation, with the intent to allow for correction of disease-
related maladaptive states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project,
which involves investigators from both neuroscience and engineering, has the
following components: 1) System identification: Using a large number of
implanted electrodes, the recorded neural activity will be used to identify a
dynamical system that is able to capture (and predict) the temporal pattern of
neural activity. The focus will be on piecewise linear models for approximating
nonlinear dynamics. 2) State decoding: With the help of the identified model and
based on the current and recent activity pattern, the current internal state of
the neural system can be identified. 3) System control: In the case of the
current state of the system deviating from a desired target state, the
identified model in combination with control-theoretic strategies can be used to
determine a stimulation pattern that needs to be applied to drive the system
towards the desired state. The project will use simple cognitive tasks, like
working memory and perceptual decision-making tasks, to provide a proof of
principle that the state of a cognitive neural system can be adjusted in real
time to improve, for example, overall performance on the task. This is an
ambitious goal, which, in this form, has not been achieved before, but a
successful outcome has the potential to revolutionize how mental disorders might
be treated in the future. This work is supported by the Integrative Strategies
for Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.