* 2024296
* Institutional Transformation: Intersections of Moral Foundations and Ethics Frameworks in STEM Enculturation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Stephen Kuebler, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,301.00

This project examines the value foundations that inform ethical reasoning among
undergraduate and graduate students. To date, strategies for developing cultures
of ethical and responsible research among STEM students have largely emphasized
the formal ethical training and experiences that shape ethical decision-making
and the conditions under which individuals are motivated to put decision-making
strategies into practice. Much less attention has been given to the ways
students’ internal values guide their professional conduct or how these values
affect their attraction to and training within a STEM discipline. This has
limited the development of ethical training protocols combining internal and
external factors in cultivating ethically literate students and institutional
cultures. Led by an interdisciplinary team at a 21st century research-intensive,
Hispanic-serving institution, this project generates fundamental understanding
about how the intersection of the implicit values that guide individuals and the
explicit content and experiences of ethics education and training matter for
ethical reasoning. Practically, the project develops methods for understanding
the ways students negotiate personal values and reason ethically amid the
disciplinary enculturation process, which is especially crucial to increasing
and retaining diverse perspectives within STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project employs surveys of undergraduates and graduate students, linguistic
coding and keyword analysis of professional ethics codes and curriculum modules,
and correspondence analysis of qualitative data collected from workshops, focus
groups, and interviews to investigate ethical reasoning among STEM students. It
has three main objectives: (1) identify the extent to which individual values
correlate with demographic differences and disciplinary choices, (2) analyze
explicit ethical frameworks within and across STEM student experiences, and (3)
understand intersections among internal values and formal ethical frameworks and
how they affect disciplinary enculturation and ethical reasoning. Individual
values and their demographic correlates are examined by administering the Moral
Foundations Questionnaire to students in a mix of traditional and
interdisciplinary STEM programs. The formal ethical training students receive is
analyzed by applying linguistic coding and keyword analysis to ethics codes from
professional bodies, curriculum modules, and other sources of ethics experience.
Intersections between individual ethics and formal ethical training are studied
by using correspondence analysis to analyze participant data collected through
PI-led ethics workshops, focus groups, and individual interviews with a
representative sample of student participants. Analyses will focus on whether
and to what extent personal values map onto disciplinary values and the ways
values are negotiated and established. Results will be compared to control-group
data and assessed to determine how students enculturate to disciplinary norms.
This project advances knowledge of STEM ethics, expands moral foundation theory,
and enhances understanding of why some under-represented groups remain in STEM
while others drop out. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has been
funded by the CISE and ENG directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.