* 2024581
* NCS-FO: Neural Correlates of Social States in Macaques
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ben Hayden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 998,608.00

Many biological organisms interact with one another by transmitting and
perceiving social signals. These include gaze, facial expression, and body pose
that convey information about the individualâ€™s internal state, including their
focus of attention, intended actions, and emotional level. Despite the ubiquity
and potential value of these social interactions, understanding how neural
activity gives rise to social interactions is still a largely uncharted area.
Past experiments were conducted either by subjective behavioral observations in
natural social settings or by quantifiable methods such as neuroimaging in
restricted social settings. This project will address these limitations by
leveraging the project team's recently developed high resolution motion capture
system, which can measure, detect, and quantify natural social behaviors and
their corresponding neural activity. This research will open new opportunities
to study early behavioral markers, such as those for at-risk children with
autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and obsessive-compulsive
disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team's main innovation is a new
statistical model called social states, designed to encode the social context of
joint behaviors. These social states will be associated with neurophysiological
activities in two brain regions, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dLPFC) and
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), both located in the prefrontal cortex.
Using the neural correlates of social states, the project will develop a novel
method to model the dynamics of social state transitions, facilitating an
understanding of how these two brain regions are responsible for processing
social signals. While the project will focus on specific brain regions, the
planned research will provide a general computational foundation for
understanding the complex social behaviors of macaques. The planned research
will advance the computational understanding of cognitive and neural processes
by learning from millions of neurobehavioral data points in real, unrestricted
environments. Developing such a computational model is a complex, real world
problem, requiring a new holistic, transformative, and integrative approach. The
planned solution is built upon domain knowledge from multiple disciplines,
including machine learning, primate physiology, neuroscience, and computer
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.