* 2024204
* Expanding STEM Ethics Education to Reduce Gender Bias and Sexual Harassment
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthew Paolucci, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 320,803.00

This project will serve to establish and maintain STEM cultures that foster
research integrity by developing two educational modules that use evidence-based
practices from social psychology to reduce gender bias and sexual harassment.
The objective in developing these modules is to expand traditional ethics
training beyond responsible conduct of research practices to encompass ethical
behavior among fellow researchers. The project is designed to extend knowledge
and skills in ethical practice across several STEM groups including
undergraduate students, faculty members, and professionals. Engaging with these
modules at the outset of their careers, STEM undergraduates will be better
prepared to recognize, respond to and prevent gender bias and sexual harassment
in domains across their careers. STEM faculty at Sonoma State University and
across the California State University system are to be trained to use these
modules, which will enhance the potential to gain knowledge and skills in a
deeper way that will serve not only to transform their teaching, but also better
equip them to recognize, confront and prevent gender bias in their career
settings. The modules are also to be introduced to other STEM professionals at
annual meetings and conferences, which will enable them to gain access to the
modules, apply them, and further disseminate them in their work settings. A
publicly accessible website is to be developed that will include the full
content of the modules, along with recommended teaching strategies for faculty
to implement in STEM classes nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will develop ethics training modules that will serve to address gender
discrimination and sexual harassment, behaviors that pervades STEM disciplines.
They will do so by integrating social psychology theory and research into ethics
topics in science courses. These modules will expand beyond presenting content
to fostering impactful, prejudice reduction processes by using more effective
techniques such as perspective-taking, which serve to arouse empathy and reduce
prejudice. The modules are to be used by faculty members to teach students the
mechanisms of psychological constructs such as stereotyping, unintentional
biases and subtle sexism will aid them in recognizing overt and subtle prejudice
throughout their careers. The research team will train faculty at Sonoma State
University to incorporate the modules into targeted courses, and they evaluate
the effectiveness of the modules through pre-post and comparison group designs.
The modules are to be disseminated through training via STEM-NET to interested
participants from across the California State University system. They will also
disseminate the modules to professional societies, and they will engage in
further collaboration to evaluate the effectiveness of their modules in other
learning settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.