* 2024104
* Support for the 2020 Gordon Research Conference/Seminar on Rock Deformation: Combining Laboratory Measurements with Observational Constraints to Understand Tectonic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Heather Savage, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 49,500.00

The project provides travel and registration costs for graduate students and
early career researchers to attend the 2020 Gordon Research Conference and
Seminar on Rock Deformation. The conference will be held from August 8th to the
14th, 2020 at Bates College in Lewiston, Maine. The Gordon Research Conferences
and Seminars provide an international forum for the presentation and discussion
of frontier scientific research, and invited presentations will highlight the
latest results in a context that looks towards future scientific avenues. The
topics that will be the topic of this activity include cutting-edge
presentations and discussions of a variety of topics pertaining to rock
deformation, including lithospheric rheology from small-scale experiments,
fundamental frictional processes, earthquake mechanics; fault slip in natural
environments, lower crustal dynamics, mantle rheology, and shallow and deep
subduction processes. The Gordon Research Conferences and Seminars provide a
unique opportunity for early-career scientists to come together in a highly
stimulating and non-intimidating environment to discuss current research and
build networks that can lead to a lifetime of collaboration and scientific
achievement. In addition, the project will contribute to broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups in science, technology, and mathematics
(STEM) through recruitment of participants from underrepresented groups. The
Gordon Research Conference and associated Gordon Research Seminar will foster
development of new research directions in rock deformation and will contribute
to the development of a diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce. The
conference program includes topics of societal relevance that bear on the
understanding of geologic hazards, which is of benefit to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.