* 2024421
* Collaborative Research: Conceptualizing and quantifying the function of beaver dams and stormwater ponds on the hydrology and biogeochemistry of urban streams
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Sandra Clinton, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2024
* USD 236,118.00

Cities across the United States are struggling with issues of storm water
because buildings and roads cannot soak up rain like soil. Instead, rain that
falls on cities runs off the buildings and roads. Cities are spending billions
of dollars to manage this extra water. They are investing in green
infrastructure, which is infrastructure on the land that can soak up and hold
rainwater. One of these green infrastructure approaches is storm water ponds.
However, across the southeastern U.S., beaver live in urban streams, and they
build ponds, too. Beaver are considered a nuisance species and are often killed,
even though their ponds may be similar to storm water ponds for slowing water
and improving water quality. The first goal of this project is to compare how
well beaver ponds store water during both dry and wet periods compared to storm
water ponds. In addition to retaining and slowing the flow of storm water from
cities, both beaver and storm water ponds receive nutrients than can feed algae
blooms. The second goal of this project is to evaluate if urban beaver ponds
increase the storage of nutrients and sediments from water that passes through
their dams. This is important because it will improve downstream water quality.
The final goal of this project is to map where beaver may be building these
ponds in urban areas. This will inform city managers on what to do with the
ponds. To determine if the ponds work the same way in different cities, this
work will be conducted in Atlanta, GA, Charlotte, NC, and Raleigh-Durham-Chapel
Hill, NC. The project will provide multiple broader impacts, including
increasing diversity in the geosciences, collaborating with conservation groups,
such as Adopt-a-Stream and Chattahoochee Riverkeeper, to educate the general
public about the benefits of beaver, and helping local watershed managers to
better manage beaver and adopt benefits that might exist from their ponds. In
addition, this research will be done at multiple minority serving institutions
by a diverse group of investigators. The multi-institution project will allow
students to collaborate across institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will test a conceptual model of how the physical features of urban beaver and
stormwater ponds impact streamflow attenuation and water quality. Cities are
spending billions of dollars on installing green infrastructure to capture
stormwater runoff, when cities in the southeastern U.S. may have infrastructure
that fills a similar role already in beaver ponds. The functioning of beaver
ponds compared to stormwater ponds has not been systematically studied anywhere.
This project aims at (1) quantifying the nutrient and sediment retention of
beaver and stormwater ponds, (2) quantifying the transit time of water through
beaver and stormwater ponds and floodplain-stream reconnection around dams at
both high and low flow, and (3) using remote sensing products and GIS to
estimate the total number of beaver ponds in cities and scale-up quantification
of retention to the whole-city scale. The hypothesis for objectives 1 and 2 is
that the hydrologic and nutrient retention response of the pond will be driven
by the hydrologic source of the water—specifically inflows dominated by surface
or groundwater—and readily quantifiable metrics of pond geomorphology. The
hypothesis for objective 3 is that identified ponded water from aerial imagery
can be combined with the drivers of beaver habitat, including stream slope and
vegetation, to pinpoint locations of beaver activity. The project entails
conducting field work on urban beaver dams and stormwater ponds in the Piedmont
cities of Atlanta, GA, and Charlotte and Raleigh, NC to compare influent to
effluent mass fluxes of nutrients and total suspended solids (TSS) over two
years, sample hyporheic waters in the dam and floodplain to understand nutrient
cycling in the sediments and quantify travel time distributions of water through
beaver ponds and how they compare to engineered stormwater ponds. The proposed
research will develop a conceptual framework through rigorous testing using
intensive field studies that will yield new and transformative knowledge within
the field of urban hydrological science. The study will be carried across a
range of factors, including pond size, watershed land use, sediment, geology,
and infrastructure age to assess controlling drivers and predict the response in
other systems. In addition, larger-scale mapping of these systems will help to
evaluate landscape-level impacts on entire cities.In addition to the
intellectual merits, this project will increase diversity in STEM by recruiting
underrepresented students to complete M.S. degrees at minority serving
institutions, mentored by a diverse group of faculty. The project will also
entail public outreach on the ecological benefits of beaver leveraging existing
relationships with non-profit conservation groups. Beaver are considered a
nuisance species, and thus to reap the benefits their ponds may have on
hydrologic and nutrient retention, conversations between watershed managers and
beaver pond neighbors must be facilitated to allow for science-based decisions
on the fate of these ponds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.