* 2024394
* Research Initiation: Development of a Survey Instrument to Identify Mental Health Related Help-Seeking Beliefs in Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ellen Usher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 219,479.00

The prevalence of mental health problems on college campuses is of increasing
concern. While the issue is not unique to the engineering student population,
national data show that engineering students are significantly less likely than
other students to seek professional help. Additionally, mental health concerns
persist past graduation, with engineers among the top five occupations with the
highest suicide rate. To better understand the root cause of this problem, the
beliefs that influence engineering students’ decisions to seek or not seek help
for a mental health concern must be identified. This fundamental study will
develop a survey instrument to measure the beliefs that affect engineering
undergraduate students’ decisions to seek help. Identification of the beliefs
that predict students’ mental health related help-seeking behaviors will enable
researchers to develop targeted intervention strategies that reduce barriers to
mental health related help-seeking. Reshaping engineering identity to be
supportive of mental health related help-seeking could increase success and
retention of at-risk students. Furthermore, increased willingness to seek help
could improve individuals’ mental health beyond graduation, resulting in a more
resilient and persistent engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the issue of mental health in engineering through a
theoretically grounded, foundational study of engineering students’ beliefs
about seeking help for mental health-related concerns. The project will answer
two key research questions: 1) What are engineering students’ mental health
related help-seeking beliefs? 2) How can researchers assess these beliefs via a
self-report survey instrument? The project will utilize the Integrated
Behavioral Model (IBM), an empirically supported social scientific framework
that can be applied to identify beliefs that influence behavior within a given
population. A central component of the IBM is the use of qualitative interviews,
which will be used to identify key beliefs that influence engineering students’
mental health related help-seeking. Thus, this project will first identify the
beliefs held by undergraduate engineers through interviews with a diverse (e.g.,
major, year of study, gender, race/ethnicity) group of students. Qualitative
coding and thematic analysis will identify emergent themes and beliefs. These
data will be used to develop a survey instrument to measure help-seeking beliefs
quantitatively. This instrument will reflect the student perspectives and norms
developed through the engineering formation process. The instrument will undergo
iterative pilot testing to ensure reliability, validity, and clarity for diverse
engineering students. Additionally, key beliefs associated with help-seeking
intentions will be identified. The core product of the project will be a
comprehensive research instrument useful for identifying mental health related
help-seeking beliefs in engineering students. Large scale implementation of this
research instrument will allow for identification of key beliefs that can be
targeted with intervention strategies to improve mental health related help-
seeking in undergraduate engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.