* 2024076
* I-Corps: Treating Bone Trauma Using a Biodegradable Bone Fixation Device
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Hamdy Ibrahim, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
improvement of bone trauma treatment outcomes through patient-specific
biodegradable bone fixation devices. Current modalities of treating patients
with bone trauma rely on the use of permanent and stiff bone fixation devices
that carry substantial risks and increase the suffering of patients and the
total operation cost. The new biodegradable (nonpermanent) devices have superior
design and properties that, if adopted, may address these problems and result in
a significant clinical breakthrough. No other technology with advantages similar
to these has been identified in the US or the global market. The global targeted
craniomaxillofacial fixation market is estimated to reach a value of USD $1,500
million by the end of 2020. In addition, the market size of biodegradable bone
graft materials in North America only is expected to exceed $690 million by
2020. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on the development
of nonpermanent bone fixation devices made of a patent-pending biodegradable
magnesium-based alloy with properties achieved using novel post-fabrication
processes. Based on preliminary in-vitro studies, these devices are expected to
be both strong enough to bear loads then lose strength and fully resorb
following bone healing. It is hypothesized that the team's fixation devices will
transfer enough compressive stresses to the healing bone to facilitate
continuous bone remodeling. A preliminary proof-of-concept through a series of
in vitro studies was successfully achieved. In addition, the biocompatibility of
the alloy before and after the post-fabrication processes was assured. The
success in developing nonpermanent fixation devices is expected to result in
reduced post-surgery complications, reduced overall hospital stays and costs,
and elimination of the need for a second surgery for implant
removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.