* 2024111
* Data-Driven Nonlinear Model Reduction with Applications to Fluid Flow Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Seddik Djouadi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 11/30/2024
* USD 410,358.00

This Dynamics, Control, and System Diagnostics (DCSD) project will create and
investigate systematic model reduction algorithms to capture the salient
features of nonlinear fluid flows. Due to the sheer scale and complexity of the
governing dynamical equations, model reduction is often an imperative first step
when formulating strategies to control flow behaviors. Existing reduction
frameworks typically fail when nonlinear terms dominate, for instance, in
applications involving high flow speeds. These new techniques will find use in a
wide variety of applications, including those involving flow separation, lift
enhancement, and drag reduction. The reduced models can be used for the design
of aircraft and transport tankers and in the control of vehicular platoons.
Consequently, results of this research will enhance national prosperity and
defense. Research findings will be incorporated into educational activities to
benefit students from underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
existing model reduction frameworks fail in fluid flow applications when
nonlinear terms dominate the dynamical behavior, for instance, at high Reynolds
numbers. This project aims to fill this critical gap by developing model
reduction algorithms designed to capture fundamentally nonlinear behaviors that
emerge in fluid flows governed by nonlinear partial differential equations. Two
primary approaches are considered. The first approach investigates a global
geometric model reduction framework that preserves the intrinsic partial
differential equation geometry and captures geodesic distances between pairs of
data points. The second uses an isostable coordinate framework that
characterizes the underlying dynamics of the slowest decaying nonlinear modes
that govern the behavior near either periodic or stationary solutions. Both
strategies will be implemented using snapshot data so that they can be readily
applied in experimental settings. Successful completion of this project will
result in powerful, general frameworks for identifying suitable reduced order
bases to analyze fundamentally nonlinear behaviors that emerge in partial
differential equation driven fluid flow systems. Prototype problems describing
nonlinear convection past obstacles, unsteady airflow in office buildings, and
unsteady flows in agile micro-air vehicles will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.