* 2024805
* Student Travel Support for the 2020 IEEE SGComm Conference. To be Held  November, 11-13, 2020 at Arizona State University.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Lalitha Sankar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2022
* USD 8,750.00

The proposal requests support for students to participate in the 2020 IEEE
SmartGridCommunications Conference (SGComm 2020), which was originally to take
place in Tempe, AZ, October 6--9, 2020, but because of the COVID-19 pandemic
will now be a virtual conference taking place from Nov. 11-13, 2020. The SGComm
2020, in its eleventh year, is a well established annual conference of the IEEE
Communications Society focused on emerging data and information processing
challenges in the electric power grid and energy systems. The conference offers
opportunities to its participants for sharing of scientific discoveries related
to various computing, communications, sensing, and information processing
aspects of energy systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SGComm 2020, a key conference
of the IEEE Communications Society, has a theme this year entitled “Trustworthy
Sensing, Communications, Processing and Analytics for a Sustainable Grid”. The
conference will feature a comprehensive high-quality technical program including
4 symposia on Communications and Networking,Cyber Security and Privacy, Control
and Operations, Grid Analytics and Computation as well as tutorials and
workshops focused on emerging challenges and topics. The event will gather
researchers and practitioners studying various aspects of the electric power
grid including sensing, data processing, computing, communications, data
analytics, and information sciences that are key today to ensure reliable and
resilient grid operations. Finally, the conference also includes two keynote
talks by leading researchers and a panel discussion, involving industry and
academic leaders, on the ways to leverage technology and data science to address
the key challenges for the new decade: grid resilience and sustainable energy
use in the face of climate change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
participation of about 25 students enrolled in US institutions (as well as US
citizens attending international institutions) by providing registration fees to
the conference. Such participation will have a positive impact on both grid-
centric research in US institutions and workforce development. It will
contribute to the preparation of the next cadre of engineering professionals who
can advance and ensure integration of computing, data, security, and analytics
technology in the electric grid while keeping the focus on sustainability,
reliability, and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.