* 2024776
* NCS-FO: Investigation of cortical-hippocampal interaction during memory formation using multimodal recordings
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Takaki Komiyama, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Learning and memory are cognitive functions that are central to human behavior.
It has been widely hypothesized that multiple brain regions are coordinated with
hippocampus, a subcortical structure, to form the basis for learning and long-
term memory. Understanding how different brain regions interact during learning
can lead to better understanding of long-term memory storage in the brain. This
high-risk, high-payoff project will investigate how cortex and hippocampus
communicate and coordinate information transfer during learning and memory
consolidation by multimodal imaging and recording experiments. However, such
experiments are not currently feasible due to technical limitations. This
proposal follows a transformative approach to investigate hippocampus-cortex
coordination during learning and memory by combining (i) technological
breakthroughs in development of novel implantable probes, (ii) carefully
designed multi-modal sensing experiments, and (iii) advanced data analysis
techniques. Such a capability could lead to discoveries on information
processing in the brain and can help to better understand circuit dysfunctions
causing memory impairment for various neurological disorders affecting a large
population worldwide. Findings from this research can help with bridging
critical gaps between artificial intelligence-driven models for learning and
real biological learning in brain. Understanding the latter has the potential to
reshape current practices in machine learning. This project will also provide
opportunities for students to become engaged in cutting-edge multidisciplinary
research in microfabrication, neuroscience and data analysis. The project will
also provide research internship opportunities and mentoring initiatives for
underrepresented minorities in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to investigate how cortex and hippocampus communicate and
coordinate information transfer during learning and memory consolidation by
multimodal imaging and recording experiments. Wide-field calcium imaging will be
used to monitor cortex-wide neural activation across large areas in awake mice.
Simultaneous electrophysiological recordings from hippocampus will detect high
frequency oscillations such as sharp-wave ripples and spikes from single
neurons. Integration of multiple imaging and recording modalities requires
development of new implantable probe technologies enabling recording from
hippocampus during imaging and advanced data analysis techniques. Complementary
expertise of the investigators will be leveraged to pursue; Task 1: Development
of new flexible penetrating microprobes compatible with optical imaging, Task 2:
Multi-modal, multi-scale experiments in awake mice generating brand new data
sets synergistically combining information from calcium fluorescence, local
field potentials, single units and behavior, and Task 3: Development of a novel
data-driven task-aware algorithm to perform single-event analyses with
multimodal calcium imaging from cortex and electrophysiological recordings from
hippocampus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.