* 2024970
* Research Initiation: Factors Motivating Engineering Faculty to Adopt and Teach New Engineering Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michelle Jarvie-Eggart, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 238,946.00

With the world on the brink of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, engineering
faculty must continually&lt;br/&gt;teach new industry-relevant engineering
technologies, such as new software tools or new programming&lt;br/&gt;languages,
to maintain the relevance of their course materials, as well as to model
lifelong learning and&lt;br/&gt;technology adoption to students. Although
faculty regularly adopt new technologies for their own&lt;br/&gt;research, these
technologies are not necessarily those that are most important for practicing
engineers&lt;br/&gt;within industry. This project will develop an understanding
of what aids and hinders engineering faculty ability to learn and teach new
engineering technologies, which will inform a model of faculty technology
acceptance as well as proposed interventions to increase faculty adoption of
industry-relevant technologies. Properly trained engineers are an essential
element of our country to navigate the Fourth Industrial Revolution and maintain
both our long-term economic stability and our national security. The success of
engineering programs within the technological revolution depends upon a quick
and agile response from faculty and administration. This project will help
position engineering faculty to be able to maintain the relevance of engineering
programs and the skills of engineering graduates both now and in the long
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an understanding of factors
that support or inhibit engineering faculty&lt;br/&gt;technology acceptance,
including the development of a faculty-specific model of such acceptance.
Its&lt;br/&gt;scope will focus on examining engineering faculty voluntary
adoption and teaching of industry-relevant technologies. Previous studies of
technology adoption among faculty have focused on instructional technologies,
rather than the technologies that students will use in their careers.
Additionally, the widely used Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) has been shown
to be limited, only accounting for 60% of the variability in the ultimate
adoption of a technology (Lee et al., 2003). Thus, additional factors remain to
be uncovered that affect the adoption and teaching of industry-relevant
technologies by university engineering faculty. The questions to be addressed in
the research include: (a) What are the motivations that influence the adoption
of new digital technologies by engineering faculty? (b) What are the barriers
that inhibit the adoption of new digital technologies by engineering faculty?
(c) What institutional policies and programs might aid faculty in the adoption
of new engineering technologies? (d) What factors affect faculty decisions
regarding which new engineering technologies to learn and adopt for their
professional use? and (e) How do faculty determine which engineering
technologies to teach in their courses? Qualitative interviews with engineering
faculty will be used to gather data to identify the relevant variables which can
then be tested in subsequent research. Identified themes in the data will be
used to elaborate new constructs that may affect faculty technology acceptance.
These new constructs will ultimately lead to a proposed revised TAM that is more
applicable to engineering faculty, leading to a better understanding of
technology adoption and use among these faculty. More importantly, the new
understandings that are developed will inform proposed interventions to address
the challenge of keeping the technological tools taught to students, and
associated skills learned, in engineering courses relevant for engineering
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.