* 2024647
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Educational Methods for Teaching Adaptive Responses to Entrepreneurial Failure
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Sarah Zappe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 22,284.00

Entrepreneurial activity is critical for the continued innovation, growth, and
transformation of the national economy. Entrepreneurial education has been
rapidly expanding within universities over the past 15 years in hopes of helping
develop the next generation of entrepreneurs. Colleges of engineering have been
amongst the most active participants because of their students’ ability and
training to innovate within a rapidly evolving technology-based economy.
Entrepreneurship education within universities and colleges has the potential to
both increase the commercialization rate of fundamental research being performed
in university systems and to provide fundamental mindset development that will
lead to more engineers and scientists to become entrepreneurs at some phase of
their careers. Because of the high risk involved in entrepreneurial activity,
the failure rate of new ventures is quite high, yet initial research shows that
universities and colleges are currently doing very little to teach skills that
prepare entrepreneurially minded individuals for failure or to support them at
times of failure. This research will develop an understanding of methods that
universities and colleges utilize in curricular and co-curricular programming to
support entrepreneurs both before and while experiencing entrepreneurial
failure. This project’s goal is to identify teaching strategies and
interventions that lead to positive adaptive behavior and help the entrepreneurs
learn from and maintain an entrepreneurial orientation when faced with failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the increase of programs and funding dedicated to
entrepreneurship, the study of entrepreneurial failure in the context of
engineering education is almost non-existent. It is currently unknown whether
sufficient preparation and education around project/venture failure is occurring
to properly equip entrepreneurially minded engineering students to learn and
grow from entrepreneurial failure. This research will add to the body of
knowledge on student entrepreneurial failure by identifying the different types
of failure that students in entrepreneurial teams experience as well as
understanding the relationship between pre-failure dispositions and post-failure
responses. This project will employ qualitative approaches to study current and
former engineering students who (co)-founded an entrepreneurial venture as part
of university entrepreneurship programming, and whose ventures have ceased
operation without an exit event. The research questions are: RQ1: What are the
different types of entrepreneurial failures that students working on ventures
experience? RQ2: What are the different ways that students who experience
entrepreneurial failure respond (i.e. identification of adaptive and maladaptive
post-failure responses)? RQ3: What are the different factors or events that lead
students who experience entrepreneurial failure to exhibit adaptive or
maladaptive responses (pre-failure dispositions)? RQ4: What educational methods
do student entrepreneurs report receiving to help them prepare for and respond
to entrepreneurial failure? The study will provide an initial understanding of
the pre-failure and post-failure dispositions and responses of these engineering
entrepreneurs combined with the educational programming (if any) that was
provided that influenced these dispositions and responses. The goal for this
project is to build and disseminate knowledge on educational programming that is
beneficial to entrepreneurially minded students who face failure events. The
project will also provide direction on enhancements to pedagogical approaches
that educators can use to better teach and support students who may face or are
facing failure events as part of a universities’ entrepreneurial
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.