* 2024504
* MTM 1: The sandy beach microbiome: physical, chemical and biological controls on diversity and function
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Christopher Francis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Sandy beaches represent a large fraction of the world’s unfrozen shoreline and
they are under serious threat from sea level rise. They provide important
ecosystem services including water filtration and nutrient cycling. These
processes are controlled by a community of microorganisms working together
called a microbiome in the beach subsurface. While we know the importance of
microbiome activity in these systems, there are limited studies that
characterize the microbial community in this environment. The goal of this
project is to characterize the microbiome in the beach subsurface and
investigate the environmental factors that control its structure and function.
This goal will be achieved using next generation sequencing methods that provide
vast amounts of genetic information from DNA and RNA sequences. Successful
completion of this project will advance knowledge and understanding across
different scientific fields including environmental microbiology, ecology, and
environmental engineering and science. The proposed work will benefit society by
furthering the understanding of the ecosystem services provided by beaches,
information critical to understanding the impact of sea level rise on the
environment. The diversity of the Nation’s STEM workforce will be increased by
engaging college students from diverse backgrounds in the research. Further
benefits to society will result from teaming with elementary school teachers to
create learning modules on bacteria for school-aged children. The research team
will also conduct outreach to the public during field work to educate them about
the beach ecosystem and engage government officials on the issue of sea level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The steep spatial physicochemical gradients and large
temporal variation make the subterranean estuary of sandy beaches an ideal study
system to focus on the goal of identifying the rules governing microbiome
structure and function in coastal environments. This will be achieved by i)
characterizing the microbiome in the subterranean estuary, ii) investigating the
mechanisms controlling sandy beach microbiome dynamics, and iii) assessing
microbial immigration via transport through the sands and local adaptation to
changes in porewater chemistry. The research will employ state-of-the-science
amplicon sequencing, metagenomics, and metatranscriptomics together with methods
from hydrology and biogeochemistry. The research benefits society by furthering
the understanding of the ecosystem services provided by beaches in terms of
biogeochemical cycling. As beaches are threatened by sea level rise, this work
is essential to fully anticipate the effects of sea level rise on the
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.