* 2024247
* NRI: FND: Computational and Interactive Design of Soft Growing Robot Manipulators
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* C. Karen Liu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2024
* USD 782,000.00

This project will contribute to the development of new soft robot manipulators
that can assist people with limited physical abilities in their activities of
daily living in the home. Soft robots are made of flexible and stretchable
materials configured to increase human safety, lower cost, and mechanically
adapt to their environments, which are significant advantages compared to
traditional, rigid robots. However, today's soft robots are far from capable of
performing household manipulation tasks; they have limited dexterity and cannot
handle the weight of many objects encountered in daily life. This award supports
research to develop novel mechanisms and design tools in order to create soft
robots that seamlessly integrate into homes and provide needed assistance. This
project aims to improve human health and quality of life by (1) assisting people
with limited physical abilities in their homes, (2) lowering the cost of robot
manipulators, toward making robots accessible to a wide spectrum of users, and
(3) promoting human safety through controllable mechanical compliance and
robustness. These features are important to improve equity in access to
technology, especially in scenarios where physical distancing between humans is
required. This interdisciplinary project integrates mechanical engineering and
computer science, and the project will educate a diverse group of students in
classes and research in order to broaden participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a modular set of new soft
robot components that capitalize on previously developed steerable, tip-
extending inflated beams: continuum links, variable stiffness control, and
variable discrete joints. Each component contributes a valuable capability
toward 3D manipulation. Because the process of specifying and combining these
components in order to create a robot to achieve a particular task is too
difficult for human designers to effectively navigate, the research team will
create simulation and planning software. This software will enable a
computational design process considering inverse kinematics, inverse dynamics,
and trajectory optimization to develop both the overall design and the real-time
control strategy. In the simulation and planning environment, users who are not
robotics experts will be able to specify the critical tasks, test the ability of
the robot to achieve the specified tasks as well as new tasks, and influence the
design to be compatible with their needs. The effectiveness of this approach
will be demonstrated through user studies and the implementation of a variety of
inflated-beam soft 3D robot manipulators that perform different household
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.