* 2024435
* NRI: FND: Multi-Manipulator Extensible Robotic Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nadya Peek, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

For a long time, robotics has emphasized "dangerous, dirty, or dull" tasks. This
project aims to make skilled experts more productive rather than automate lower
skilled mass-manufacturing tasks. The project will enable automation of custom,
specialized, and niche tasks conducted collaboratively by domain experts
together with robots. Laboratory scientists rely on precise and accurate
manipulation of samples for the gathering of data. This project will develop co-
botic automation tools that enable scientific exploration. These tools will
include open-source motion platforms which can be customized for different
applications, novel end effectors which can move objects without touching them,
and software programming environments that can be used for authoring workflows
that will be conducted with these tools. These tools allow scientists to
delegate the precise manipulation to a robot without loss of the ability to
explore and iteratively develop experiments and workflows. This research will
broaden and diversify access to automation technology by providing low-cost and
accessible infrastructure that is relevant to many scientific
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will establish tools for co-botic
workflows which end-users can customize for application specific tasks. It will
contribute novel end-effectors for ultrasonic manipulation, including for
applications such as manipulating trapped powders and liquids. It will
contribute new design patterns for motion platforms which automatically change
between multiple end-effectors. These motion platforms will be customizable,
with application experts able to produce them in the field without additional
expertise in robotics. It will contribute software tools for controlling these
end-effectors and motion platforms developed from an end-user perspective,
providing abstractions that allow domain experts to define and execute
collaborative robotic workflows. This work will substantially advance research
efforts in robotics and human-machine interaction by developing contactless
manipulation, customizable co-bots, and iterative design of automated
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.