* 2024905
* NRI: INT: MiaPURE (Modular, Interactive and Adaptive Personalized Unique Rolling Experience)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Hsiao-Wecksler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,539.00

Wheelchair design is essentially a chair supported between two large drive
wheels with one or more casters and has changed little since the first U.S.
patent awarded in 1869. Globally, the World Health Organization reports that
approximately 65 million people need a wheelchair. The 2010 U.S. Census
indicated that there were 3.6 million wheelchair users over the age of 15 in the
U.S. Limitations exist to current manual wheelchair design. Notably, daily
manual chair propulsion contributes to long-term overuse injuries to shoulders
and wrists, and because the hands are occupied with propulsion, access to life
experiences such as holding a loved one’s hand on a walk are compromised. Other
life experiences remain largely inaccessible as well, such as easily and safely
navigating a variety of outdoor terrains without risk of falling (gravel, rocks,
grass, sand, snow) and accessing tight spaces such as restroom stalls and
airplane aisles. Powered wheelchairs address some of these limitations; however,
they are heavy and large, which also limit use in tight spaces and require
ramp/lift-equipped vehicles for transport. Most wheelchair users with sufficient
upper limb functionality will not use powered wheelchairs due to their
substantial weight, runtime limitations, larger size, and greater cost. A
disruptive approach for achieving the rolling mobility of people with lower-limb
disability is needed. This project envisions breaking the mold of the
traditional wheelchair through exploration of a safe, compact, adaptive ball-
based robot (ballbot), where the rider sits on a sleek modular robot that is
driven by a single large ball. Robot movement and speed are managed hands-free
by gently leaning the torso in the desired direction. The use of a single
spherical wheel (a ball) allows for unique movement in any direction, or
"omnidirectional” movement. Due to the sleek design of the ballbot architecture,
the robot’s footprint will be approximately the size of a seated person and the
height of a chair. User-centered design and user experience principles will be
observed throughout prototype development by incorporating input from focus
groups to allow for iterative adjustments. This embodiment creates an ideal
ubiquitous collaborative human-robot relationship that seamlessly integrates
this co-robot into the user's everyday life. This project will also provide
educational opportunities to bring design thinking, focused specifically on
design for disability, to university courses and high school engineering summer
camps. A dedicated Disability Design Maker-Lab will be created within the U.S.
Paralympic Training Center at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to
provide these students, and those across the campus, with an immersive and
empathic exposure to real-world application and individuals with physical
disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MiaPURE is a Modular, Interactive and Adaptive
collaborative robot that will provide a Personalized Unique Rolling Experience
for each user. MiaPURE explores a common omnidirectional ballbot platform with
multiple human-robot interfaces for modular and adaptive design configurations
and input control. The primary goal is to improve upon hardware and control of
self-balancing ball-based robots to allow for a safe, compact, and intuitive
mobility device for people with lower-limb disability. This riding ballbot will
feature omnidirectional, hands-free movement and ability to adapt to users of
different sizes and trunk functional ability in a variety of environments. A
secondary goal is to exploit modularity to envision easy conversion into a
companion robot capable of supporting substantial top-heavy payloads (including
up to the weight of an adult human). Both design configurations utilize a common
ballbot drivetrain, which will be a sharable testbed allowing others to explore
ballbot research questions. Customizable and scalable design needs will be
explored to accommodate different users in complex environments. Two input
control modes propelling either device configuration will be developed: (1)
direct physical interaction (leaning of the torso while riding or
pushing/pulling the companion ballbot), and (2) remote commands using an input
device (e.g., joystick, gesture control). Advanced driving assistance such as
obstacle avoidance and semi-autonomous navigation between predefined indoor
locations will also be investigated. Specifically, this project will construct a
third-generation prototype. In the first aim, the project will examine issues
related to human-robot interfaces to allow for intuitive and organic user
interfaces. The second and third aim will address low-level and higher-level
robotic control, respectively. The technological approaches explored in this
project can be applicable to making a realizable family of ballbots to address a
variety of use cases and stakeholders (consumers, healthcare, workforce, and/or
defense).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.