* 2024649
* NRI: INT: SMART: Soft Multi-Arm RoboT for Synergistic Collaboration with Humans
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,499,255.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support research that will contribute novel
methodologies related to multi-arm soft robots, advancing its practical use in
applications involving close collaboration with humans. Soft robots have great
promise in versatile applications involving interactions with humans, such as
elder care, collaborative surgery, work/life assistance, and collaborative fruit
harvesting. Taking apple-picking as a motivating case study, the goal of this
project is to develop a novel soft robot system equipped with multiple soft
arms, termed soft multi-arm robot or SMART, and to advance its practical use in
applications involving close collaboration with humans. This award supports
fundamental research that addresses the major challenges in soft robot design
and fabrication, motion planning and control, environment and human perception,
and human-robot interaction. The new designs and methodologies will enable safe,
efficient, and robust cooperation between multiple soft robot arms and humans.
The soft multi-arm robot system can not only improve production efficiency (for
example, in assisting fruit harvesting), but also contribute to meeting the
nationâ€™s urgent need to take care of the elderly population (for example, in
elder care and assisted living). Therefore, results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and life quality. This research involves several
disciplines including soft robotics, control, human-robot interaction,
perception and learning, and agriculture automation. The multi-disciplinary
approach also facilitates the participation of underrepresented groups in
research and positively impacts engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
soft multi-arm robot system is expected to offer dexterity, efficiency, and
intrinsic safety, and achieve productive collaboration with humans with an array
of exciting potential applications. To achieve this goal, five synergistic
research thrusts are pursued to overcome key scientific challenges: 1) designing
and fabricating soft multi-arm robots to realize simultaneous actuation and
stiffness-turning and enable dexterous manipulation, 2) advancing motion
planning and control approaches for these soft robots to achieve robust
manipulation in 3D space in the presence of stationary and dynamic obstacles, 3)
formalizing trust-based human-robot interaction to realize efficient human-robot
collaboration by explicitly accommodating the dynamics of human trust in the
soft multi-arm robot policy, 4) developing orchard and human motion perception
algorithms to robustly obtain 3D tree and human position/pose information to
support the fruit harvesting application, and 5) evaluating the soft multi-arm
robot system via extensive lab and field experiments in the context of
collaborative apple harvesting. Collectively, advances from these research
endeavors are expected to make soft multi-arm robots practically viable,
especially for applications involving close collaboration with
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.