* 2024178
* Collaborative Research: Ionic Solutions and the Partitioning of Oxygenated Organic Compounds in the Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Christopher Hennigan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 410,317.00

This project includes laboratory experiments and field measurements to help
build a quantitative understanding of influence of salts and pH on the
partitioning of atmospheric organics between the aerosol and gas phase. The goal
of the project is to develop parameterizations suitable for implementation in
atmospheric models to improve the prediction of the atmospheric particulate
matter burden, and subsequent impacts related to air quality, direct and
indirect radiative forcing and the deposition of reactive carbon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address the following
questions: (1) How does partitioning of atmospheric organic gases change as a
function of salt composition, concentration and droplet pH in different
environments? and (2) How do changes in gas-to-water partitioning alter the
budget and lifetime of reactive carbon compounds in the atmosphere? This effort
will advance the understanding of fundamental chemistry through the deployment
of mist chambers to humid and arid regions of the U.S. to systematically study
inorganic salt influences on the partitioning of ambient water-soluble organic
gases in contrasting environments. The project incorporates a creative method
for communicating scientific findings through the participation of art students,
who will design insightful content about air quality and climate change for
those outside the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.