* 2024684
* Genomic Perspectives in Comparative Physiology of Mollusks: Integration across Disciplines
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Maurine Neiman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 14,870.00

This project will support a symposium, “Genomic Perspectives in Comparative
Physiology of Mollusks: Integration across Disciplines” that will take place at
The Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB)'s annual meeting on
January 4, 2021 in Washington, D.C, USA. The symposium speakers will all
highlight mollusks as a powerful means of linking genome to phenotype - a
critical unanswered question in biology. This symposium will bring together a
diverse set of biologists from across career stages and institutions and from
the biomedical sciences to ecology to address this theme. The symposium
activities are designed to encourage engagement and catalyze collaborations. In
particular, the symposium will use an interdisciplinary and interactive model
that will provide meaningful professional and scientific development
opportunities for junior scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mapping genotype to
phenotype remains one of the biggest challenges in biology. A mechanistic
understanding of the genetic basis of these responses is also critically
important to forecast how living systems will respond to rapidly changing
environments, which represents an urgent challenge for biologists. This
symposium will use an interest in mollusks as a common currency to link
biologists in otherwise quite disparate fields (e.g., biomedicine, physiology,
ecology). The symposium consists of 11 presentations representing a broad range
of efforts to integrate large datasets across levels of biological organization
in mollusks, towards the larger goal of linking genome to phenome - one of the
Grand Challenges identified by NSF. Presentations, discussions and syntheses
will focus on topics that include overviews of the biological and genomic
diversity of molluscan life, technological progress towards highly contiguous
molluscan genomes, challenges in assembling molluscan genomes, and how genome-
scale processes underpin organismal physiology and ecological and evolutionary
processes over multiple spatiotemporal scales. Meetings focused on organismal
groups traditionally emphasize systematics and taxonomy or the intricacies of
organismal biology. The symposium will explicitly take a broader and more
integrative perspective, applying new insights and developments from
bioinformatics and genomics to solve important biological questions and address
health and economic issues that directly impact
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was cofunded by the Integrative
Ecological Physiology and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Programs
in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in Directorate for Biological
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.