* 2024856
* NCS-FO: Integrated neurocognitive process models of individual differences in children’s math problem solving strategies, learning and development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Vinod Menon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project, led by a team of researchers at Stanford University,
is to develop novel neurocognitive models that integrate behavioral and neural
(fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging) data to understand the
computational, cognitive, and brain mechanisms underlying individual differences
in mathematical problem solving and strategy use, the effects of training, and
longitudinal development. Understanding how symbols are processed in the brain
has direct implications for education and the remediation of cognitive
difficulties. The researchers will perform sophisticated computational analyses
on a dataset derived from children 7 to 12 years of age in an fMRI study, a
tutoring study, and a longitudinal study. The findings of this study will
provide a basis for customized training and will provide novel platforms for
diagnostic and intervention procedures for learning difficulties. This project
is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive
Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will leverage extensive
behavioral data, cognitive assessments, as well as brain imaging data, to model
moment-by-moment changes in latent cognitive dynamics associated with
mathematical problem solving. The multidisciplinary approach described here
seeks to develop unsupervised computational models to infer differences in the
latent cognitive strategies used by an individual on a trial-by-trial basis.
Specifically, this project aims to (1) develop computational cognitive models
for inferring latent problem-solving dynamics and strategy use, (2) develop
novel integrated neurocognitive models to identify distinct and overlapping
brain circuits underlying latent problem-solving dynamics and strategy use, and
(3) determine integrated cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying the impact
of cognitive tutoring on changes in latent problem-solving dynamics and strategy
use. The planned studies will help in dissociating mathematical problem solving
into multiple cognitive sub-processes, characterizing sources of individual
differences across these sub-processes, identifying how each of these might
relate to difficulties in problem solving, and evaluate whether these cognitive
sub-processes may be remediated by cognitive tutoring programs. Ultimately, this
research will enhance our understanding of dynamic cognitive processes and
problem-solving strategies in children’s numerical cognition and provide new
insights into latent behavioral dynamics associated with typical and atypical
math abilities in children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.