* 2024672
* Shift In Shedding Frequency In Multiphase Flow Past A Cylinder
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Per-Olof Persson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 407,175.00

Vortices are shed from tubes in heat exchangers and in countless other commonly
encountered flows of practical importance. The shed vortices can excite
vibration in the equipment, which in turn can lead to inefficient operation or
damage, which is a known phenomenon and usually accounted for in the design.
However, if the liquid flow past an object like a tube contains gas or vapor
bubbles, the shedding frequency can shift and hence excite potentially
unexpected frequencies. The flows with a shift in the shedding frequency remain
only partially understood. The goal of this research is to better understand the
physical mechanisms of multiphase flows encountering a bluff body (i.e. an
object that is not streamlined). This research will provide recorded
visualizations for K-12 students explaining the bubbly-fluid physical phenomena.
This interaction will introduce a diverse student population to the relevant
physics of these flows with the goal of increasing interest in the STEM field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To gain a deeper understanding of vortex shedding in
multiphase flows, a carefully planned fundamental study is undertaken on the
physical mechanisms relevant to a bubbly flow past a cylinder in a nominally
two-dimensional flow. The research will utilize state-of-art experimental
techniques, theory, and numerical modelling to gain a thorough understanding of
the flow over a wide range of parameters. The numerical simulations will be
carried out using high-order accurate flow solvers with adaptive meshes and
large eddy simulation models. The bubble size has a predictable effect on the
probability and rate of bubble entrainment to boundary layers and vortex cores
in a flow past a cylinder. Small bubbles act as passive tracers, whereas for
large bubbles buoyancy dominates. However, for intermediate size bubbles there
is a notable nonlinear dependence on probability of bubble capture in the
vortices on bubble size. For conditions where bubbles accumulate in the vortices
at disproportionate rate and increasing local void fraction, there is an
enhanced shift in shedding frequency. Hence, the questions to be studied
include: what are the dominant mechanisms controlling gas accumulation in the
vortex cores, does the modification of the underlying flow by the dispersed
phase affect vortex shedding by mechanisms other than modification of average
density in wake, and does the vortex shedding frequency bifurcate as suggested
by previous investigatorsâ€™ data?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.