* 2024964
* Regulatory functions of intrinsically disordered electronegative clusters (ENC) in RNA-binding proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jun Zhang, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

Interaction between biomolecules is essential for life. While most proteins have
stable three-dimensional structures, a significant number of proteins have been
shown to lack a stable three-dimensional structure and are known as
intrinsically disordered proteins. It has been shown that proteins that interact
with RNA contain regions that are intrinsically disordered, which are essential
for the protein-RNA binding. The investigators of this project have shown that
most abundant disordered regions in RNA-binding proteins encode clusters of
acidic residues or phosphorylation sites that give these regions an overall
negative charge. Like tails that help animals to balance and to swish away
insects, the disordered protein regions help proteins to balance surface charges
for stability and swish away nonspecific ligands. This project will explore how
these electronegative clusters modulate protein function. Studying these
proteins will provide insights into key biological processes, such as transient
folding of disordered proteins, site selection in ribosomal biogenesis, and
alternative splicing. In addition, understanding this phenomenon will inform
development of novel protein design techniques for more robust and specific RNA-
binding proteins, which will ultimately contribute to US bioeconomy. This
project will provide training opportunities to high school and undergraduate
students, including members of underrepresented groups, in biochemical research
and bioinformatics-based coding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
three model proteins: histone-mRNA Stem-Loop Binding Protein, ribosome
biogenesis protein 15, and Serine-Arginine Rich Splicing Factor 1. These
proteins were selected because they play essential roles in critical biological
processes, such as histone pre-mRNA processing, ribosomal biogenesis, and
alternative splicing, respectively. Because these proteins encode different
types of electronegative clusters and have unique degrees of three-dimensional
folding status, this project will systematically elucidate the function of
electronegative clusters in mediating both protein folding and stability as well
as RNA binding specificity and kinetics. Cutting-edge biophysical and
biochemical techniques, such nuclear magnetic resonance, crystallography,
stopped-flow fluorescence, and next generation sequencing will be used.
Completion of this work will not only produce knowledge generally applicable to
all RNA-binding proteins, but also elucidate specific and important processes
where these proteins play essential roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.