* 2024656
* NRI: FND: Investigating the Safety Challenges of Co-drones in Future Construction Workplaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Masoud Gheisari, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 804,797.00

The use of drones in construction has increased significantly, making the
construction industry one of the fastest commercial adopters of drones. Drones
are widely used through different phases of construction, from aerial mapping,
safety and quality monitoring and site logistics to structural inspection and
maintenance assessment. With the predicted increase in construction activity to
address growing infrastructure needs, it is expected that collaborative
interactions between human workers and co-drones in the construction industry
will continue to increase rapidly. The use of flying robots in construction
jobsites potentially raises new occupational safety and health issues that must
be investigated to avoid putting construction workers at a risk. In this study,
simulation techniques will be used to visualize future construction sites that
include ubiquitous co-drones and to identify and evaluate strategies for
minimizing risks to the health and safety of construction workers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to explore the health and safety
implications of having construction crews work collaboratively with co-drones on
construction jobsites. The specific objectives of the project are to: (1)
identify and evaluate the fatal and non-fatal physical risks associated with the
operation of co-drones in construction sites under different operating
conditions, (2) empirically evaluate the effects of co-drones on workersâ€™
attentional allocation (e.g., visual, auditory, and cognitive distractions) and
physical balance control performance in construction sites, and (3) empirically
evaluate the psychological impacts (e.g., acute stress, cognitive and sensory
overload, and negative emotional states) of workers working with co-drones.
Simulation and virtual reality techniques will be employed to achieve the
objectives of the project. A combination of quantitative and qualitative
measures obtained from interviews, self-reported questionnaires, and multiple
types of camera-based systems, wearable biosensors, and ground reaction force
measurement systems will be used to assess the health and safety impact of co-
drones. From a human behavior modeling perspective, the project will elicit
fundamental knowledge about natural human behavior in drone-populated
environments and advance fundamental knowledge of human-drone interaction.
Moreover, the findings of the study will help in formalizing comprehensive
regulations for drone use in construction and lead to the efficient design of
drones and unmanned aerial systems to satisfy construction-specific
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.