* 2024742
* Collaborative Research: NRI: INT: Customizable Lower-Limb Wearable Robot using Soft-Wearable Sensor to Assist Occupational Workers
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Woon-Hong Yeo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,373.00

This award supports an integrative, collaborative project to develop a
personalized lower-limb assistive wearable robot that reduces human effort
during physically intensive activities, such as lifting. The robot works by
sensing a user’s physical effort using soft-wearable electronics and responding
accordingly to reduce this effort. This work has significant applications in
factory labor involving weights, as overexertion injuries are both costly and
frequently disabling. This research investigates the effectiveness of this
wearable robot strategy in reducing human effort and develops strategies to
improve the utilization of wearable robots and soft wearable electronics. The
robot assistance to each individual human wearer is customized using an
estimation method based on various metrics. The estimation method can also be
used to design a training method using a wearable robot. The soft wearable
sensors will be useful in robotics as well as medical applications related to
diagnosis, monitoring, and therapeutics. The proposed project integrates
research and education by developing a project-based course on wearable robotics
and supporting graduate and undergraduate student mentoring in independent
research and thesis studies. The project strengthens the infrastructure for
education and research by helping maintain wearable robot testbeds. The research
results will be broadly disseminated through publications, software, and data
sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team members have three objectives that
contribute to the goal of customizability in wearable robot personalized
assistance. First, the customization process will be improved by identifying
alternative optimization criteria to efficiently estimate the user’s physical
effort during physically intensive activities. This will be accomplished through
a rapid and robust estimate of the user effort using a conventional
physiological sensor, such as a muscle activity sensor, followed by an estimate
using new soft wearable electronics. Second, the work will enhance soft-wearable
electronics with the goal of improving on and replacing conventional sensors.
Associated tasks will explore the feasibility of using existing soft wearable
electronics as sensors and then iteratively improve the electronics and
estimation method to accurately sense and estimate physiological status. Third,
the study will integrate and evaluate the personalized assistance achieved using
soft wearable sensor measurements in a physically intensive activity, such as
lifting using an ankle exoskeleton. This task will use appropriate metrics such
as energy expenditure rate of the task and muscle activity. The work will result
in customized (personalized) assistance available from a wearable robot for
physically intensive activities and a soft wearable sensor system to evaluate
the physical status of the user and provide real-time feedback. The evaluation
outcomes can be applied in interventions to mitigate or prevent existing hazards
and resulting injuries to workers; thus, the results of this research will
benefit human laborers in factories, warehouses, and other industrial
workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was funded with the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.