* 2024660
* Collaborative Research: What Processes Cause State Evolution in Rate and State Friction?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Friction is the resistance to sliding between two surfaces in contact, whether
it be on an earthquake fault, the parts of a door hinge, or pieces in an
automobile engine. People have observed that if two surfaces are in contact for
longer times with little sliding, greater forces are required to really get them
sliding again. Although this has been known for nearly 50 years, no one is sure
why it is true. Frictional surfaces actually only touch each other in many small
contact spots. The most popular idea for why longer contact times make friction
higher is that being in contact longer increases the total area or size of the
many contact spots. However, recent results by the team planning this research
project suggest that changing the strength or “quality” of those small contact
spots is more important than changing their area. The team of experimentalists
and theoreticians will conduct and analyze experiments in order to better
understand which explanation is correct. It is important to understand this
because the variations in frictional strength influence many processes of
practical importance. These include whether two surfaces slide steadily or
undergo alternating sticking and slipping motion. Such alternating motions
occur, for example, during earthquakes or when a bow is pulled across a violin
string. A better understanding of friction has implications for several
economically-important industries, including manufacturing and transportation.
If the results are as revolutionary as anticipated, this project will alter the
research directions of scientists trying to understand jerky sliding in many
disciplines. It could influence the research directions of people who are
pursuing the possibility that changes in contact area are responsible for
changes in friction. It would show that it is important to understand the
chemical bonding at frictional contact spots. It would result in new theoretical
investigations of the appropriate equations to use for applying lab results to
earthquake faults. The project will also increase the skills, the knowledge, and
the networks of an undergraduate student and a graduate student, as well as of
the two early-career scientists involved in the theoretical parts of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior described by rate and state
constitutive equations for friction has been recognized for nearly 50 years and
is widely accepted as being important in the nucleation of earthquake slip.
Nevertheless, there is still uncertainty regarding the micromechanical meaning
of what is represented by a “state” variable in this formulation; in other
words, what physical or chemical changes control state, dictating its evolution.
This is unsatisfactory from a fundamental scientific point of view. It is also
unsatisfactory because if the processes involved in the evolution of state are
not understood and characterized by process-based equations, then extrapolation
of laboratory results to understanding earthquake mechanics does not rest on a
firm foundation. It is believed by many in the community that the evolution
process involves time-dependent increase in the size of contacts across a
frictionally sliding interface, namely evolution of contact quantity. However,
evolution of contact quantity alone cannot explain recent experimental
observations of friction phenomenology following normal stress steps. In
contrast, the quality of the contact interface, in other words the contact shear
strength per unit area, dominantly controls strength evolution following normal
stress steps, a transformative observation. The team brings together
experimentalists and theoreticians. They will conduct a large suite of
experiments on a wide variety of geological and other materials, together with
intensive theoretical modeling and inversion of the experimental results, to
determine the relative contributions of changes in contact quantity and quality
to evolution of state. The theoretical modeling will include discrete element
modeling of granular gouge which has been recently shown to reproduce a variety
of experimental findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.