* 2024510
* Pumice: a post-fragmentation product?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* James Watkins, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 349,683.00

Plinian eruptions are among the most explosive volcanic eruptions and one of the
principal geological hazards along volcanic arcs. In the US, several volcanoes
have produced, and will again one day, devastating Plinian eruptions. Products
from a Plinian eruption are ejected into the atmosphere and can travel up to
thousands of kilometers. Their fallout can seriously damage infrastructure,
agriculture, and eventually encircle the globe, disrupting aviation and
affecting climate. Typically, more than 70% of the ejected Plinian material
consist of light weight fragments of fresh magma called pumice. The overall
formation of pumice seems mostly understood; during its ascent to the surface,
magma foams as gas bubbles nucleate and grow. This process continues until gas
pressure inside the bubbles causes the magma to break up into porous fragments
that are ejected in the atmosphere. The texture of pumice is thought to be
“frozen in” at the time magma fragments, whereas the size of fragments (microns
to centimeters) is reduced upon inter-particle collisions during transport in
the conduit, the eruptive column and/or the pyroclastic flows. Past research has
used the texture and size distribution of pumice to put quantitative constraints
on the eruptive processes occurring inside the conduit, especially on magma
fragmentation, even though the initial fragment size distribution remains
largely unknown. This study is driven by new textural observations made on
pumice from Medicine Lake Volcano (CA) that suggest some pumices are in fact
made of numerous smaller pieces of magma that collided, agglomerated and partly
sintered inside the conduit. This project seeks to (1) assess whether these
newly documented textures vary with pumice size and between eruptions of diverse
intensity and conduit shape, (2) further investigate the implications of this
discovery in terms of the conditions for magma fragmentation and characteristics
of its products, (3) determine whether the observed textures can be
quantitatively reproduced by sintering and decompression experiments in
laboratory. This study will support an early career scientist, a PhD student,
and undergraduate students who will gain experience with a wide variety of field
methods, experimental approaches, and analytical tools. The link between
research and education will include the development of two new First-year
Interest Group courses that expose students to volcanology and the links between
volcanology and other disciplines (anthropology, archeology and
journalism).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magma fragmentation is a process of
fundamental importance to volcanology. Beyond that, it has relevance to volcanic
hazard assessment, as it discriminates an explosive volcanic eruption from an
effusive one. In particular, the evolution of the size distribution of
pyroclasts inherited from magma fragmentation is an important input of plume
development and tephra dispersion models. Thus, a better understanding of
fragmentation and its products is important not only for basic science, but also
for practical reasons. To test the aforementioned hypotheses, the research team
will first quantify the size, shape and textures, both in 3D and in 2D, of
hundreds of porous pyroclasts from five rhyolitic eruptions that spanning more
than three orders of magnitude in eruptive volume. These eruptions occurred at
Newberry, Medicine Lake, Crater Lake and Long Valley volcanoes and through
conduits of different shape (sub-circular, dike, or unknown shape). Second, the
researchers will decipher the implications, in terms of magma fragmentation, of
the new observations by individualizing the particles that make up pumice clasts
and characterizing their size and shape distributions. Finally, experiments will
be carried out to attempt to reproduce the observed textures. Rhyolitic glass
will be hydrated with different amounts of H2O, then crushed, and finally
sintered during decompression experiments that reproduce the conditions of magma
ascent between the fragmentation level and the Earth’s surface. Preliminary
observations, analyses and experiments show that (1) agglomerate textures occur
in pumices from several Plinian eruptions at different volcanoes, (2) the size
distribution of individual particles making individual pumice clast is
consistent with the former being derived from primary fragmentation in the
conduit, and (3) it is possible to reproduce the observed textures
experimentally under certain conditions of initial particle size, water content
and decompression rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.