* 2024020
* BCSER: IID: Evaluating CURE Laboratory Benefits for Underprepared Students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Anne Casper, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 313,087.00

Evaluating Classroom Undergraduate Research Experience Laboratory Benefits for
Underprepared Students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classroom Undergraduate Research
Experience (CURE) laboratory experiences can make science more inclusive by
giving large numbers of first-year students the experience of carrying out
authentic research. The positive benefits of CUREs include increased analytical
skills, technical skills, self-efficacy, and persistence in science. Most of the
reported research on CUREs is from research-intensive institutions with
selective admissions, and some CUREs have been intentionally limited to only
high-achieving students. This research project will test the hypothesis that
CUREs benefit students when implemented at an institution with a great diversity
in student socioeconomic background and a large number of students who are
educationally underprepared. The PI’s current expertise is in molecular biology
research. Thus to successfully carry out this education research, the PI will
pursue professional development to develop deep subject-matter knowledge in the
field of biology education research, expertise in study design for education
research, and expertise in statistical analysis of quantitative data. These
goals will be achieved with the guidance of four expert mentors, and by taking
summer classes in statistical analysis. This research project and the PI’s
change in overall career trajectory will broaden participation in STEM careers
by facilitating the transfer of successful pedagogies between different
educational contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CURE that will be studied is a
Tiny Earth lab that was implemented in Introductory Biology I at a regional
comprehensive university with an extremely diverse student body in socio-
economic background and student preparation. The project research goals are to
determine whether the CURE lab (1) increases student self-efficacy, project
ownership, and perceptions of biology; (2) affects content knowledge in the
associated lecture class; and (3) has longitudinal effects on persistence. For
each goal, the PI will also specifically address whether underprepared students
are differentially affected by the CURE lab. The PI will use established
instruments to survey students, will compare student exam scores in the
associated lecture class, and will compare enrollment in an upper-level required
course. For each analysis, the PI will use regression models to control for
student preparation and other co-variates. This research will enhance our
understanding of how the effects of pedagogy differ between contexts, especially
in effects on underprepared students, and it will enhance our understanding of
the positive benefits of CUREs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported
through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
(ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build individuals’ capacity to
carry out high quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.