* 2024473
* Computational Design of Ultraselective Desalination Membranes using Molecular Simulations and Path Sampling Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Amir Haji-Akbari, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2023
* USD 332,392.00

Semipermeable membranes selectively impede the passage of undesirable molecules
and ions in a fluid, while allowing the desirable molecules to pass through the
membrane. This type of technology is key to many applications as well as natural
processes. For instance, membranes that are only water permeable and reject most
other ions and molecules are used in water desalination. Similarly, biological
cells feature membranes capable of modulating the passage of small molecules and
ions into and out of the cell. On a molecular level, a membraneâ€™s selectivity is
dictated by its nanostructure, i.e., the geometry, topology, and chemistry of
its constituent nanopores. However, there is much yet to learn about how a
membrane's structure is fundamentally related to its selectivity for certain
ions and molecules. On one hand, existing experimental techniques lack the
necessary spatiotemporal resolution to characterize membrane structure and to
probe isolated solute (the molecule or ion) passage events. On the other hand,
conventional molecular simulation techniques can provide information about
events at the correct length-scale, but the average time it takes to observe an
undesirable solute passing through a highly selective membrane is beyond the
reach of standard molecular simulation methods. These factors limit our ability
to understand important natural processes (such as biological membrane transport
and solute transport in porous media) and hamper efforts to rationally design
ultraselective membranes for desalination and gas and chemical separation
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to conduct a
systematic investigation of the structure-selectivity relationship in nanoporous
membranes using molecular dynamics simulations and advanced path sampling
techniques. The investigator recently developed a novel path sampling algorithm
that makes it possible to accurately and efficiently estimate arbitrarily long
solute transport timescales under operationally realistic conditions. The
algorithm is also capable of reconstructing an accurate and statistically
representative picture of the solute transport mechanism. This approach will be
used to probe the kinetics and molecular mechanisms of pressure-driven solute
transport through nanoporous membranes with well-defined geometries and
chemistries. The project focuses on membranes used in desalination applications,
but the developed computational tools can be universally applied to other
membrane-based separation processes. The research plan sets out first to develop
new computational tools and methods for studying solute transport through
membranes. Subsequently, the investigator will conduct a set of hypothesis-based
calculations that address important fundamental questions about the structure-
selectivity relationship in membranes and hindered transport under nanoscale
confinement. To this end, both simple model carbon-based membranes with well-
defined structures and chemistries and synthetic membranes such as zeolites and
metal-organic frameworks will be examined. Collaboration with experimental
groups at Yale complements the modeling efforts, as membranes with well-defined
structures will be synthesized and performance in membrane-based desalination
will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.