* 2024300
* SaTC: TTP: Small: Creating Content Verification Tools to Protect Document Integrity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Zhuo Lu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Adobeâ€™s Portable Document Format (PDF) has become the standard for electronic
documents. Academic and collegiate papers, business write-ups and fact sheets,
advertisements for print, and anything else meant to be viewed as a final
product make use of the PDF standard. End users cannot easily change the text of
a PDF document, so most come to expect a degree of integrity present in all PDF
documents encountered. Nevertheless, content masking attacks were discovered
against the content integrity of PDF documents themselves. Specifically, these
attacks cause humans to view a masked version of the content these computer
systems read. This project will create techniques and tools to deal with content
masking attacks against document integrity, and has the potential to
significantly impact on the research and engineering effort in the field of
document security, due to the wide use of digital documents in government and
commercial entities. With the substantial security enhancement for PDF content
integrity, the project could promote the wide adoption of PDF content
verification tools in today's data loss prevention
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the state-of-the-art in
document security via creating a set of defense tools to assure the integrity of
documents. The research team aims at (i) designing a lightweight PDF font
verification tool that can effectively verify the integrity of font files
embedded into documents; (ii) understanding the impact of adversarial machine
learning on document integrity; (iii) creating an advanced content verification
tool, which integrates functionalities of random partition, feature extraction,
and decision aggregation, to address content masking attacks leveraging the
adversarial machine learning techniques; and (iv) performing comprehensive
evaluation to ensure the efficiency, reliability, and security of the designed
content integrity verification tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.