* 2024180
* Collaborative Research: IUSE EHR - Inclusive Learning and Teaching in Undergraduate STEM Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 12/20/2019,09/30/2024
* Regina Frey, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2024
* USD 402,133.00

The economic prosperity of the United States relies on progress in science, the
advancement of national health initiatives, and adaptation to an increasingly
technical economy. This prosperity in turn relies on a talented workforce with
the ability to nimbly address new challenges and develop innovative
technologies. Colleges and universities can best prepare this future workforce
by ensuring that educational environments are effective for a diverse range of
students. This project focuses on the design and dissemination of faculty
development materials designed to enable faculty members to create more
inclusive learning environments for their students. Specifically, the project
will incorporate research-based practices that enable students to develop
further senses of self-efficacy, identity, persistence, and motivation to
persist in STEM fields of study. The project is intended to address persistent
gaps in the rates at which women and members of underrepresented groups persist
in STEM fields of study. Closing these gaps would lead to greater degree
attainment and workforce entry. The product of this work will be a comprehensive
virtual and in-person professional development program at a national scale that
will prepare future and early career faculty to teach inclusively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be led by Northwestern University in
partnership with Boston University, the University of Wisconsin at Madison,
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, University of Georgia, Washington
University in St. Louis, and the Des Moines Area Community College. Project
leaders will work with the University of Michigan's Center for Research on
Learning and Teaching Players, a group that uses theatrical and improvisational
dramatization in the service of improved learning and teaching. The materials
will be designed to enable faculty members to rethink curricular choices, update
their teaching methods, activities, and assessments, understand how aspects of
their own identities and those of their students may affect learning, and
recognize ways in which position and other issues play out in learning
environments. Building on the success of two prior Center for the Integration of
Research, Teaching and Learning online courses in STEM teaching and their
affiliated local learning communities, the project aims to build and sustain a
diverse network of institutions through learning communities of trained
facilitators to advance inclusive learning and teaching on their campuses. The
project has the potential to prepare 500 current faculty and 4,000 PhDs and
postdoctoral scholars to apply inclusive teaching practices that would
positively influence the learning experiences of more than 25,000 STEM students
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.