* 2024349
* EAGER: Bioforecasting: understanding and predicting species persistence in ecological communities under changing environments
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Serguei Saavedra, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2023
* USD 199,298.00

Biodiversity is defined as the presence of all species of plants, animals and
other living things at a given place and time. These species share their
environment and interact in complex ways. Scientists know that biodiversity is
critical for providing many ecological services necessary for the planet’s
health. Examples of these services include nutrient cycling, water purification,
and soil formation. Thus, understanding and predicting changes in biodiversity
(called "bioforecasting") is important for human wellbeing. However, because of
larger and faster environmental changes, knowing whether a species in a given
place will persist has become one of the biggest ecological challenges that
scientists face. The main problem is that it’s virtually impossible to know how,
where, when and which environmental conditions will change. The changes are
obvious only in hindsight. This project will create a new way to solve the
problem. The goal is to estimate the chance that a species will persist in a
given place and how its presence (or absence) can affect the chance of other
species persisting there, too. This project will also help launch the careers of
a scientist and the students he will mentor as they together craft a new
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main difficulty in understanding and predicting
species persistence resides in knowing the exact equations governing the
dynamics of ecological communities and the high uncertainty regarding initial
conditions, parameter values, intrinsic randomness, and more importantly, how
the changing external conditions will affect all of these dynamics. While
bioforecasting is already a well-established endeavor in ecological research,
current bioforecasting approaches demand extensive amounts of data and their
generalization often lacks experimental validation. Thus, it has been emphasized
that radically new frameworks are needed. Development of such frameworks involve
large risks and many challenges. This project will break new ground by
integrating concepts from the ensemble theory of statistical mechanics with the
mathematical concepts of structural stability, applied to population dynamics to
tackle current limitations in bioforecasting. Specifically, instead of aiming to
study the future behavior of a system by inferring the main conditions acting
upon it, this project will provide a testable methodology to estimate and
interpret the probability of a future behavior based on the fraction of possible
conditions compatible with the observability of such behavior. The investigator
will develop model-driven and data-driven approaches to estimate such
probabilities and validate them with empirical data already compiled in the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.