* 2024163
* Collaborative Research: A New Approach to Firn Evolution using the Taylor Dome Natural Laboratory
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Kaitlin Keegan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 385,870.00

The transformation of snow into firn and then glacial ice is a fundamental
process in glaciology. Understanding it is critical for many applications
including the conversion of satellite altimetry measurements into ice-sheet mass
changes—a key measure of glacier response to climate change. Better process
understanding is also critical for determining the difference in the age of ice
and the gas trapped within it. This difference complicates the age-dating of ice
cores. Despite its importance, the transformation of snow into firn and then ice
is still poorly understood and current predictive models have limited
applicability. This project aims to develop a physically based firn-compaction
model for the glaciological community. The team will take the first steps toward
this goal through a set of field and laboratory experiments combined with model
developments. The fieldwork will be at Taylor Dome in Antarctica.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce a new combination of firn
datasets designed to lead to the development of next-generation, physics-based
firn models. Advances in ice-core science and satellite altimetry demand firn
models that can reliably simulate firn evolution in a range of climatic
conditions, in a changing climate, and on long- and short-time scales. Current
firn-compaction models are largely based on a steady-state assumption and tuned
to particular geographical locations. Advancing beyond these models requires (1)
measuring current firn-compaction rates (2) measuring grain-scale
microstructures that play a crucial role in firn compaction, and (3) quantifying
processes driving evolution of those microstructures. To decouple firn’s
sensitivities to accumulation and temperature, the team will measure in situ
strain rates by two independent methods and observe trends in microstructure in
cores from sites spanning the accumulation gradient at Taylor Dome, while
maintaining the same average temperature. The team will assess the ability of
phase-sensitive radar to remotely measure firn-compaction rates, potentially
simplifying future in situ measurements. This work will create a roadmap for
collecting future microstructural data spanning key areas of temperature-
accumulation space and simplify future collaborations through the availability
of an open-source Community Firn Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.