* 2024342
* RUI: Mechanisms that influence DNA methylation maintenance at imprinted genes in mouse
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Tamara Davis, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 386,397.00

The majority of genes in mammals are expressed from copies inherited from both
parents, but a small number – called imprinted genes – are only expressed from
one of the two copies. Normal patterns of mammalian growth and development are
perturbed if the expression of imprinted genes is dysregulated. This research
focuses on DNA methylation, which plays a leading role in directing differential
expression of the mother’s vs. the father’s copy of imprinted genes. This
project will examine the mechanisms responsible for maintenance of DNA
methylation at imprinted genes, in order to better understand how distribution
of this DNA modification on the two parental copies results in different
expression patterns. These studies will be conducted at Bryn Mawr College, a
women’s undergraduate institution, and will provide a diverse cohort of students
the opportunity to advance scientific exploration, expand their data science
literacy and prepare them to be the next generation of research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While stable parental allele-specific
differences in DNA methylation are inherited via gametes and modulate the
expression of imprinted genes, less is known about the acquisition and
maintenance of highly variable DNA methylation profiles at secondary
differentially methylated regions (DMRs) that maintain imprinted expression
patterns at individual loci. This research will provide insight into the
mechanisms that govern establishment and maintenance of epigenetic profiles at
secondary DMRs. An oxidative bisulfite approach will be used to examine 5-
hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) content to test the hypothesis that hemimethylation
at secondary DMRs is a consequence of 5hmC enrichment and leads to loss of
methylation and pattern variability. Furthermore, the high level of
hemimethylation observed at secondary DMRs suggests that maintenance of
methylation at these sequences may be a complex process. The role of DNA
methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) at secondary DMRs will be investigated by analysis
of DNA methylation patterns in mice bearing a Dnmt1 mutation that has different
effects at global genomic sequences vs. imprinted loci. The experiments will
test the hypothesis that maintenance of methylation at secondary DMRs may depend
on methylation at gametic DMRs and may require Dnmt3. The outcomes of this
research will yield greater insights into the acquisition and maintenance of DNA
methylation patterns critical for imprinted gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.