* 2024058
* CCSS: Block-term Tensor Tools for Multi-aspect Sensing and Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Xiao Fu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Multi-aspect data arise ubiquitously in sensing, communications, and signal
processing. For example, a hyperspectral image in remote sensing has two spatial
aspects and one spectral aspect; spectrum dynamics data in wireless
communications comprise frequency, time, and space aspects. As higher-order
extensions of matrices, tensor models are considered indispensable tools for
multi-aspect sensing and analytics. This project is concerned with a recently
emerged tensor decomposition model, namely, the block-term decomposition model
in multilinear rank-(L,L,1) terms (i.e., the LL1 model). This model is well-
aligned to the underlying physics of a number of core applications in remote
sensing, medical imaging, chemometrics, and wireless communications, thereby
offering strong theoretical guarantees for these tasks. However, the LL1 model
is relatively new, and thus many challenges pertaining to its theory and methods
(e.g., scalability, robustness, and missing value recoverability) are still
largely uncharted territories. The appealing promises for boosting performance
of engineering applications have been barely fleshed out. This project will
significantly advance the understanding to the computational and analytical
aspects of the LL1 model --- leading to a series of theory-backed refreshing
multi-aspect data acquisition and processing algorithms. Beyond engineering, the
developed theory and methods will also be broadly applicable in related domains
such as ecology, biology and food science, where multi-aspect data frequently
come up. The project will also offer opportunities for training undergraduate
students in optimization, linear algebra, and real-data
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards fully capitalizing the power of the
LL1 tensor model, this project will address a number of critical challenges in
LL1 decomposition theory and methods. Specifically, the first thrust will design
scalable LL1 algorithms that can flexibly incorporate a large variety of prior
information as constraints and regularization; the second thrust will develop
model identification guarantees and algorithms for LL1 computations in the
presence of gross outliers; the third thrust will develop theory and algorithms
for recovering compressed/downsampled LL1 tensors; and the last thrust applies
the proposed approaches onto real-world engineering problems such as
hyperspectral unmixing, fluorescence data analysis, hyperspectral super-
resolution, and spectrum cartography. The proposed computational and analytical
tools are well-motivated in wake of the rapid growth of multi-aspect data.
Optimization problems associated with LL1 tensor decomposition are hard in both
theory and practice, due to their nonconvex nonsmooth nature and the LL1
model’s inherent ill-conditioned multilinear structure. Outlier-robust LL1
decomposition and compressed/downsampled LL1 tensor recovery pose exciting
research questions that reside at the core of signal processing and data
analytics. The solutions developed in this project will offer new insights and
effective tools for these challenging open problems, which are bound to benefit
a broad range of real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.