* 2024158
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 IEEE North American School for Information Theory(NASIT)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Yu Xiang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The 2020 IEEE North American School for Information Theory (NASIT ’20) will be
held at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada, from July 8th
to July 10th, 2020. This award supports travel expenses for US graduate students
attending the school. These participants benefit by learning from senior
colleagues, presenting their own research in poster sessions, and expanding
their network with their community, as well as honing professional development
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IEEE North American School for Information
Theory is an annual event of the IEEE Information Theory Society; this will be
the school's seventh year of operation. The School provide a supportive
environment where foundations for learning and long-term future scientific
collaborations are established. The School delivers interactive education for
graduate students in the mathematical, engineering, and computer science aspects
espoused by modern information theory, and offers students the opportunity to
meet with and learn from senior researchers from academia and industry who
present long-format tutorials. Student participants present their own research
results in poster sessions. The IEEE Information Theory Society “Padovani
Lecture” is delivered at the school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.