* 2024216
* EAGER: Impact of LEO Satellite Constellations on Optical Astronomy: Measurement, Simulation, Mitigation, and Forecast
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2023
* J. Anthony Tyson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 03/31/2023
* USD 299,871.00

The exponential industrialization of space, in the form of tens of thousands of
rather large Low Earth Orbit (LEO) communications satellites (LEOsats), has a
timescale short compared with normal scientific research projects. As they are
presently configured, LEOsats will have a major deleterious impact on ground
based optical astronomy. This study will assess the science impact of LEOsats,
and explore the effectiveness of different mitigation strategies. There is an
urgent need for informed studies that assess the impact realistically, as well
as exploratory investigations to choose one, or a few, of the best of various
proposed different mitigation strategies. Since the Vera C. Rubin Observatory
(VRO) is most impacted, with a domino effect on all other astronomy which would
use VRO data, this project will focus on assessment, laboratory measurements,
simulation, and mitigation, specific to the VRO and its initial mission, the
Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST). The natural night sky is the universal
heritage of everyone, not just professional astronomers, and it is threatened by
tens of thousands of bright moving LEOsats. Finding ways to reduce their impact
affects the quality of life of pretty well all of modern
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.