* 2024248
* Pilot Project: Exploring the Paleoenvironmental Data Archived in Ice Deposits from Lava Tubes before Its Imminent Loss  to Ice Melting
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Bogdan Onac, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 181,309.00

This project uses funding for a two-year pilot study to explore the paleoclimate
information potentially stored in ice cores recovered from a select number of
lava tubes from El Malpais National Monument (ELMA) in western New Mexico, a
region of great potential for drought
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instrumental climate records indicate that
drought patterns in southwestern North America are sensitive to Pacific Decadal
Ocean (PDO) variability and to interactions between the El Ni√±o Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) and the North American Monsoon System (NAMS). A deeper
understanding of the past (pre-instrumental) behavior of these modes could be
helpful for improving predictions of future drought and pluvial cycles.
Seasonally-accumulated ice in lava tubes may provide an high-resolution and
well-dated record of changing climatic conditions that will test the overarching
hypothesis that ENSO and NAMS variability were persistent features over the past
millennia in the Southwest and that all major climate periods (e.g., Medieval
Warm Period) were part of this pattern of decadal-to-interdecadal
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to: 1) provide proof of
concept for the use of stable isotopic composition of ice deposits in lava tubes
where carbonates are not available for delta 18-Oxygen analyses; 2) contribute
to a growing network of quantitative paleoclimate datasets that would add a
critical spatial and temporal perspective to the understanding of aridity
patterns in southwestern North America and associated synoptic climate
teleconnections; and 3) develop high-resolution, decadal-to-interdecadal scale
isotopic records from ice in lava tubes in the Southwest for the past 3,000
years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project may also help address other important
science questions such as: 1) How delta 18-Oxygen and deuterium excess of ice
indicate changes in the moisture source and air temperature during ice
formation? 2) How is hydroclimate variability in the south west U.S. reflected
by the stable isotopic composition of ice and which of the large-scale modes of
climate variability were operating over the past 3000 years? and 3) Can ice
deposits be used to identify spatial patterns of aridity (megadroughts) in the
Southwest during late Holocene. To address these questions, the ice isotopic
record will be used in conjunction with radiocarbon dated charcoal recovered
from ice and high-resolution tree-ring data available at
ELMA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include support for a
graduate student, the potential for developing a new archive of paleoclimate
data, and the advancement of the science of drought in the southwestern U.S., an
area of concern for current and future water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.