* 2024633
* NCS-FO: Advantages of varying navigational abilities in humans and robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mary Hegarty, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,019,638.00

Despite the importance of navigational skill, peopleâ€™s ability to find their way
around and the approaches they take vary widely. Yet we do not know why this
variation exists or how different strategies are used during everyday
navigation. In robotics, self-driving cars, and other autonomous systems, it has
become increasingly clear that a one-size-fits-all approach is not viable for
all environments and user needs. Similarly, producing autonomous systems with
different navigational strengths could improve the capacity of autonomous
systems as a whole, such as teams of exploring or search-and-rescue robots. This
project brings together researchers from neuroscience, cognitive psychology,
computer science, and robotics to study variability in navigation abilities and
strategies in complex environments. The researchers combine behavioral,
neuroscience, and computational approaches. Pinpointing the neural and
behavioral markers that underlie individual differences will lead to customized
solutions to navigational challenges and optimize the performance of autonomous
systems for differing environmental conditions. The outcomes of this research
will have the following specific benefits to society and scientific discovery:
1) advancing theoretical understanding of the processes involved in spatial
navigation, 2) understanding the advantages of variation in both humans and
robots, impacting how people approach both fields, 3) implications for
improvements in self-driving cars, GPS wayfinding devices, and transportation
signage, and 4) broader dissemination of virtual reality (VR)
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching cross-disciplinary aims of this
study are to 1) test whether human spatial navigation is a singular competence
or whether multiple abilities contribute, 2) establish the neural markers of
human navigational abilities through multi-modal imaging, and 3) implement and
test different navigational abilities in robots in real-world situations. This
study will be the largest to date (n = 270) to study human navigation abilities,
using both structural equation modeling and multivariate analysis of imaging
data to deeply address this question. Furthermore, the project will broaden the
scope of abilities to relate navigation skills to working memory, learning,
personality, and other factors. Implementing navigational strategies and
abilities in robots provides a controlled test of their tradeoffs. By
manipulating the planning and mapping strategies of robots, the researchers can
isolate particular abilities and their contributions to navigation, testing both
navigational theory and practical advantages for autonomous systems. The
interdisciplinary approach of this project harnesses the strengths of cognitive
science, robotics, and neuroscience to test the fundamental nature of human
individual variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.