* 2024391
* Laser-Assisted Atomic Layer Etching of Semiconductors and Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 632,800.00

Etching processes for removal of layers from the surface of wafers are
ubiquitous in the semiconductor industry. As the electronics manufacturing
enters the atomic scale regime, it is imperative to develop etching processes
that offer extremely tight control of the size variability. A highly promising
emerging approach to this end is the Atomic Layer Etching (ALEt). Incorporation
of laser irradiation can control and substantially enhance this process. This
award supports fundamental research to investigate the mechanisms of laser-
assisted ALEt. The research has the potential to provide the means to regulate
the target material dimensions with monolayer accuracy without inflicting damage
on the neighboring structures. The laser-induced ALEt will minimize changes in
the dimensions of nanostructured materials, thereby preserving the fidelity of
the processing sequence. The project outcome has the potential to advance
nanomanufacturing by enabling key applications in the atomic electronics era.
Therefore, results from this work will benefit the U.S. economy and society. The
research involves multiple disciplines, including laser chemical processing,
electronics nanofabrication, materials science, and on line process diagnostics.
The coupled materials processing and characterization methodology will provide
significant and presently unavailable opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to have exciting research experiences and state-of-the-art
training in nanoscience and engineering with emphasis on the participation of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser-assisted chemical etching
can control the removal of an ultra-thin layer of material using sequential
self-limiting reactions. The combination of surface processing experiments with
analytical diagnostics bridges a scientific gap in the understanding of chemical
and physical aspects of the ALEt mechanisms including gas phase and surface
reactions. The research will examine the dissociation of precursor etchant gases
by applying ultraviolet laser sources under different pressures and flow rates,
measure and correlate the concentrations of the produced radicals to the surface
coverage. Work will be conducted to investigate the effect of laser-induced
excitation of the target material and the adsorbed atoms on the atomic layer
removal under different incident irradiation wavelengths, pulse durations and
energy densities. The laser-aided ALEt concept will be extended to accomplish
layer-by-layer etching of transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) films and
graphene via tip-based nanopatterning. On line spectroscopy will probe the
mechanisms of the laser-induced dissociation process, the coupling of the
processing laser to the target material and the desorption process. The laser
activation of ALEt will also be explored as a means to establish a low
temperature etching process compatible and complementary to plasma-mediated
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.