* 2024276
* Preparing a Skilled Technical Workforce through Utilization and Assessment of Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Alvin Kung, Mount San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2025
* USD 953,432.00

This project builds upon the evidence that early immersion in mentored
experiential learning, such as an undergraduate research experience, increases
student persistence in STEM, completion of STEM certifications, and entry into
the technical workforce. Since research experiences may be limited at many two-
year college campuses, students at these institutions would benefit from
expanded opportunities to engage in authentic research experiences. Educating
enough skilled technical workers who are prepared for advanced technology
industries has become a national priority in the United States, and it is
essential for the country to retain its global leadership in science and
technology. Community and technical colleges play a vital role in meeting this
demand, especially for preparing students who are well qualified to enter the
technical workforce or transfer to a four-year university to earn STEM
baccalaureate degrees. An efficient and rapid way to produce the STEM
professionals that the nation needs would be to increase community college
student persistence in STEM fields. This project proposes to achieve that goal
by providing more undergraduate research experiences to community college
students. The research experiences are expected to help students gain deeper
STEM knowledge and skills, to increase their academic success, and to enable
them to develop the highly valued professional skills needed to enter the STEM
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on three
distinct goals: (1) providing authentic undergraduate research experiences to a
large number of STEM students to help strengthen their interest in STEM careers
and gain professional skills that are critically important in the technical
workplace; (2) modifying an assessment tool, EvaluateUR, for use in shorter
(8-week) summer research experiences; and (3) implementing EvaluateUR to assess
the intellectual growth and development in the studentsâ€™ disciplinary and
professional skills acquired through participating in the undergraduate research
experiences. The project is aligned with the goals of the Advanced Technological
Education program and leverages the vast research facilities and resources at
the University of California, Irvine, together with the technical resources and
support for modifying and implementing EvaluateUR available through SUNY-Buffalo
State and the Science Education Resource Center at Carleton College. Four
cohorts of 20 STEM students will be recruited and engaged in an undergraduate
research experience. Student and faculty mentors will be assessed using the
modified EvaluateUR tool. This tool has been shown to measure a broad range of
desirable outcomes that include both content knowledge and the outcomes that are
critically important in the workplace, including communication skills, ability
to solve obstacles, problem solving skills and critical thinking. The project
will work to ensure educational equity through activities that support the
recruitment of women, veterans, first-time college students, racial and ethnic
minorities; these groups represent an important, talented STEM pool for growing
the nation's technological workforce. The project outcomes will be published
through a dedicated website, presentations at local and regional conferences,
including the ATE Principal Investigators Conference, the American Association
of Community Colleges annual convention, and the Council on Undergraduate
Research Conference. The lessons learned while implementing this project will
likely be of interest to all community colleges and other academic institutions
with an interest in engaging students in similar research experiences. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.