* 2024212
* Understanding Future Changes in Midlatitude Orographic Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Siler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 431,782.00

Orographic precipitation refers to rain and snow that develops due to air that
is forced upward over mountainous terrain. Orographic precipitation depends on
numerous factors, and how those factors change in future climate states will
impact the climatology of the amount and location of precipitation in relation
to the terrain. One common result from climate modeling is that precipitation on
the downslope side of mountains will increase, which would have a large impact
on water resources and potential flooding. This study will analyze an existing
high-resolution numerical simulation and perform new simulations to determine
the physical mechanisms behind these changes. The work has direct impact on
farmers, water-resource managers, and other stakeholders in the Western US, and
the researchers will engage with this group through the participation in the
Climate Impacts Research Consortium. Multiple graduate students will also be
trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct a numerical
modeling study to better understand the potential changes in orographic
precipitation in future climate states. Prior modeling has provided evidence
that precipitation will increase in the “rain shadow” areas on the lee side of
mountainous terrain. The research team will analyze existing output from a
35-year high-resolution “pseudo-global warming” simulation and conduct new
simulations to address the following research questions: 1) What types of storms
contribute most to the pattern of precipitation change in the Cascades and
Sierra Nevada? 2) What mechanisms – dynamic, thermodynamic, and/or microphysical
– contribute to orographic precipitation change, and what is their relative
importance? 3) How sensitive are the results to differences in model
parameterizations, especially related to cloud microphysics? 4) Does the pattern
and mechanisms of precipitation change in the Cascades and Sierra Nevada hold
lessons for other midlatitude mountain ranges, such as the Andes or Southern
Alps?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.