* 2024928
* NRI: FND: Collaborative Navigation, Learning, and Collaboration in Fluids with Application to Ubiquitous Marine Co-Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Zhuoyuan Song, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 394,750.00

As the lifeblood of Earth, the ocean shapes and regulates global weather
patterns, maintaining the perfect balance of chemistry and temperature to allow
all Earth's life-forms to survive and thrive. Nonetheless, the current
understanding of global ocean activities and ocean health is extremely
inadequate due to the lack of sufficient observation data below the ocean
surface. The gap between the large ocean volumes to explore and the number of
existing sensors in subsurface regions remains astonishingly huge, leaving the
majority of the oceans unexplored. Small-size autonomous underwater vehicles are
becoming essential elements in persistent and pervasive ocean sensing and
monitoring. Accurate localization is of utmost importance for these vehicles to
perform intelligent sensing and control as well as for the users to properly
interpret the vehicles' measurements. However, underwater localization is
notoriously challenging since the ocean is opaque to radio frequency signals,
rendering the satellite-based positioning systems unavailable underwater. To
this end, this project will result in novel algorithms that enable teams of
marine robots to persistently and collaboratively navigate the under-explored
ocean volumes by utilizing ocean flows as localization references. This project
will fundamentally increase the footprint and autonomy of mobile robots in fluid
environments. The project outcomes will benefit several pertinent research areas
including oceanography, marine ecology, and meteorology. Furthermore, the
project will create unique opportunities for STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) students, especially Native Hawaiians, to
recognize the great potentials of robotics, gain experience with marine robots,
and participate in cross-disciplinary research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a series of scalable
algorithms that enable teams of mobile robots to collaboratively navigate and
sample fluid environments with minimal infrastructural support. These novel
algorithms are instantiated with the application of ubiquitous marine
collaborative robots (co-robots). The research objectives include (i) a
collaborative flow-aided navigation algorithm that improves the long-term
inertial navigation performance by utilizing the knowledge about the dynamics of
background flows; (ii) a physics-informed, data-driven fluid dynamics learning
method based on in-situ flow observations by mobile robots; (iii) a fluid-based
simultaneous localization and mapping (fluid-SLAM) scheme that enables
concurrent flow-aided navigation and flow dynamics learning, and (iv) a
decentralized cooperative fluid-SLAM algorithm for teams of co-robots. Field
evaluations of the cooperative flow-aided navigation and flow dynamics learning
algorithms will be conducted in ocean environments near Hawaii. The single-robot
and co-robot fluid-SLAM algorithms will be evaluated in simulated scenarios
using an indoor co-robot testbed consisting of a fleet of nano-quadrotors. The
resulting co-robot algorithms will fundamentally advance the adaptability and
robustness of mobile co-robots in distributed sensing and collaborative learning
in uncertain and unstructured environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.