* 2024409
* NRI: FND: Natural Power Transmission through Unconstrained Fluids for Robotic Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yahya Modarres-Sadeghi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 749,043.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will promote the progress of science
and advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; by studying a novel
approach to control the transmission of power from a robot through an
unconstrained flow of water to manipulate an object using fluid-structure
interaction control strategies and without any other direct contact. In many
existing robotic control problems, power is transferred through direct contact
with the object to be manipulated. This project focuses on the case of
underwater manipulation, where the environment (water) has a significant impact
on the overall system performance. In a fluid-based system, interactions between
bodies and fluid around them transfer a significant amount of momentum to the
water. In this work, an object in water will be controlled by manipulating an
upstream structure whose wake can be controlled. The wake of the upstream object
will be controlled by forcing it to rotate at a given frequency and angular
velocity. Through closed-loop feedback, the desired motion of the downstream
object can be obtained by inputting the desired motion of the upstream structure
and thus controlling its wake. The approach can be applied to establish a novel
method for natural and unconstrained gait training for persons recovering from
stroke or injury by naturally assisting their gait using flow forces. Beyond
health, extensions of this work can be applied in manufacturing to create new
methods for fluid-based material handling and production processes. The project
will also motivate and broaden the diversity of the next generation of engineers
and scientists through training undergraduate and graduate students and
designing and implementing an innovative underwater robotics outreach program
for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The transformative impact of this work
on robotics is enabling a new fluid-based, non-contact manipulation strategy.
The work creates new insights in the field of fluid-structure interactions by
introducing a closed-loop control method to indirectly impose desired motions of
an object placed in the wake of another structure. An “explore-and-exploit”
methodology is used to effectively search for parameters in the highly nonlinear
system to achieve optimal limit cycle oscillations of a hydrofoil in the wake of
a controlled rotating cylinder. The parameters can then be used to design a
controller to obtain the desired trajectory for a multi-body system by
controlling the rotation rate of an upstream cylinder. With this approach, an
underwater robot gait training system is created that can manipulate the power
of the existing fluid flow to apply controlled forces to the lower limbs of a
person to assist them while walking. The system is supported by new predictive
simulations of underwater human gait with fluid-structure interaction dynamics
to optimize the interconnected human-robot system. The approach can also be
generalized for other applications in underwater robotics for non-contact
manipulation using flow forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.