* 2024364
* NCS-FO:  Variability and the Global Brain
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Eric Shea-Brown, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,612.00

While the brain's computational abilities are in many respects unrivaled, its
workings appear to be far noisier than those of almost any engineered
computational system. Even in carefully controlled experiments in which the same
conditions are presented over multiple trials, neural activity is strikingly
variable from one trial to the next. This project aims to resolve the apparent
contradiction between the brain's computational proficiency and its apparently
high levels of noise. The core hypothesis is that much of the observed neural
variability is driven not by noise but by internal brain modes -- that is, by
coordinated patterns of activity across the brain. Thus, variability may be a
signature of dynamic and uniquely biological computations rather than noisy
fluctuations. If this hypothesis is correct, then observation of these global
modes should explain choices that subjects make in behavioral tasks, and
perturbation of the modes should alter their patterns of choices in systematic
ways. To test this hypothesis, the project employs a novel joint experimental
and theoretical approach to measure the variability in brain-wide neural
activity across scales, to define its relationship to behavior, and to
dynamically perturb these modes to impact behavioral performance both within and
across individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To build a transformative
understanding of the link between neural and behavioral variability, the project
will use multi-probe Neuropixels technology that enables simultaneous recording
at submillisecond resolution from thousands of individual neurons distributed
across the brain, coupled with advanced data analytic and dynamical modeling
tools to extract activity modes from these data. These analyses will be
performed together with behavioral assays that probe multiple aspects of
behavioral performance, including engagement, perceptual sensitivity, and vigor.
Statistical modeling will then be used to identify the functional role of these
modes in regulating behavioral performance, and how their activity drives
behavioral differences both across trials and across individuals. Beyond
correlative analysis, control theory tools will design patterned optogenetic
perturbations to provide direct causal tests of this novel functional role for
brain-wide activity modes. If the project succeeds, the result will be a new
understanding of the nature of the ongoing fluctuations in brain-wide activity
patterns trial by trial and individual by individual in terms of behavior rather
than noise -- a key step in deciphering the logic of distributed computation
underlying perception and cognition. The project will develop and disseminate
novel open data and code to impact research and training nationwide. It will
also build a dynamic, team-mentored environment led by investigators from very
distinct disciplines -- from neuroscience to applied mathematics to control
engineering -- which will prepare both undergraduate and graduate trainees to
bridge disciplines and scientific cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.