* 2024546
* ISS: Synthesis of Electrically Conductive High-Temperature Composites Under Microgravity and Normal Gravity Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kathy Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,997.00

With the fast advancement of space exploration, conducting materials research in
space is becoming mainstream. At the same time, novel two-dimensional materials
and polymer derived high temperature ceramics have captured the attention of the
materials community. In this research project, two dimensional MXene will be
incorporated into a silicon oxycarbide matrix to generate new materials, both on
Earth and at the International Space Station. The high temperature evolution
behaviors of two-dimensional materials and polymer to ceramic conversion under
microgravity conditions will be systematically compared with the processes on
Earth. These materials are expected to have high oxidation resistance, excellent
electrical conductivity, and low density. They should also have great
synergistic potentials for toughness, strength, and high temperature stability.
The composites can be made into almost any shape (bulk, coating, discrete
feature, et cetera) and size (nano- to macro-) based on application needs. In
addition, these materials can easily produce complex shape, thin-wall, or
freeform components with lightweight and functional capabilities in high
temperature environments. This research will usher in a new generation of
advanced materials which have great potential to be used as heat exchangers,
electric systems, catalyst support, energy storage, electrodes, nano-devices,
and microsystems. Ultimately, project results will lead to new applications
benefiting space science and life on Earth. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be involved in the research project. The PI will expand current
activities to Eastern Virginia while continuing efforts with different summer
camps on campus. In addition, the PI will expand outreach efforts to the Western
Virginia Science Museum to stimulate the interest of females and minorities in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will advance
understanding of atomic- and nano-level species interactions under different
gravitational conditions in order to explore a new class of high temperature
stable and electrically conductive materials. The high temperature composites
will include both dense and porous microstructures but the methodology developed
will be applicable to a wide range of high temperature materials derived from 2D
additives and polymer precursors. This research project is expected to develop
new theories, provide new knowledge, and offer novel methods in atomic level
design and thermodynamic prediction of polymer derived ceramics. Results from
this project will open new opportunities for using microgravity to understand
and create novel high temperature materials. The team will conduct the research
using four approaches. First, using MXene exfoliation and surface
functionalization, pre-pyrolysis at 500-700°C will be conducted in order to
provide controlled states for microgravity and Earth gravity studies. Second,
different atmosphere pyrolysis will be conducted on Earth and under microgravity
to understand the atmosphere and gas release effects on new phase formation.
Third, theoretical thermodynamic calculation and experimental pyrolysis studies
will be combined in order to explore the fundamental interfacial interaction and
phase evolution processes. Finally, gravitational effects on 2D MXene
deformation, stacking, and chemical interaction with silicon oxycarbide during
pyrolysis will be comprehensively investigated; the phase and structural
evolution of the porous systems will be correlated with pore stability and
shrinkage/collapse under different gravity conditions. The educational component
is training of multiple graduate and undergraduate students, with a focus on
women and minorities. The PI will expand current activities to Eastern Virginia
while continuing efforts with different summer camps on campus. In addition, the
PI will expand outreach efforts to the Western Virginia Science Museum to
stimulate the interest of females and minorities in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.