* 2024377
* Standard: Aligning Incentives: Can Registered Reports Encourage Ethical and Responsible Research Practices among Early Career Researchers?
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Amanda Montoya, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,127.00

Academic fraud and failed attempts to replicate research have amplified concerns
about scientists’ ethical practices. Registered reports are a new method of
publication where peer review and guarantee of publication occurs before data
collection. This project tests if registered reports can increase ethical
research practices related to transparency and decrease questionable research
practices among early career researchers. Lack of job security leaves early
career researchers vulnerable to questionable research practices, and early
career researchers in departments with publish-or-perish cultural norms may be
particularly susceptible. Registered reports are hypothesized to be most
effective for this group, as they align the incentives to publish with the value
of ethical practices. The project will conclude by designing and evaluating an
online intervention meant to help early career researchers understand the
benefits and barriers of registered reports. The project will also produce a
free online tutorial on submitting registered reports and the ethical
implications of doing so, and a series of cross-disciplinary online and in-
person workshops that will encourage a culture of ethical research practices
through registered reports in a variety of STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the impact of registered reports on
early career researchers’ research ethics related to transparency and their
likelihood of engaging in questionable research practices. The mixed-methods
research design uses cross-sectional and longitudinal data to assess the effects
of registered reports. The first study tracks authors to assess if registered
reports affect ethical research attitudes, values, and behaviors. The second
study uses survey research to assess if those who complete registered reports
use more ethical research practices. The third study uses data from focus groups
to uncover barriers to adopting registered reports among early career faculty.
The fourth study uses an online intervention across a range of conditions to
assess if the intervention influences early career researchers’ intentions to
use registered reports and to identify cultural factors that could modify the
efficacy of the intervention. Overall, this project advances scientific
knowledge related to research ethics by exploring whether registered reports can
act as a mechanism for encouraging ethical research practices among early career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was funded by the BIO, MPS, and
SBE directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.