* 2024072
* NSF Student Travel Support for the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2020)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Victor Sheng, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 24,000.00

This activity will increase student participation in the 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2020) that will take place from November 17-20,
2020 at Sorrento, Italy, by providing travel fellowships to U.S.-based students.
The International Conference on Data Mining series has established itself as the
world’s premier research conference in data mining. It provides an international
forum for presentation of original research results, as well as exchange and
dissemination of innovative and practical development experiences. The
conference covers all aspects of data mining, including algorithms, software and
systems, and applications. In addition to enhancing student research careers. A
strong representation of US researcher at the conference also helps maintain US
competitiveness in this important area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICDM conference
series promotes novel, high-quality research findings, and innovative solutions
to challenging data mining problems, and seeks to advance the state-of-the-art
in data mining. The conference covers all aspects of data mining, including
algorithms, software, systems, and applications. ICDM draws researchers,
application developers, and practitioners from a wide range of data mining
related areas such as statistics, machine learning, pattern recognition,
databases, data warehousing, data visualization, knowledge-based systems, and
high-performance computing. The conference proceedings are published by IEEE.
The recipients of the NSF travel support will be listed at the ICDM 2020
conference website, together with additional ICDM 2020
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.