* 2024320
* HNDS-I: Collaborative Research: Developing a Data Platform for Analysis of Nonprofit Organizations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2023
* USD 813,598.00

Nonprofit organizations are important contributors to the US economy and social
well-being. Across a wide range of domains, such as healthcare, childcare,
education, job training, and many others, nonprofit organizations serve the
public, reduce the costs of government, and improve daily lives. Millions of
individuals interact with nonprofit organizations every day. Yet despite these
important roles, the high costs of collecting and sharing data have prevented a
greater understanding of nonprofit organizations and their collective
contributions to society. This project, the Nonprofit Organization Research
Panel Project (NORPP) Manager, will create a publicly-accessible, internet-
based, and collaborative research platform that will lower the costs of
collecting and sharing large amounts of high-quality, multiyear data on
nonprofits and their impacts. The platform will strengthen research and
evaluation, broaden access to data-intensive research, and lead to more
scientifically informed decision-making by organizations, policymakers, and
funders and to improved outcomes for the communities they
serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NORPP platform will offer three primary
functions. First, tools and automated processes will allow researchers to
recruit and grow representative samples of nonprofit organizations nationally
and across communities, states, and regions over time using a common
methodology. The platform will automate systematic sampling and weighting
procedures to ensure representativeness for studies using the platform, and it
will reduce other costs to researchers by automating information flows with
organizations in its samples. It will also allow public access among the
research and practice communities to download nationally representative data,
build additional project-specific samples within the platform, add original
survey instruments, and collect original data. Second, the NORPP Manager will
support the merger of data developed within the platform with IRS Form 990 Data
and other available data on organizations from the population of 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organizations that file with the IRS, including geocoded data on
organizationsâ€™ communities and external environment that are publicly available
from Census and other sources. Third, the NORPP Manager will serve as a
collaborative repository to manage a bank of core and supplemental
questionnaires to facilitate replication studies, improve content validity of
measurements, and allow for consistent measurement scales across nonprofit
organizational research. This work will increase the efficiency of research on
nonprofit organizations by significantly reducing the costs to sample, contact,
and survey nonprofit organizations, and to merge those data with existing data
with the goal of facilitating the growth of rigorous, data-intensive research
across the many social science disciplines that intersect with nonprofit
organizational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.