* 2024004
* Collaborative Research: INFEWS: N/P/H2O: Remote and autonomous sensing for managing the economic and environmental consequences of salinity-impacted agricultural waterways
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Meagan Mauter, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 154,624.00

1604853 / 1604906&lt;br/&gt;Mauter / Viers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing
salinity of agricultural waterways is a global problem with critical economic
and ecological impacts. When cropland is irrigated with moderately saline
waters, salts accumulate in the soil leading to reduced crop yields or permanent
land fallowing. While this problem is neither new (ancient irrigation systems
led to the degradation of the once fertile soils across Mesopotamia), nor
declining in scale (soil salinization is now estimated to impact nearly one-
third of all irrigated land worldwide), there are few decision tools for
evaluating the techno-economic feasibility of intervention which is the focus of
this proposal. Developing decision tools is critical to informing farmers,
managers and others who are interested in slowing salinization trends and
ensuring the sustainability and resilience of global food
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agricultural waterway salinization imposes
considerable economic and ecological damages. The proposed research will develop
methods for valuing those damages and comparing the cost-effectiveness of
technology and policy interventions. The proposed research will also develop
novel methods for efficiently generating a broad, multi-resolution dataset of
agricultural waterway salinization critical to implementing these decision
models. Finally, the proposed research will evaluate the techno-economic
feasibility of salinity reduction interventions, including subsidizing land
fallowing, limiting tile drain discharge, and desalinating saline agricultural
waters, in a multi-objective decision framework. This research will test and
implement the proposed methodology in the Panoche Water and Drainage District
and the Westlands Water District, salinity-impacted districts within the San
Joaquin River Basin of California and very nearby UC Merced. Collecting,
processing, and leveraging data high-resolution data to inform environmental
decisions remains a methodological challenge in agricultural systems. The PIs
propose to develop a comprehensive decision analysis framework that leverages
remote and autonomous sensing to rapidly and cost-effectively evaluate salinity
management practices for agricultural waterways. Design and integration of
multi-modal sensor networks will inform fundamental relationships between water
quality, soil salinity, ecological health, and land use in agricultural
environments. Incorporating this information into a decision analysis framework
will aid agricultural producers, regulators, and state infrastructure managers
in evaluating technologies and policies for salinity management across multiple,
often competing, objectives. The first objective of the proposed research is to
implement a valuation model to assess the benefits of salinity reduction to
agricultural and ecological systems. The second objective is to develop a
hierarchical, multi-modal data collection methodology using remote sensing,
autonomous robotic watercraft sensors, and sparse, distributed, static sensor
networks for efficiently and cost-effectively developing models of agricultural
water salinization. The third objective is to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of
distributed salinity reduction technologies and policies available to
agricultural producers and regulators to minimize the economic and ecological
impacts associated with salinized agricultural waterways. This will result in
novel, hierarchical, low cost methods for generating high-resolution data sets
on agricultural waterway salinity that can be extended to the detection and
monitoring of other non-point source emissions in the agricultural industry. The
proposed research will also develop novel valuation methods for quantifying the
benefits of reducing agricultural waterway salinity for private actors (growers)
and the public (ecosystems) at a sufficient resolution to inform policy and
technology implementation, a major barrier to policy and technology development
for combating salinization issues. Finally, the proposed research will develop
algorithms for positioning static sensors to maximize the value of information
collected. Throughout, the PIs will develop methods to manage uncertainty in the
processing of large datasets. The proposed work will enhance the sustainability
of irrigated agriculture by providing a quantitative decision framework in which
to compare public and private costs and benefits of salinity reduction. It will
also promote workforce development in the emerging field of autonomous and
robotic sensing for environmental decision-making by engaging UC Merced
undergraduate students in data collection, data management, and data
visualization research. UC Merced is a minority serving institution in the
Central Valley of CA, and students participating for course credit or full time
summer employment will be trained for emerging, high tech jobs in the local
agricultural industry. Finally, the PIs will continue the development of an
education module for high school students that provides hands-on exposure to
environmental science, robotics, and data processing via deployment of
autonomous robotic watercraft sensors.