* 2024182
* RUI: Mapping obscurin’s role as a force sensor
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Nathan Wright, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 677,656.00

All cells must sense and respond to force, otherwise physical forces would tear
them apart. However, it is still poorly understood how cells turn a purely
physical stimulus, like force, into a biochemical signal. One potential
mechanism involves the giant protein obscurin. One end of this protein binds to
the cell membrane and the other end binds the cytoskeleton. The middle of the
protein acts like a rope in that it is able to change shape and elongate without
requiring any major energy contribution. But if obscurin is stretched too far,
it begins to act like a spring, gradually resisting additional stretch. Obscurin
also contains enzymatically active regions that are thought to ‘turn on’ when it
is stretched. This project tests the model that obscurin is a signal transducing
mechano-molecule that senses and responds to the physical force of stretch
experienced by living cells. This research will provide insights into how cells
‘feel’ force, how they react to this force on a molecular level, and how this
phenomenon informs tissue growth. The Broader Impacts of this project integrate
a strong undergraduate science education program and community outreach. In
collaboration with the capstone class of James Madison University’s engineering
department, interactive machines will be developed and built that teach
fundamental concepts of molecular biology. These machines will be displayed at
local county fairs, bringing science and engineering concepts to a population
that is often excluded from other science outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a novel mechanism of mechano-
transduction between membranes and the cytoskeleton of the cell by focusing on
the protein obscurin, a putative stretch sensor. This research will determine
whether obscurin is under tension within the cell. It will also determine the
extent to which its localization and signaling are directly related to the
forces experienced by the cell. Third, this work will determine whether obscurin
localization influences the motility of sheets of cells in response to the force
they experience. To answer these questions, this project will use a combination
of FRET microscopy, fluorescent tension sensors, tissue ablation techniques,
cell biological approaches, and computer modelling. The data obtained from these
experiments will be used to create a predictive model of cell motility.
Together, these experiments will reveal obscurin’s role in cellular
mechanosensation. Because obscurin is found in multiple cell types, this basic
science work is expected to have impact on a broad range of more specific
topics, including embryonic development, cell invasiveness, endothelial cell
biology, muscle biology, and cardiomyocytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.