* 2024027
* Tenth U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Renkun Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The Tenth U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena will be held
in San Diego, CA on July 19-22, 2020. The seminar provides an international
forum for interdisciplinary discussions to identify and disseminate outstanding
science and technology issues in the area of nanoscale heat and mass transport
phenomena. Topics include heat and mass transport in devices, advanced
instrumentation for probing heat and mass transport at small spatial or temporal
scales, first principles calculations of thermal transport properties, radiative
heat transport at the nanoscale, and phase-change heat transfer. The proceedings
and perspectives on promising research directions will be disseminated to the
greater thermal sciences community through articles in the archival journal
Nanoscale and Microscale Thermophysical Engineering. Participants will consist
of a diverse group of scientists and engineers from academia, national
laboratories, and industry. It is anticipated that this seminar will enable
joint research papers, exchange of students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty,
as well as sharing of research facilities between the U.S. and Japan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and controlling physical phenomena at
nanoscale have received tremendous attention in recent years in both US and
Japan and around the globe. Prior work in the past two decades has shown
tremendous opportunities to engineer materials properties at nanoscale. This
joint seminar includes the presentations and discussions on a wide range of
fundamental subjects related to nanoscale transport phenomena as well as a broad
array of technologies that will benefit from the advancements in thermal
sciences. The impacted technologies include energy conversion and storage,
nanoelectronic devices, advanced manufacturing, biomedical engineering, and
among others. The discussions during the seminar and the publications afterwards
are expected to identify important and emerging research areas, educate the
community on opportunities and challenges in various technological areas, and
foster the interactions between academia and industry. Several focused articles
will be prepared to disseminate the experts’ assessment of new opportunities and
future research needs to the broad research community. In addition, the talks in
this seminar series will be recorded and made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.