* 2024033
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2020 IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC 2020). To be held August 4-6, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Donald Lie, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 10,000.00

This project helps support the participation of around 40 US-based students to
attend the IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC 2020)
originally scheduled for June 21-23, 2020 in Los Angeles and now a virtual
symposium due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Symposium is part of Microwave Week
2020, the world’s largest RF &amp; microwave technical convention and will now
be held from August 4-6, 2020. Over the last three years, the RFIC Symposium has
been a three-day long event with over 900 registered attendees, including about
300 students. The project will support the selected students that are chosen for
their registration fees to the RFIC Symposium. The RFIC Symposium organizers
seek to increase the number of student participants by targeting women,
undergraduates, and under-represented groups for participation. The aim is to
support young researchers who might not otherwise be able to attend RFIC 2020
due to financial difficulty as well as to encourage the diversity of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RFIC Symposium is one of the world’s premier
events to learn about RFIC design, technology and research. Students are able to
obtain feedback on their work (through paper presentations and demos and
&lt;br/&gt;competition), talk with senior researchers from government, industry,
and academia, and get exposed to &lt;br/&gt;the latest research. RFIC 2020 has a
number of events specifically beneficial to student researchers, which
&lt;br/&gt;are technical talks, interactive demo session, workshops, tutorials,
technical lecture, exhibition, the three-&lt;br/&gt;minute thesis (3MT®)
competition program, and other targeted student activities. To summarize,
&lt;br/&gt;participation at RFIC 2020 will expose these US-based students to
this critical research field of US &lt;br/&gt;national interests (e.g., 5G
wireless), enhance the research experiences for students, and provide increased
&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for new collaborations to advance
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.