* 2024561
* NRI: FND: End-User Robot Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Rodrigo Spinola, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 765,593.00

Collaborative robots, or robots that can safely work in close proximity to
humans, promise to revolutionize society. Such robots could help the country
remain competitive in the service and manufacturing industries. But this vision
has not yet been achieved because programming robots remains difficult, time
consuming, and, most importantly, only feasible by experts after years of
training. This project seeks to remove this final barrier to progress by making
collaborative robots programmable by their owners. That is, without any special
training, to empower small business owners, lab technicians, and small-scale
manufacturers to be able to program a robot to do meaningful tasks. Project
outcomes will not only benefit American businesses by lowering costs and freeing
human workers to complete higher-level tasks, they will also improve access to
technology for many. Because the research will be conducted at a highly diverse
university, in collaboration with a rural community college and a rural
manufacturing research center, additional broad impacts will derive from
exposing a diverse group of students to cutting edge technology they would
otherwise never know existed. Furthermore, by conducting experiments and
demonstrations at both rural sites the team will impart to the broader community
a vision for future career choices while driving robot programming technology to
the next level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the high cost of programming
collaborative robots remains a major barrier to adoption. This project will
create a suite of end-user programming languages that make common robot
programming tasks accessible to novices, dramatically reducing this barrier to
adoption. The work is based on two key insights. First, because collaborative
robots offer unprecedented safety features, end-users can safely operate and
program them. Second, by leveraging the last twenty years of progress in
educational programming languages (e.g., MIT’s Scratch), interfaces can be
created that support the programming of realistic tasks yet can be learned in
minutes. The project will comprise four thrusts: (1) creation of a block-based
robot programming environment that enables a large set of realistic tasks; (2)
development of an in-line tutorial system for learning block-based programming
without formal training; (3) implementation of a parallel programming language
for multi-armed programming; and (4) definition of a multi-threaded programming
approach for maximizing robot usage. This comprehensive set of tools will enable
end-users to tackle many common robot programming tasks that are currently out
of their reach. To ensure that the various approaches actually help end-users,
they will be evaluated through extensive user studies run both on an urban and
rural university campus. These studies, where subjects complete realistic tasks
with the prototypes, will have three outcomes. First, preparing for the studies
naturally hardens the research prototypes into high-quality software, allowing
accurate evaluation. Second, the study will generate quantifiable results on the
effectiveness of end-users programming with each tool. Third, through video
analysis and interviews additional insight will be derived into further issues
that hinder end-users, thereby laying the groundwork for the next round of
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.