* 2024689
* Collaborative Research: NRI: INT: Transparent and intuitive teleoperation interfaces for the future nursing robots and workers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Paula Bylaska-Davies, Worcester State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 17,536.00

The recent pandemic outbreaks, including Ebola, Zika and the 2019 Novel
Coronavirus (2019-nCoV), urge tele-medicine to go beyond mere tele-presence, to
achieve robots that perform real-world nursing assistance tasks that require the
coordinated control of manipulation, locomotion, and active teleoperation.
Remotely-controlled nursing robots provide a promising alternative for
quarantine and remote patient care. However, the traditional and contemporary
human-robot interfaces fundamentally limit the performance and user experience
of nursing robot teleoperation, and may reinforce burden and safety concerns
that discourage healthcare workers to adopt robots. To address this problem,
this project will (1) develop an innovative integration of transparent and
intuitive teleoperation interface, to support the freeform and coordinated
motion control of the remote nursing robots, and (2) integrate this interface
with the robot intelligence to enable nursing professionals to learn robot
teleoperation with minimal training, and to reduce the physical and cognitive
workload using shared autonomy. The proposed project will promote the progress
of science in human-robot interfaces for robot teleoperation, and advance the
quality, availability and sustainability of healthcare in the present and future
pandemic crisis. This project will have significant impacts on the domain of
nursing, which consists of 2.9 million registered nurses and 160,000 nurse
practitioners across the U.S. It will revolutionize patient-care in quarantine,
and has the potential to extend to in-home care, clinics, and hospitals given
the upcoming shortage of nursing workforce. The fundamental research also
generalizes to other worker domains with robot tele-operations, including
warehouse, social service, and maintenance. The proposed research will forge
substantial collaboration among faculty and students in robotics engineering,
nursing and social science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two
research themes. Research Theme 1 will develop a soft-robot teleoperation
interface architecture and systematic human-inspired motion mapping strategies,
to support the intuitive and transparent mapping of the motion, force, and
perception information between humans and robots. The proposed interface will
enable transparent and legible robot behavior of reaching-to-grasp, loco-
manipulation, and the control of active telepresence. Research Theme 2 will
develop the intelligence of the interface, to enable interactive learning and
mutual adaptation between humans and robots. Based on game-theoretic planning,
it will develop adaptive shared autonomous strategies that use human-robot
communication via haptic feedback. It will employ active tele-presence to
enhance the training and reduce workload in tele-operation of the human
operator. The integrated interface will be evaluated in comprehensive user
studies with registered nurses, nursing faculty and nursing students. The
evaluation will assess the performance and user experience, including human-
robot teaming, using efficiency, workload and interface effort metrics. It will
also evaluate the social impacts of the proposed human-robot interface on the
acceptance and adoption of nursing robots by the current and future nursing
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was funded with the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.