* 2024207
* SBIR Phase I: Create Effective COVID-19 Chatbots through High Patient Engagement Phase I
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Jorge Flores, SmartBot360
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide on-demand customized health
information. Chatbots are automated communication agents that have been
successful in other sectors, but to date they have enjoyed limited success in
patient engagement during the COVID-19 pandemic. Increased patient engagement
leads to better health outcomes and cost savings. This project will develop a
COVID-19 chatbot to address common questions and transactions, freeing
healthcare staff for more complex cases and providing information to patients
seeking to minimize office visits during periods of social distancing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will advance development of patient engagement via chatbots. This
project represents a chatbot as a graph of states, wherein a transition is based
on the user message. The proposed chatbot optimizer extends this model by
applying reinforcement learning to dynamically compute the best response given
the user profile and context. The objective of the optimizer is to reach a
success state (for example, make an appointment with a counselor), accounting
for the fact that a user (patient) may drop out at any time; previous work on
goal-oriented chatbots has generally not included this
possibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.