* 2024238
* Institutional Transformation: VERITIES - Virtue-Based Education for Responsibility and Integrity To Increase Excellence in STEM
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Robert Pennock, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,930.00

This award supports a research project to transform the way that scientists are
trained to think about the ethical dimensions of scientific practice. The
project is called VERITIES, short for Virtue-based Education for Responsibility
and Integrity to Increase Excellence in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics). It is based in the PI's scientific virtue-theoretic account,
which is backed by a prior national study of science's ethical culture with data
from over 1100 scientists; the earlier project identified a coherent set of
values that included attentiveness, objectivity, perseverance, skepticism,
meticulousness, and humility to evidence, all centered on core virtues of
honesty and curiosity. VERITIES builds on a tested implementation over a seven-
year period at BEACON, an NSF Science and Technology Center; it scales up the
piloted approach to an institutional transformation project at Michigan State
University. Its primary goals are to test what can be done at a top level (R1)
public research university, and thereby serve as a test bed for a national
transformative effort. The project will culminate in train-the-trainers
workshops at professional conferences for Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR)
to begin to seed the approach broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VERITIES team,
whose research is being supported by this award, will begin by collecting
baseline data of ethical culture and practices using a university-wide survey.
The team members will then adapt graduate student scientific-values training for
varying circumstances of STEM departments revealed by the survey, and they will
also train diverse faculty to serve as committed exemplars to support change in
ethical culture. They will then assess the efficacy of these interventions with
a quasi-controlled study of graduate student cohorts and with focused interviews
of faculty members. In these engagements, the team will utilize the PI's
scientific virtue-theoretic account together with a new approach to RCR training
that uses modules that help conversants explore how each virtue ties scientific
identity to excellence of practice. The modules were developed using a guided
dialogue framework pioneered by the Toolbox Dialogue Initiative. Their use of
these modules in RCR training will serve to promote an increase in conversations
about disciplinary virtues and increased sensitivity to normative dimensions of
scientific practice, which the project regards as key indicators of successful
RCR training. Such increases will serve to bring about a deeper understanding of
the nature of the scientific virtues in general and within the science, leading
to more thoughtful consideration of how they ought to be expressed in scientific
practice. These changes will lead more generally to a more thoughtful and
renewed commitment to a culture of excellence and integrity in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.