* 2024388
* Collaborative Research - Digging deeper: Do deeper roots enhance deeper water and carbon fluxes and alter the trajectory of chemical weathering in woody-encroached grasslands?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Pamela Sullivan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 334,681.00

Within grasslands, woody plants are increasing in cover and abundance. The
replacement of grasslands by woody plants can change the way water, nutrients,
and metals are stored and move through soil. This project studies these changes
in grasslands in Kansas. The project links the fields of water science, rock
chemistry and soil chemistry. The project connects the way water moves and is
stored in the ground to how soil and rock chemically breaks down. Investigating
how roots of woody plants altered water flow in the ground is important to
understanding how Earth will respond to future changes in climate. This research
provides training across different fields of science including geology, biology,
and chemistry. Educational materials will be developed for all grade levels
including K-12 and college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to understand how roots respond to changes in climate and land use, and how
roots control the movement of water and nutrients through landscapes.
Specifically, this research studies how deeper roots associated with woody plant
encroachment enhances transport of water and carbon to greater depths, increases
the water residence time in the subsurface, and enhances the potential for
weathering at depth. To accomplish this goal, integrated field and modeling
approaches will be conducted at the watershed scale. Data will be collected at
the Konza Prairie (KS, USA), where long-term burning experiments have resulted
in the encroachment of woody vegetation. This research relies on: 1) long-term
measures of vegetation cover, stream discharge, water isotopes, and water solute
chemistry, and 2) new measurements of the subsurface including root density and
distribution, soil structure, soil water potential, soil gas concentrations, and
solute chemistry. Collectively, this research links water residence time to
fluxes of nutrients. The project partners with the Konza Environmental Education
Program to provide educational materials and training on woody plant
encroachment into prairies. An online modular toolbox for water quality and
quantity is developed for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.