* 2024118
* RUI: Spatial light modulator technology for the on-demand fabrication of optical microstructures in polarization-sensitive materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Heba Abourahma, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

Optical microstructures are deformations of a material surface on a scale too
small to be seen with the human eye, but which can efficiently redirect light so
as to give the surface a colored or even self-illuminated appearance. Such
structures occur naturally, and for example lead to the brilliant colors of a
butterfly wing. Synthetic fabrication of optical microstructures has had far-
reaching technological impact in fields such as information storage and display,
and is typically based on exposing a photosensitive film to a prescribed
illumination pattern from a lamp or laser. While this technique is well-
established, it is not suited for rapid prototyping. A separate limitation is
that the fabricated structures are immobile on the film surface once the film
processing is complete. However, an emerging material class of highly colored
organic molecule coupled with a flexible polymer have been found to be sensitive
to the direction of illumination and not its brightness. This sensitivity to
light polarization can be exploited to make dynamic surface microstructures,
enabling not only permanent optical microstructures, but also structures which
can be reconfigured in response to light. Separately, the recent emergence of
programmable spatial light modulators makes possible the generation of rapidly
reconfigurable polarized light fields. The proposed research combines new
polarization-sensitive polymers with spatial light modulator technology to
create a benchtop system for the on-demand fabrication of both static and
dynamic optical microstructures. Such a system will make rapid prototyping of
light-diffracting surfaces accessible to a wide range of optical manufacturers,
while also enabling new techniques in bioengineering that rely on the use of
microscale surfaces to study cellular response. The project will also benefit
education and training at TCNJ that is a primarily undergraduate institution.
The project offers an outstanding opportunity for undergraduate science students
to gain integrative experience. Undergraduate researchers will become partners
in a multidisciplinary and international research program that leverages
emerging research in photonics and material sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical microstructures are fabricated by exposing
photosensitive film to an optical intensity pattern. While conventional
photosensitive films respond to optical intensity and require post-exposure
chemical processing, new supramolecular azopolymer films respond to optical
polarization, with the surface microstructure growing immediately in response to
illumination, with no subsequent processing required. To best leverage these new
polarization-sensitive materials requires a programmable source that can project
spatially-defined patterns of linearly polarized light, such as a spatial light
modulator. The proposed research will therefore pursue the development of a new
microstructural fabrication system based on supramolecular azopolymer materials
and digital polarization optics. The first step towards this discovery is to
establish the amplitude, resolution, and surface topographies of optical surface
structures obtainable with the spatial light modulator. Resolutions of order 500
nm and surface amplitudes of 2 Âµm are expected following the incorporation of
multielement corrected optics. A second goal is to exploit the optoelectronic
scanning capability of the spatial light modulator to Fourier synthesize
nonsinusoidal surface patterns using the superposition of multiple exposures
with appropriately determined exposure times and phase shifts. In addition, the
dynamic programmability of the spatial light modulator-enabled digital optics
system will be exploited to explore dynamic surface microstructures. Such moving
surface structures can only be induced in materials such as azopolymers which
exhibit a reversible photomechanical response. Throughout this exploration of
feature sizes and structures, the replication of optical surface microstructures
on azopolymer films will be studied using nanoimprint lithography. Atomic force
and scanning electron microscopy will complement this effort and will be used to
assess replication fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.