* 2024498
* Morphological acquisition in early infancy: Experimental and computational studies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Megha Sundara, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,320.00

Morphological suffixes like English -s, -ed and -ing are basic building blocks
of grammar. Limited use of morphological suffixes characterizes the speech of
children with developmental disorders like SLI and autism. To promote language
learning in typical and atypical populations, it is therefore necessary for us
to understand how and when infants acquire morphology. This project is focused
on investigating the beginnings of morphological acquisition in English and
Spanish. By integrating experiments with infants as young as 6-months, corpus
analysis and state-of-the-art computational modeling, this project seeks to
establish when and how infants begin to acquire morphology. By additionally
focusing on Spanish, a language in which the acquisition timetable is far less
known than in English, this project will also increase access to participation
in research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating the behavioral and
computational results from this project will shed light on the representations,
time course of learning as well as mechanisms involved in the acquisition of
morphology. Specifically, infant experiments will provide evidence for
linguistic representations underlying morphological acquisition and document the
developmental trajectory for the acquisition of morphological affixes. Next,
using computational modeling, a morphological learner will be reverse
engineered; its performance to be evaluate against the developmental trajectory
of morphological acquisition uncovered in the infant experiments. Computational
modeling will subsequently be used to pinpoint infant experiments that are most
likely to distinguish between alternate theories; this is crucial particularly
because infant research is time and resource intensive. Finally, as part of the
project we anticipate generating a large, annotated corpus of infant-directed
speech which will be publicly available for researchers investigating language
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.