* 2024960
* Research Initiation - Developing Professional Identity: Integrating Academic and Workplace Competencies within Engineering Programs
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Chemical engineering education needs a new educational approach commensurate
with the evolution and expansion of industry expectations via inclusion of key
elements from several fields: pharmaceuticals, renewable energy, biotechnology,
nanotechnology, nuclear engineering, and food and consumer products, among
others. Given the impact of chemical engineering in these areas, practicing
chemical engineers are expected to be technically knowledgeable in these broad
areas and also skilled in communication and leadership. However, the typical
chemical engineering undergraduate core curriculum has not adapted to prepare
students for the multiple needs encompassed by the chemical industry. Most
courses are content-driven and based on classical problems, making it
challenging to integrate emerging industrial examples and practices.
Communication skills and teamwork experience are mainly gained in senior level
courses. Many current faculty members have limited industrial experience, and
they are not fully aware of emergent, practical problems and applications
derived from new industries. Much of the standard software used in industry is
not available at universities, and broader chemical industry needs are not
incorporated into course content. As a result, students are less motivated
and/or engaged, get lost in content-driven learning while missing the big
picture and applications of the concepts. They therefore often struggle to
identify with the profession and are not ready for the workforce when they
graduate. This project examines a unique experience in which a student-faculty-
industry integrated community will be created to bridge the gap between industry
needs and the competencies developed within chemical engineering undergraduate
programs. This project will investigate the effects of multiple activities
designed to impact professional identity formation and promote industry-related
competencies. Knowledge and insights gained from the research will help
engineering programs to analyze important aspects of industry engagements, the
feasibility of implementation and impact on student outcomes and faculty
professional learning. The results will allow engineering educators to improve
the next generation’s skillset and better prepare them for the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to integrate academic and industrial
workplace competencies within engineering programs. Industry professionals and
engineering educators will work together to deliver application-guided and
fundamentals-driven education. Implementing the method in a sophomore course,
one of the first courses in chemical engineering curriculum, the project will
consider: (a) the industrial enculturation process in the classroom, (b)
synergistic instruction and mentoring by faculty and industrial trainers, and
(c) student interaction with industry professionals. During the project,
students’ engineering identity and self-efficacy will be monitored via surveys,
interviews and other tools. The result of this study will lead to better
understanding of effective engineering education models and methods for the
professional formation of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.