* 2024606
* NRI: FND: A Formal Methods Approach to Safe, Composable, and Distributed Reinforcement Learning for co-Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Calin Belta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 548,065.00

Many applications require heterogeneous teams of robots to collaborate with each
other and with humans to accomplish complex tasks. Consider, for example, a
futuristic robotic restaurant, in which the goal is to make hotdogs and serve
them together with drinks to incoming customers. A couple of robotic
manipulators have sensors and actuators allowing them to manipulate and grill
the hotdogs, put them in buns, and add spices. Another robot has a gripper that
allows it to handle glasses and pour drinks. Mobile wheeled robots can move
around the restaurant, greet the customers, and then serve them hotdogs and
drinks. A human supervisor gives the robotic team high level task
specifications, together with some useful facts, and then watches the team
working. If something goes wrong, or the robots do not manage to coordinate
efficiently, the supervisor can intervene and give more instructions. Many other
application areas share similar scenarios, including agriculture, military
surveillance, search and rescue. This project proposes an approach to solve such
problems that exploits the robotsâ€™ manipulation and cooperation capabilities,
allows for rich task specifications and interactions with humans, while at the
same time ensuring the safety of the overall operation. The research plan is
integrated with an education and outreach plan that includes a rich spectrum of
robotic-related activities for undergraduate and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technical approach brings together
tools from machine (reinforcement) learning, formal methods, and optimal
control. A rich, easy-to-understand, temporal logic specification language will
be developed to formalize requirements such as the ones from the example above,
and to specify prior knowledge. Central to the computational framework is a
metric that measures the satisfaction of the specifications, which will be used
to guide the learning process. This metric will be combined with control barrier
functions to ensure safety. The proposed approach is compositional - policies
for new tasks will be constructed from a library of learned policies with little
to no additional exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.