* 2025197
* How genomic shock triggers transposition during hybrid dysgenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Justin Blumenstiel, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 831,180.00

This project seeks to determine how genome instability is triggered by
transposable elements. Transposable elements (TEs) are selfish DNA elements that
proliferate through genomes and cause mutation. More than sixty years ago, the
geneticist Barbara McClintock demonstrated that DNA damage can lead to TE
activation but how this happens is poorly understood. Moreover, since TEs
themselves cause DNA damage, the activation of some TEs can trigger the
activation of others. This is known as co-mobilization. By combining genetic
manipulation with new methods of genome sequencing, this project will determine
how the DNA damage caused by TEs triggers co-mobilization. The outcomes will
provide new insight into how genome integrity is maintained across generations.
This project will engage diverse undergraduate student researchers, providing
training in genetic modification and genome analysis. Furthermore, it involves
development and dissemination of teaching tools to the broader community,
including video tutorials and software modules for genetic
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine how TE mobilization triggers the
movement of other TEs, hybrid dysgenesis in Drosophila virilis will be used as a
model. Hybrid dysgenesis is a syndrome of sterility caused by rampant
transposition when paternally inherited TEs become mis-regulated in the
germline. Long-read sequencing will be performed to directly measure
transposition and co-mobilization across generations. This approach will be
combined with strain-specific CRISPR to identify genetic factors that shape the
profile of co-mobilization. There are two primary models for how co-mobilization
may occur. One model proposes that TE activation is caused by disrupted genome
defense. An alternate model is that TEs are directly activated by elements of
the host DNA damage response. These two hypotheses will be tested using reporter
analysis. Finally, the same methods will also be used to characterize co-
mobilization in other model systems, in order to determine the generality of TE
co-mobilization across species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.