* 2025752
* NNCI: San Diego Nanotechnology Infrastructure (SDNI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,525,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The San Diego Nanotechnology Infrastructure
(SDNI) is set up as a national nanotechnology research and education
infrastructure to serve the country’s needs for advancing research, facilitating
technology commercialization, supporting entrepreneurship, developing strong and
competitive work force, enhancing K-12, college and graduate education, and
promoting diversity and inclusion. By accomplishing its missions, SDNI will
become a key contributor to the pursuit of scientific research and the national
health, prosperity, and security. SDNI offers unique tool sets, skills,
technical support, mentorship, and services to produce a myriad of innovative
materials and devices. These unique capabilities will help the nation to gain
competitive advantages in areas critical to the nation’s economy and security,
including artificial intelligence (AI), advanced manufacturing, quantum
information science (QIS), and 5G/6G communications. The SDNI will also play a
pivotal role in research pursuits that align with NSF’s 10 Big Ideas for the
future, with particular focus on supporting and growing convergent research,
enhancing science and engineering through diversity, and seeding innovation. To
develop a more diverse and productive scientific workforce, the SDNI is
committed to developing a systematic and executable outreach and education
program to promote STEM. Built upon a pilot program that has shown feasibility
through very positive responses from all stakeholders, including students,
teachers, and administrators from school districts with high minority student
populations, SDNI’s proposed outreach efforts will bring nanotechnology to the
science curriculum of middle and high schools in southern California first and
then across the country, through collaborations with other sites in the NNCI
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;As part of the
National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), the SDNI offers
technical strengths in the areas of Nano/Meso/Metamaterials, NanoBioMedicine,
NanoPhotonics, and NanoMagnetics. SDNI’s strategic goals are to (1) Provide
infrastructure that enables transformative research and education and leverages
San Diego’s innovation ecosystem, which includes major research institutes and
over 2,000 companies employing more than 60,000 scientists and engineers; (2)
Accelerate the translation of discoveries and new nanotechnologies to the
marketplace; (3) Become a key contributing member of the NNCI Network to support
and advance the nation’s nanotechnology infrastructure, and (4) Collaborate with
the California Board of Education and local school districts to develop
education and outreach programs to promote STEM efforts in high school and
community colleges, especially at schools with high populations of
underrepresented minority (URM) students. Because nanotechnology is a
foundational technology with applications across disciplines, SDNI will continue
to expand its capabilities, optimize its operations, and actively recruit and
engage new and nonconventional users to advance discoveries in scientific areas
of national priority. In particular, we expect the SDNI will play a crucial role
in the advancement of convergent research to help create breakthroughs in areas
of human machine interfaces, exploration of the universe, facilitating
revolutions based on quantum physics, and enhancing science and technology by
broadening participation in STEM. Discoveries made by users of the SDNI will
have the potential to create transformative change in fields critical to the
future of human society and national interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.