* 2025216
* BCSER: Developing Expertise in Educational Testing to Support Characterizing the Impact of Organic Chemistry Instruction on Students' Ability to Reason with Representations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Maia Popova, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 344,582.00

Representational competence is the ability to use drawings, diagrams, and
symbols to learn, communicate, and solve problems in a specific area, such as
organic chemistry. Studies have shown that undergraduate students’ ability to
reason with specific representations is important for their understanding of and
success in organic chemistry. However, no validated assessment instruments
currently exist that measure students’ representational competence in organic
chemistry. With support from NSF’s EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, this project seeks to develop such an
instrument. In the process of conducting this project, the principal
investigator will develop competencies in educational testing and psychometrics.
These new competencies will complement existing expertise in qualitative
investigation of students’ understanding of chemistry concepts and
characterization of instructors’ teaching beliefs and classroom practices. The
high-quality assessment instrument developed by the project team is expected to
be useful for further research on organic chemistry learning, as well as for
helping college chemistry instructors make informed decisions about their
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a combination of classical
test theory and factor analysis methods to develop and test the Organic-
chemistry Representational Competence Assessment (ORCA). ORCA will measure
student representational competence skills in the context of organic chemistry
representations such as dash-wedge diagrams, Newman projections, and chair
conformations. The targeted skills to be measured by ORCA include: the ability
to (a) interpret these representations, (b) select an appropriate representation
for a particular purpose, (c) make connections across these representations, and
(d) use these representations to make predictions about chemical phenomena. The
measurement quality framework, which targets select psychometric evidence
informed by the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing, will be
used as the conceptual and methodological framework for evaluating the quality
of ORCA’s items and its capacity to assist in drawing valid and reliable
inferences about student representational competence skills. The instrument will
be rigorously evaluated and tested with organic chemistry students from the
University of North Carolina at Greensboro and the University of South Florida.
The principal investigator will be mentored by an expert in the area of
assessment of content in undergraduate chemistry courses, and will complete
coursework to develop proficiency in psychometrics and measurement. The success
of the project and achievement of project objectives will be assessed through
periodic meetings with both the mentor and the advisory board. Dissemination of
project work will be facilitated via publications in academic journals,
presentations at relevant conferences, and workshops on assessment measurement
design and evaluation. Results of this study will inform instructional practices
and evidence-based design of organic chemistry curricula that supports the use
of effective strategies to develop student representational competence. This
project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build
individuals’ capacity to carry out high-quality, fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.