* 2025492
* The evolution of gametic compatibility within species and reproductive isolation across species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Don Levitan, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 889,704.00

Species are generally defined by whether individuals can mate successfully with
each other. If individuals can, they are generally considered part of the same
species, if they cannot they are considered to be members of different species.
What remains uncertain is how reproductive incompatibilities originate and
evolve. This project aims to investigate how variation in the proteins that
determine reproductive compatibility is generated, and the consequences of this
variation in establishing barriers to fertilization among species of sea
urchins. The broader impacts include the design and implementation of a workshop
for high school teachers to develop modules for using sea urchin fertilization
as a model to understand reproductive isolation and speciation; a key learning
concept in the Florida State Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will investigate how within species sexual conflict might generate intraspecific
variation in gamete recognition proteins and how reinforcement selection might
act on this protein variation to influence the evolution of reproductive
isolation among four strongylocentrotid sea urchin species; two that co-occur
along the West Coast of North America and two that have a circumpolar
distribution. The methods include generation of the (1) genomes and gene
expression of reproductive proteins in strongylocentrotid species; (2) crosses
within and among species to determine how the protein variants known from prior
work, and newly identified by the expression assays, influence within and across
species reproductive compatibility and (3) evidence for shifts in compatibility
and protein variation in and out of sympatry between the West Coast and
circumpolar species. This work represents an ecological context for
understanding the phenotypic and molecular evolution of gamete recognition
proteins and reproductive isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.