* 2025103
* AMPlifying the Simulation of Clouds and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Adele Igel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 369,418.00

Properly simulating clouds is critical for accurate prediction of clouds and
rainfall in weather and climate models. There are two common ways in which
small-scale cloud processes are represented in atmospheric models; these are
known as bin microphysics schemes and bulk microphysics schemes. Bulk schemes
are simple models that execute quickly while bin schemes are much more complex
but run slowly â€“ in fact, too slowly to be used in weather forecasting or
climate prediction. This project will use a new model, called the Arbitrary
Moment Predictor (AMP), which benefits from the accuracy and flexibility of bin
schemes to improve bulk schemes. AMP acts as a lens. It allows a weather model
to see a bin scheme as though it were a bulk scheme. By changing the view, it
will become possible to understand how best to implement bulk schemes in models
for the first time. The results have the potential to lead to a major shift in
the design and development of future weather and climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMP predicts size distribution moments of cloud
droplets and rain drops like existing bulk schemes, but the process
parameterizations are identical to those used by a bin scheme. It is flexible in
that it can predict mass mixing ratio and one or two additional arbitrary
distribution moments. There will be two major parts of the work. 1) Large eddy
simulations of warm phase stratocumulus clouds with two bin schemes and with two
versions of AMP corresponding to each bin scheme will be compared to assess
fundamental limitations of bulk schemes. Such a direct comparison between bin
and bulk schemes has not been possible before. 2) Additional simulations will be
run using AMP with alternative combinations of predicted moments. Simulations
will be rigorously assessed with available observations to explore the
possibility that nonstandard moment combinations should be used to improve
simulation of clouds and precipitation. Such a possibility has been suggested
based on observational evidence but has not been tested in 3D
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.