* 2025749
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Drivers of Microbial Survival and Autotrophy in a Characteristically Marine and Terrestrial Serpentinizing System–Ney’s Spring
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Brittany Kruger, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 208,846.00

Many of the microorganisms on Earth live in environments without access to
sunlight and therefore lack the energy from light to power chemical reactions
like photosynthesis. These bacteria live on other types of chemical reactions
that use rocks and water instead of light and produce compounds that
microorganisms can live on, like hydrogen, methane, or hydrogen sulfide. One of
these interactions, known as serpentinization, occurs principally in the deep
sea associated with volcanic activity and mid-ocean rifts, and it can support
specialized microbial life. Many questions remain however about specific
chemical reactions, diversity of the microbes and metabolic activities, and how
the microbes survive in these extreme environments. This project will
characterize a natural spring in Northern California, Ney’s spring, which is
similar to marine serpentinzing systems, making it uniquely accessible for
investigation and allows the use of monitoring techniques not possible in deep
marine systems. Experiments and measurements will be made in the spring and the
laboratory to examine microbial activity and chemical environment including
microscale profiling. Laboratory cultures of microbes from the spring and spring
muds will be established to understand microbial processes. Cultivations of
microbes from this environment could result in the isolation of novel bacteria
and applied biotechnology. The research team will implement outreach and
learning activities in local schools and community colleges that benefit a
diverse group of young STEM participants. This project is jointly funded by
Earth Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will approach the overarching
goal of understanding microbially-mediated chemical processes that support life
in this unique, ‘marine-like’ terrestrial spring by characterizing the microbial
and chemical makeup of this spring, with a focus on analyses that support
evidence of microbial activities that are thought to support life (utilizing
inorganic compounds such as sulfide and methane). A series of field based, and
lab-based experiments to support predictions of microbial activities will be
performed. Cutting edge electrochemical techniques, including microelectrode
profiling of spring’s chemistry, and in situ electrochemical incubations used to
test for microbes that can utilize solid phase mineral as energy sources, will
be used. Confirmation of microbial activities will be conducted by obtaining
isolated cultivars. Significant intellectual merit will therefore be achieved by
producing the first cohesive insight into the activity of microbial communities
in this ‘marine-like’ spring of unique chemistry. This work will also help
develop new experimental approaches in the field through the implementation of
novel and cutting-edge experimentation and analytical approaches. Cultivations
of microbes form this environment, also has the potential to support development
of applied biotechnology. The unique, cross-discipline nature of this work will
also allow the Co-Is to implement outreach and learning activities in local
schools and community colleges that benefit a diverse group of young STEM
participants. This project supports two early career female investigators and
significantly enhances their new research groups. This project is jointly funded
by Earth Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.