* 2025735
* Revisiting the Cambrian Series 1 animal origination chronology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jessica Creveling, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,110.00

The oldest shelly sea creatures appeared ~540 million years ago in the ‘Cambrian
explosion’. This research seeks to refine the timeline for this captivating
evolutionary event. This task is harder than expected because fossils of the
same organism appear at different times in different places. How can one tell
which of the many fossils of the same species is oldest—and refine its
evolutionary timeline—with a sparse chronology for Cambrian marine sediment
deposition and fossil occurrences? This research uses a computer program to
match up the globally synchronous chemical signals of carbon cycle changes
preserved in the rocks hosting Cambrian fossils. Matching the chemical signals
from a fossil’s location to the one Cambrian location with many dates will allow
these ages to be determined via extrapolation. As most Cambrian fossil organisms
are the earliest members of still-living taxonomic phyla, our research promotes
the progress of scientific inquiry into the tempo of evolution within and across
animal clades. This project will develop open source, interactive software for
the broader geological community to align chemical records without the need for
advanced coding experience; train one PhD student and three undergraduates in
computational research; and develop and distribute curricula, based on this new
software, to promote undergraduate quantitative literacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chronology for the early Cambrian radiation of small
skeletal fossils arises from visual alignment of δ13Ccarb excursions at a U-Pb
radiometrically calibrated, fossil barren, stratigraphic section in Morocco to
excursions at richly fossiliferous, time uncertain sections elsewhere. Visual
δ13Ccarb correlation methods cannot ensure unique alignments, nor a given
chronology. This research adopts a dynamic programming algorithm to identify
libraries of geologically permissible alignments between fossiliferous
stratigraphic sections and the Moroccan δ13Ccarb–U/Pb age model. Each
permissible δ13Ccarb alignment will generate a distinct chronology for the local
first appearance datum (FAD) of all fossil taxa at a stratigraphic section and,
thus, various combinations of local FAD chronologies will yield alternative ages
for a taxon’s global FAD. The proposed research explores whether/how alternative
global FAD chronologies reveal a different number of origination pulses and
alternative ages for pulse initiation and duration, thereby addressing
heretofore unacknowledged uncertainty in the earliest Cambrian explosion
chronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.