* 2025022
* EAGER: Partnering with Grab for Cross-ASEAN Regional Urban Insights
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kurtis Heimerl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This activity is in response to the NSF Dear Colleague Letter: Supporting
Transition of Research into Cities through the US ASEAN (Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Cities) Smart Cities Partnership (NSF 20-024), in
collaboration with the US Department of State. This project will kickstart a new
collaborative research agenda between US researchers, international researchers
in Singapore and the Philippines, together with Grab Holdings (Grab); Grab
operates a platform for services including ride sharing (both car and
motorcycle), food and package delivery, and mobile payments across the entire
Southeast Asia region, with hundreds of thousands of drivers having ferried more
than three billion rides throughout the company’s lifetime. Leveraging Grab’s
vast datasets in Indonesia (Jakarta), the Philippines (Manila), and Singapore,
and using complementary datasets collected by the researchers, associated
cities, or other sources, the team will make use of statistical “big data”
analyses to explore, for example, the impact of the gig economy on the health
and wellness of passengers, drivers, and other citizens, as well as on the
economic security of gig workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grab’s broad scope,
crossing regional, national, cultural, religious, rural, and urban boundaries
together with wide-ranging services creates an opportunity for engaging with
critical social questions relevant across the ASEAN region as well as in cities
in the US and globally that rely on the gig economy. Using methods from data
science, social network analysis, and natural language processing as well as
accompanying in-situ qualitative field investigations, the researchers will
engage with Grab drivers and passengers to explore the broader impact of ride
sharing in their communities. Specifically, the partners will work towards a set
of initial project directions, including (1) the exploration of income mobility
on the Grab platform in Manila and Jakarta, (2) the measurement and mitigation
of the effects of air pollution on Grab motorcycle taxi drivers and passengers
in Jakarta, and (3) the investigation of the efficacy of different driver
strategies in Singapore and Manila. These activities will create foundational
research and actionable insights into topics that span urban health,
international development, poverty alleviation, and the future of work in both
the ASEAN region and across the world while also building partnerships for
future research throughout the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.