* 2025773
* SBIR Phase I:  A Wireless Portable Fully Electronic Hematology Analyzer for Complete Blood Count Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Jianye Sui, RIZLAB HEALTH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a new device for conducting blood
tests at home or in smaller clinical settings. The platform will be fully
electronic, portable, low-cost, and using advanced artificial intelligence
techniques. This proposed analyzer provides information normally obtained from
costly high-end commercial equipment at much lower cost, enabling new diagnosis
and monitoring for many different conditions. Additionally, the ultra-compact
modules developed here will be applicable to a broad range of assays beyond
complete blood count analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to build and characterize an
ultra-compact all-electronic cytometer with a fully plastic cartridge capable of
quantifying the key cellular components in a complete blood cell count (CBC)
test including: red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC), platelets,
hemoglobin (hgb) concentration, and hematocrit levels. An impedance cytometer
will be developed in conjunction with machine learning to discriminate between
RBCs, WBCs, and platelets, while estimating hgb and hematocrit levels with less
than 15 ul of blood. The primary goal is to engineer a cartridge that can work
with the reader while being manufacturable in high volume with ultra-low cost.
The research will involve fabrication and testing an integrated microfluidic
biosensor, developing data-driven software for accurate classification of blood
cell types using impedance cytometry data, building ultra-compact pocket-sized
hardware and a smartphone application, and finally benchmarking and testing of
prototype accuracy against a standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.