* 2025626
* 3D printing of reactive porous media to enhance understanding of porosity-permeability evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Lauren Beckingham, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 331,833.00

Geochemical reactions play an important role in natural and engineered systems,
occurring as part of natural weathering processes, at contaminated subsurface
and surface sites, and in geologic CO2 sequestration, radioactive waste
disposal, and other engineered subsurface systems. Understanding the impact of
these reactions on flow and transport is critical to assessing long-term
evolution of these systems, including risks and adverse environmental impacts.
However, current understanding of the impact of mineral dissolution and
precipitation reactions on porous media properties is limited. These systems are
difficult to evaluate with laboratory experiments because natural samples are
highly heterogenous and different results can be obtained for even replicate
experiments with samples from the same location. In this work, the use of 3D
printing to create replicable, reactive porous media samples will be explored
and used to enhance understanding of reactions and permeability evolution in
porous media. Observations will be leveraged to generate new porosity-
permeability relationships with improved predictive capabilities. Advancements
in understanding from this work will generate knowledge needed to improve
engineering design of subsurface energy systems, enhance understanding of
contaminant fate and transport in subsurface systems, and improve understanding
of near surface weathering processes. This work will encompass a range of
broader impacts ranging from K-12 outreach, graduate student education, and
enhancing diversity in STEM students in addition to increasing understanding of
transport and reactions in natural systems. Undergraduate and graduate students
from underrepresented groups will be recruited for this project and included in
outreach activities aimed to enhance interest and diversity in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to enhance understanding
of mineral dissolution and precipitation reactions and impacts on porosity and
permeability in porous media. The highly heterogenous nature of porous media
complicates experimental efforts and limits predictive capabilities. Critically,
this proposal will utilize 3D printing to fabricate replicate reactive porous
media that maintain the physical heterogeneities of real porous media to enhance
understanding of the impact of variations in porous media structures and the
distribution of mineral reactions on where mineral reactions occur and,
consequently, changes in porosity and permeability. The approach will be to
create a series of 3D printed “reactive” porous media and carry out replicate
laboratory mineral dissolution and precipitation experiments on these samples,
characterizing permeability evolution and using 3D imaging to identify the time
lapsed evolution of porosity. Experimental observations will be leveraged to
develop new macroscopic porosity-permeability relationships with improved
predictive capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.