* 2025285
* Viscosity-driven Enhanced Hydrological Connectivity
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Felipe de Barros, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 562,000.00

Remediation or cleanup of contaminated groundwater resources is a well-known
societal problem for which more effective solutions that are based on a better
understanding of how water mixes with chemicals in aquifers is required. Many
chemicals that are either responsible for contamination or used as a remedial
agent for decontamination have viscosities and densities different from water.
These differences lead to complex flow patterns, especially in aquifers with
heterogeneous hydraulic properties, as one fluid is pushed by the other during
natural groundwater flow or pump-and-treat operations for groundwater cleanup.
Viscous fingering is an example of such a complex flow pattern that develops
when a less viscous chemical or water pushes a more viscous water or chemical
through the aquifer. The fingers that form spontaneously at the boundary between
the two fluids control how fast and how far the contamination or decontamination
spreads. Understanding and predicting the growth of viscous fingers and the
associated spreading and mixing within contaminated/remediated regions is the
goal of this project. Lab experiments and numerical simulations of viscous
fingering will be conducted for a range of fluid viscosity contrasts and aquifer
heterogeneities representative of U.S. aquifers to generate data for testing
hypotheses on spreading and mixing of contaminant/remedial fluids. The proposed
research is particularly relevant to megacities suffering from fuel leakage from
underground storage tanks at gas stations because of the viscosity contrast
between gasoline additives and water. Educational activities that involve
undergraduate and graduate students in learning the mechanisms of groundwater
contamination and remediation through hands-on numerical and physical modeling
tools are also planned in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve our current understanding of how the physical properties of a solute
plume interact with permeability heterogeneity to affect plume spreading and
mixing during hydrodynamically unstable transport through strongly heterogeneous
rocks. This understanding is required to predict and control contaminant
remediation and removal processes because of the variability in the physical
properties of different types of organic/inorganic contaminants. Based on high-
resolution numerical simulations, theory of hydrodynamic dispersion and
instability, and novel experiments of solute transport in consolidated rocks,
the interplay between permeability heterogeneity and viscosity contrast and its
control on mixing and spreading of a solute plume will be quantified. By
evaluating new metrics of plume connectivity that are defined in terms of the
breakthrough curve and the topology of the control plane concentration map,
which are field observables, the contribution of the viscosity contrast to the
solute arrival time and the mixing zone length will be quantified. Understanding
how viscosity contrasts, in the presence of heterogeneity, impacts solute
connectivity and transport is highly relevant for aquifer remediation, risk
analysis, underground waste disposal, and the chemical industry. Undergraduate
and graduate students will be trained in conducting Hele-Shaw cell experiments,
building physical aquifer models of contamination and remediation, and
organizing a viscous fingering art exhibition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.