* 2025170
* Collaborative Research: Institute in Research Methods for Professional Development for Emerging Education Researchers (PEER) Field Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 587,328.00

This Institute in Research Methods project extends the impact of the
Professional Development for Emerging Education Researchers (PEER) field school
model to emerging education researchers through a multi-faceted approach,
building individual and community capacity for high-quality STEM education
research. The institute advances understanding of the effectiveness of
professional development for research. Evaluation activities will identify
characteristics of successful field schools in STEM education research and
compare these with current understanding of professional development in a
pedagogical context. In addition to training the institute will contribute to
generalized knowledge of how to help emerging researchers generate high quality
STEM education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of gateway
workshops to attract and motivate participants, 5-day introductory field schools
across the country, and advanced activities that explore quantitative and
qualitative methodologies in depth. Curated web repositories of research tools
and "Expert How To" articles will be developed with user-design research to
ensure usability. These products will be hosted on the nationally established
PhysPort repository for physics pedagogical resources. The project also develops
a strategic partnership with the University of Virgin Islands, a public,
Historically Black College, and its Institute for STEM Education Research and
Practice. The final project outcome will be a growing community of discipline-
based STEM education researchers trained to address critical issues in the
education system, including broadening participation, addressing gaps in STEM
learning, and developing the next-generation of pedagogical materials that
increase student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research institute is
funded by ECR (the core research program of the Education and Human Resources
directorate) and attends specifically to critical aspects in research capacity
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.