* 2025141
* Detecting Student's Dual-Process Reasoning in Introductory Undergraduate Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,05/31/2023
* John Kelly, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 112,333.00

In this capacity building project, the investigator proposes to replicate a
research project to investigate dual process reasoning in an undergraduate
physics classroom at a Historically Black College and University. Dual process
theories state that when faced with a decision, students may use both an
autonomous system of cognition (T1S) and a reflective system (T2S) that relies
on working memory and mental simulations. The current project builds on prior
research that applied the heuristic-analytic theory of reasoning to examine
studentsâ€™ intuitive thinking in the context of physics. The prior project
studied concepts related to capacitors and mechanical waves. In the current
project, the investigator will study concepts related to Newtonian mechanics.
This research is intended to inform interventions that can help students develop
valid intuitions and evaluate physical situations using formal physics
reasoning. The investigator will implement a professional development plan to
acquire skills and competencies to conduct STEM education research. Development
activities include mentoring, and courses in multivariate statistics and in
design and implementation of mixed methods research. In addition to its
potential to enhance student success in physics and other STEM courses, the
project will position the investigator to conduct future research on
metacognition in students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will investigate to
what extent measures of reflective thinking correlate with performance on
conceptual physics problems. The guiding hypotheses are: (1) Students who answer
the screening questions correctly will show a positive correlation between
correct answers on target questions and Critical Reflection Test (CRT) taken as
a measure of higher cognitive reflection skills; (2) Students who answer the
screening questions correctly will show a positive correlation between CRT
scores and correct reasoning on a subsequent question; (3) Students who show a
higher propensity for reflective thinking, as measured by the CRT, are more
likely to use formal physics reasoning on the target questions (i.e. provide
correct answers and correct reasoning for all questions); and (4) Students
taking Calculus-based Physics 1 will have higher average CRT scores than those
taking Conceptual Physics. Interview data will be collected for three semesters
in two introductory physics classes and analyzed by replicating the system of
screening questions and target questions from the earlier study. Data will be
analyzed using effect sizes, logic regression, and a t-test. The research plan
creates questions that probe dual-process reasoning in a broader range of
students and creates diagnostics and a baseline for understanding dual-process
reasoning that can be used to study the influence of interventions to improve
reflective, analytic thinking among HBCU students. The research results will
contribute to developing interventions to improve the reasoning and analysis
skills of underrepresented students and build capacity to develop a vibrant
physics education research program at the institution. This project is supported
by the ECR: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. ECR funds STEM education research projects that are
focused on STEM learning and learning environment, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM professional workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.