* 2025643
* ISS: A new paradigm for explaining catastrophic post-wildfire mudflows: transport phenomena and gravity-driven aggregation dynamics of hydrophobic particle-air-water mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ingrid Tomac, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF-CASIS project will conduct a series of experiments on board the
International Space Station (ISS) and on Earth to understand the role of gravity
in the dynamics of mudflows. It is well established that rainfall triggers
mudflows on recently burned slopes. After wildfires, the surficial burned soil
is water-repellent or hydrophobic, preventing rain infiltration and leading to
sudden and rapid mudflows. Post-wildfire gravity-driven mudflows are
unpredictable, occur suddenly, and travel rapidly downhill, turning into debris
flows and mobilizing large and heavy boulders. In January 2018 in Montecito,
California, an intense 15-minute burst turned into a devastating debris flow
which caused 21 deaths, led to $421 million in damages, and closed key transit
corridors. The experiments will examine how the attachment of hydrophobic soil
particles to air bubbles leads to the formation of aggregates that may give rise
to the unusual flow behaviors observed in mudflows. Particle-air-water mixtures
form interesting structures (bubbles, pipes and clusters) whose shapes are
primarily governed by a balance between gravity and the attractive forces
between air bubbles and water-repellent particles. The experiments on the ISS
and on Earth will use a model system consisting of sand particles that have been
made hydrophobic through a chemical treatment, air and water. After mixing, the
material will flow through a plexiglas channel, and particle motions and
evolution of aggregates will be imaged and correlated with characteristics of
the overall flow. By comparing experiments on the ISS with those on Earth, the
role of gravity in aggregate formation and flow behavior will be understood. The
results of this study will help understand how mudslides are affected by
rainfall intensity and duration and could lead to better early-warning systems
and risk evaluation. The research team will include students, especially those
from underrepresented groups, and the project will support educational
activities to high-school students in local communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to run experiments on Earth
and in microgravity conditions to correlate mudflow composition with flow and
transport characteristics on a micromechanical level. An understanding of the
role of gravity on microstructural changes in flowing air-water-particle
mixtures and, in particular, on the formation of particle-bubble agglomerates is
crucial for predicting the rheological behavior of mudflows. Experiments will
focus on how mudflow shear behavior depends on relative amounts of water,
trapped air, and particles of various sizes. Experiments on Earth will identify
how the mixture composition affect flow behavior and will delineate critical
parameter ranges to be tested on board the ISS. Microgravity experiments will
study the dynamics of hydrophobic particle attachment to air bubbles and the
consequences of agglomeration on mixture flow and transport. Results will be
used to derive governing equations that can describe the flow behavior of the
mixtures, including effects of mixture rheology on the flow. Understanding the
processes of mudslide initiation with respect to rainfall intensity and duration
will lead to a more accurate predictive capability for the onset and development
of mudslides that could mitigate catastrophic damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.