* 2025093
* Research Initiation:  Computational Modeling in the Professional Formation of Materials Engineers (PFE: RIEF)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Hyung Sok Choe, Campbell University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 233,021.00

Engineers need to be able to use powerful computational tools in order to
continue to address increasingly complex problems. This is particularly true for
the field of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), in which simulation tools
are vital to the effort to develop and test cutting-edge new materials like new
metal alloys, smart materials, and composites. Universities who train future
engineers have responded by including this information in their curriculum.
However, a portion of undergraduate engineering students have had particular
difficulty learning to use these tools and do not develop the competence
necessary during their studies. One possible reason for this is that many
engineering students, particularly materials science and engineering students,
do not think they are capable of learning these skills or do not believe they
will need to use them in their career. This project will survey and interview a
large number of students at two different universities, Campbell University and
Ohio State University, to determine whether or not there are significant
differences in students’ motivation based on their program of study, and whether
or not this difference in motivation is tied to student learning. By better
understanding this relationship, engineering educators can help develop programs
or curriculum that will improve students’ learning in this vital
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational thinking and skills are critical for
the success of both engineering students and practicing engineers in the 21st
century. The study will explore the extent to which key motivation factors for
students learning computational skills – such as efficacy, expectancy value, and
utility value – differ across engineering disciplines. Students from a large
public university (Ohio State University) and a small private university
(Campbell University) will be surveyed and interviewed during their first year
of studies in engineering to determine their motivational beliefs. Links between
different types of motivation, chosen specialty within the field of engineering,
and student background will be investigated. The degree to which these factors
correlate with each other and with students’ performance in basic computational
modeling assignments will determine whether the hypothesis – that students in
some sub-disciplines of engineering studies such as materials science and
engineering will be less motivated to learn computational tools – is supported.
Ultimately, these findings can lead to appropriate and high-impact interventions
to improve computational materials science education. We may find that it is
easier to address the way students think about the importance of learning
computational skills and whether or not they are able to succeed, and if so
dramatic improvements in student learning could
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.