* 2025453
* ISS: Collaborative Research: Bimodal Colloidal Assembly, Coarsening and Failure: Decoupling Sedimentation and Particle Size Effects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Safa Jamali, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 261,704.00

A wide range of natural and artificial materials are composed of different
components - such as particles and polymer molecules - dispersed in a fluid.
Examples are personal care products, food, and inks. Physical properties and
function of these products, along with their shelf-life and consumer perception,
depend on the behavior of these components. Designing materials with specific
desired properties, therefore, requires a better understanding of how these
particles and polymers interact under different conditions. Of particular
interest are gel-like systems where particle size variations can lead to product
failure. This award will combine computer simulations and terrestrial
experiments, along with experiments onboard the International Space Station. The
goal is to examine the effect of gravity on these gels and to investigate the
size variation effects on final properties of such materials. Such findings
could benefit several industries and will also help opening new avenues of
fundamental research. A series of outreach activities are proposed to enhance
the participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will study the physics of
colloidal gelation, coarsening and phase-separation in bimodal attractive
colloidal suspensions, in which the size difference between the two particle
populations is appreciable. This size disparity can cause selective
gravitational settling in one hand, and heterogeneous clustering where large
particles serve as nuclei for aggregation of small colloids in another hand,
leading to coarsening and failure of the gels. The role of particle size
difference in coarsening and eventual failure of colloidal gels will be probed
by decoupling the role of gravitational forces and inter-particle interactions.
The ultimate goal is to explore the role of particle composition (ratio of small
to large particles) as well as the range of interactions between the particles
in mediating gelation, coarsening, and [gravitational] failure. An integrated
effort, with detailed study of the physical phenomena through
computational/theoretical platforms in conjunction with control ground
experiments in addition to essential micro-gravity experiments will be
performed. The cohesive integration of theory, computation and experiments with
and without gravity will enable us to systematically decouple the roles of
gravity and particle size disparity in mediating gelation, coarsening, and
failure, paving the way for the development of a theoretical framework to better
understand attractive colloidal systems in real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.