* 2025849
* LTER: Manipulating drivers to assess grassland resilience
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2026
* Melinda Smith, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2026
* USD 3,572,548.00

Grasslands provide many benefits to society. In the eastern portion of the
Central Plains, tallgrass prairie is the most common type of grassland.
Tallgrass prairies once supported vast herds of bison and elk, and now support
cattle ranching. Native prairie grasses are highly nutritious for cattle and can
withstand frequent grazing, making tallgrass prairie the most productive
rangeland in the United States. Tallgrass prairies also provide habitat for
commercially important game species including deer, turkey, and waterfowl.
Additionally, the prairies regulate water and nutrient cycles, and help store
carbon. Remaining tallgrass prairie is threatened by invasive species, climate
change, and expansion of woody plants. Sustainable management of tallgrass
prairies requires a deep understanding of how these threats affect species,
water, and nutrient cycling. Decades of research at the Konza Prairie Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) site in Kansas have provided a deep understanding of
how the prairie responds to environmental changes of many kinds. New research
will focus on ecological resilience, identifying how plants and animals respond
to natural disturbances (fire and grazing) and to the more recent challenges
imposed by climate shifts and invasion of woody plants. This work will inform
grassland restoration, management and conservation efforts throughout the Great
Plains. Konza scientists will be active in education and outreach activities.
For example, the Konza Environmental Education Program provides activities for
thousands of K-12 students every year, illustrating the societal value of
collecting long-term data. Konza scientists also provide community outreach and
engagement for the public, land managers, conservationists, and policy-
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1980, the Konza Prairie LTER site has
investigated how key drivers of grasslands globally - fire, grazing, and
climatic variability - interact to influence tallgrass prairie structure and
function. The conceptual framework of this renewal award builds on long-term
studies, reflects the increasing complexity of research questions developed over
the history of the site, and explicitly recognizes that tallgrass prairie
pattern and process result from human alteration of ecological drivers at local
(e.g., land use and management), regional (e.g., nutrient inputs) and global
(e.g., climate change) scales. This research leverages long-term, watershed-
scale manipulations of fire frequency and grazing by large ungulates, coupled
with numerous plot-scale manipulations to test ecological theory and address
timely questions regarding grassland responses to multiple, interacting global
changes. Specifically, researchers will focus on mechanisms underlying
sensitivity and resilience of ecosystem states in mesic grasslands. New research
will utilize the array of ecosystem states that have emerged from previous
landscape manipulations to refine the understanding of sensitivity, resilience,
and ecosystem state change in tallgrass prairie. The research comprises four
thematic areas: 1) continued watershed-level manipulations of historical drivers
(fire and grazing), 2) experimental manipulations of global change drivers, 3)
cessation or reversal of selected drivers to assess legacies, and 4) human
intervention. Collectively, Konza Prairie research will advance ecological
theory and improve our mechanistic understanding of ecosystem state changes by
manipulating key drivers to alter ecological states while employing new
analytical approaches to augment the value of Konza LTERâ€™s long-term data sets.
The research will provide new information critical for understanding, managing,
and conserving grasslands globally, while concurrently addressing fundamental
ecological questions to explain grassland dynamics in a changing
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.