* 2025203
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Safety Accessory for Improving Performance and Minimizing Complications of Manual Ventilation (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Prathamesh Prabhudesai, SAFEBVM CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2022
* USD 275,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes improved performance and minimized
complications of manual ventilation through the development of a cost-efficient
and user-friendly medical device. The bag valve mask (BVM) is used during first-
response and emergencies to manually deliver air to patients unable to breathe
on their own. Approximately 13.1 million BVMs are used annually in the United
States. Due to a lack of feedback mechanisms, providers are unable to judge
their compliance with ventilation recommendations, resulting in a high incidence
of life-threatening complications. In the intensive care unit, mechanical
ventilators are used for safe and precise air delivery, but the quality is
different. This project prevents complications of unsafe manual ventilation,
thereby improving the quality of care and providing cost savings for the health
system. The project will help bridge the gap between manual and mechanical
ventilation, aiding first responders in the COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
advance the science of emergency airway management. This technology will fit
into the existing treatment workflow and supply-chain while addressing the need
for safer ventilation during COVID-19. Improper manual ventilation due to
delivery of unsafe pressures, volume, or frequency is common and occurs
regardless of a provider's training or experience. The prevalence and severity
of the problem have been studied extensively, establishing the need for the
device. The research and development goal is to develop a device that can
achieve performance and safety closer to a ventilator. Studies include
characterizing usability, performance, efficacy, and
biocompatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.