* 2025064
* NNCI: North Carolina Research Triangle Nanotechnology Network (RTNN)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Nan Jokerst, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,300,000.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The Research Triangle Nanotechnology
Network (RTNN) enables innovation and commercialization of new promising
nanotechnologies and facilitates public education for the U.S. by providing
technical leadership and open access to comprehensive and dynamic nanotechnology
laboratories, equipment, and research expertise. Three major research
universities anchor the RTNN (North Carolina State University, Duke University,
and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) and are clustered near one
of the nation's major nanoscience and nano-biotechnology regional economies. The
RTNN identifies and responds to emerging nanotechnology infrastructure needs
that will enable researchers to address societal grand challenges of the next
decade, using our facilities as a focal point for the convergence of academic
disciplines, industries, and the public and private sector. The RTNN surmounts
the barriers of accessing nanotechnology facilities by implementing and
deploying innovative programs that are continually assessed, evaluated, and
refined. The RTNN leads research on Social and Ethical Implications of
Nanotechnology (SEIN) including issues that reside at the intersection of
nanotechnology user facilities with employment and economic development. The
RTNN supports a nanotechnology innovation ecosystem that spans grades 7-12,
community colleges, universities, and industry. By translating program successes
across the nation, the RTNN serves as a leader for the development and growth of
U.S. nanotechnology innovation ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;The RTNN integrates comprehensive shared user facilities
and complementary research programs at three major research universities. These
resources are used to dramatically increase the national impact of state-of-the-
art fabrication and characterization facilities in nanoscience and
nanotechnology. A specific emphasis is on engaging users from underserved
groups, including all underrepresented groups in STEM as well as researchers who
do not typically access shared nanotechnology facilities such as those from non-
traditional disciplines. RTNN technical capabilities span nanofabrication and
nano-characterization of traditional hard/dry and emerging soft/wet materials.
Core research expertise and specialized technical capabilities in the RTNN span:
organic and carbon-based 1-D and 2-D nanomaterials (e.g. plant-based
nanomaterials, textile nanofibers); materials for energy efficiency and
sustainability (e.g. hybrid perovskite devices, wide-bandgap materials);
heterogeneous integration and interfacial studies of nanomaterials and
nanostructures (e.g. flexible substrates, nanofluidics systems); and
nanostructures for biology, medicine, and environmental assessment (e.g.
nanoparticles for drug delivery, wearable electronics). The RTNN expands shared
facilities usage by creating and assessing innovative programs and disseminating
these programs throughout the nation. These programs include new modules for
Nanotechnology, A Makerâ€™s Course (a massive open online course on making
nanotechnology devices), expansion of a program to accelerate the entry of new
and non-traditional users into working in the facilities, a community college
internship program, enhanced outreach to grades K-12 and rural communities, and
the leadership of a Research Community for Nanotechnology Convergence. This
Research Community will bring together researchers from distinct disciplines to
address infrastructure barriers in tackling major societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.