* 2025969
* Collaborative Research:  Variation of Incoming Plate Hydration and Faulting Along the Alaska Subduction Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Douglas Wiens, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 195,246.00

Subduction zones are sites of important chemical exchanges between the solid
earth, hydrosphere and atmosphere. Seawater that penetrates into the subducting
oceanic plate is incorporated in water-bearing minerals and carried deep into
the earth. As the subducting plate descends and heats up, water is released and
can influence the properties of subduction zone faults, the generation of
subduction zone earthquakes, and the generation of magmas that feed arc
volcanoes. Some of the water is released back into the atmosphere through
volcanic eruptions. A critical unknown in this cycle is the amount and
distribution of water in the incoming tectonic plate. How much water is stored
in the plate? To what depth in the plate does water penetrate? Does the amount
of water in the plate vary along the subduction zone? If so, what controls this
variation? This project will use seismic and bathymetric (seafloor-depth) data
collected across the Alaska subduction zone between Kodiak Island and the
Shumagin Islands to constrain the volume and distribution of water stored in the
subducting oceanic plate. The results will be valuable for understanding changes
in the occurrence of large earthquakes and the compositions of magmas feeding
volcanoes in this part of the Alaska subduction zone. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in data analysis and gain valuable
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The volume and distribution of water is thought
to control a host of fundamental processes at subduction zones, including
megathrust behavior, the generation of arc magmas, and intermediate depth
earthquakes. However, the amount of water delivered into the subduction zone by
the incoming oceanic plate remains controversial and poorly known, resulting in
great uncertainties in Earthâ€™s deep water budget. In addition, the along-strike
variation of water input, and its influence on along-strike variations in
subduction processes, are also poorly constrained. Newly acquired seismic and
bathymetric data from the Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment (AACSE)
will be combined with existing data off the Alaska Peninsula to characterize
outer-rise faulting and possible hydration throughout the incoming oceanic
lithosphere. This subduction zone is an excellent target for study because it
exhibits along-strike variations in megathrust coupling and seismicity at a
range of depths, and existing data suggest along-strike variations in faulting
and hydration. The lateral and depth distribution of hydrous phases in the
incoming crust and mantle will be determined using seismic surface wave, body
wave, and active source methods, and the results will be compared with incoming
plate seismicity and mapped faults from bathymetry. Seismic anisotropy will
provide constraints on the distribution of hydrated minerals around fault zones.
The results will provide a comprehensive estimate of the incoming-plate water
budget as a function of location along the Alaska subduction zone, allowing the
effects of water on other subduction processes to be quantitatively evaluated.
New constraints on the incoming water budget can be used by multidisciplinary
studies evaluating the influence of water on megathrust and intermediate depth
seismicity characteristics, along-strike volcanic output changes, and on the
global mantle water budget. Estimates of the maximum size of incoming plate
normal faults will allow the possible tsunami hazards of such earthquakes to be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.