* 2025106
* CAREER: Understanding the Mechanisms of Wildland Fire Spread
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Michael Gollner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 03/31/2022
* USD 169,817.00

CBET-1554026, Gollner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large wildland fires pose an enormous
threat to local populations and natural resources, and contribute carbon and
particulate emissions to the atmosphere. Firefighters, community planners, and
local residents all depend on accurate predictions of the spread of wildland
fires for operational firefighting, evacuations, community design, and
prescribed fire design. It is well known in the wildland fire community that
increasing winds or slope will increase the rate of spread of a wildfire;
however, the physical mechanisms by which a fire spreads are not well known.
This uncertainty is, in part, why no models can accurately predict the critical
thresholds for fire spread. Important thresholds include when a fire will
extinguish or transition from surface fire spread to crowning through the tree-
tops. This research project will utilize laboratory experiments to develop
quantitative models to describe the physics of fire spread. Once these improved
models for fire spread are developed, they can be used for predicting fire
suppression, evacuations, and fire weather alerts. Solving the wildfire problem
will take more than just advanced research. A workforce trained to understand
both the practical and scientific fire problems in wildland fire will also be
necessary. In conjunction with this project, two outreach programs will be
implemented. First, an educational program for middle and high school girls will
use fire science as a unique avenue to introduce underrepresented students to
STEM careers. Second, researchers will work with the first responders - wildland
firefighters, to inform them of hazards and safety techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to understand
the previously-unexplored role of intermittent heating that is driven by
reacting-flow instabilities on wildland fire spread, in the hope that this
knowledge may lead to a testable, physical theory of wildland fire spread.
Current models either rely on empirical results or assume that radiation is the
dominant heat transport mechanism. Recent observations by the PI and his
collaborators have instead shown that intermittent heating from flames is, in
many regimes, an equally important process driving flame spread and cannot be
neglected. Buoyant instabilities originating in the reacting flow of wildland
fires eject flames far ahead into unignited fuel, driving the spread. During the
most devastating wildfires, these regimes tend to be dominant and, hence,
current flame spread models fail. This study of intermittent fuel heating will
contribute to these important numerical tools which will address critical
failures during extreme fire conditions. Experimental work will include the use
of stationary burners under forced-flow, inclined, and combined configurations.
In addition, a pulsed-gas burner will be used to couple the effects of flame
instabilities on fine fuel ignition which drive flame spread. Theoretical work
will include developing theoretical models and scaling relationships for the
formation of coherent structures in the flow and their effects on intermittent
heating of fine fuels. The development of new models and collaboration with the
U.S. Forest Service will propel these results directly into practice and couple
the disparate fields of wildland fire and combustion science.