* 2025226
* Building Capacity for Science-Informed Policy in the Americas through Regional Collaboration, Global Change Science Synthesis, Science Diplomacy, and Transdisciplinary Networks
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,324,890.00

The Inter-American Institute (IAI) for Global Change Research will establish an
innovative science-policy program for the Americas with the following aims: (1)
To create a science diplomacy center with innovative training approaches,
including Science, Technology, Policy Fellows (STeP) and in-person and virtual
science diplomacy professional development seminars; (2) To develop a
transdisciplinary (TD) science training program to enhance the capacity of
professionals and institutions across Latin America and the Caribbean to conduct
TD science that will inform end users from public and private sectors. Although
scientific capacity in the Americas has been increasing in the last two decades,
there are still significant discrepancies among countries. In this project, IAI
will focus on effectively addressing the disparities in capacity between large
and small nations. These efforts will allow for greater inclusion of early
career scientists and practitioners from underrepresented countries into
regional networks, thereby providing a more diverse and realistic panorama of
global change challenges and improving the Americas’ ability to cope with and
thrive under global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IAI will define TD
approaches through training and collaborative development of instructional
materials, synthesizing and disseminating results and best practices in the
design and implementation of TD methodologies, tailored for the region. Targeted
training materials on science diplomacy and TD science will reach a broad
audience of scientists and non-scientists throughout the region, increasing the
capacity of the Americas to generate scientific information that is useful for
stakeholders to jointly address global change issues. This project will also
support a broader conversation on the ethical principles associated with TD
research. Training exchanges and the STeP Fellowship program will prepare the
next generation of science-policy leaders, individuals who are well equipped to
effectively integrate scientific information into decision making processes for
the public and private sector. These fellows will also be connected to other
regional and global fellow networks, increasing their collaboration
opportunities. TD trainings will aim at increasing the inclusion of people and
countries that have been historically underrepresented in the sciences, thereby
fomenting a more equitable and diverse science-policy
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.