* 2025439
* Domain Boundary - Grain Boundary Interactions in Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 604,792.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ferroelectric materials (which have a spontaneous
polarization which can be reoriented by an applied electric field – the
electrical analog of ferromagnetic materials) comprise a multi-billion-dollar
industry; in nearly every case, the functional properties depend on the mobility
of domain walls (the boundaries between regions with different polarization
directions). This project is quantifying the role of realistic microstructure on
the mobility of these domain walls, and broadly disseminating these results to
the scientific community and industry. At the graduate level, the project is
training students who will become next-generation scientific and technology
leaders. Graduates typically find employment either at high-tech companies or as
university faculty members. In addition, the principal investigator will
complete a second edition of the textbook, Materials Engineering: Bonding,
Structure, and Structure-Property Relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The fundamental processes and length scales associated with pinning
domain wall and phase boundary motion in ferroelectric materials are at present
poorly understood for general cases. This project is using a combination of
electrical and electromechanical characterization, transmission X-ray
microscopy, nanoprobe X-ray scattering, and piezoresponse force microscopy to
develop a quantitative database on the way that different mechanical boundary
conditions, including film stress, grain boundary misorientation angle, and
interacting crystallographic defects influence correlated motion of domain
walls. The interdisciplinary team of researchers from Penn State, Argonne
National Laboratories and the Technical University of Denmark are preparing and
characterizing model samples with a wide range of different grain boundary
angles in order to directly measure the length scales over which correlated
motion of domain walls occurs in Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 thin films. The functional
properties are being mapped through a combination of Rayleigh and Preisach
approaches. Large area measurements are being complemented with local
measurements via piezoresponse force microscopy to map the size of the clusters
where there is collective motion of domain walls for different strain states and
grain boundary misorientations. Samples are being interrogated with nanoprobe
diffraction measurements under field excitation. Moreover, the local domain
structure in regions identified as strongly or weakly responsive are being
interrogated via X-ray dark field microscopy in order to spatially map the
defect/domain wall interactions. The ability to localize the major pinning sites
and then structurally probe those regions non-destructively while exciting the
sample electrically allows the possibility of elucidating the impact of local
perturbations on the collective motion of functional domain walls. These results
are allowing models of ferroelectric films, ceramics, and single crystals to be
developed to capture the fundamental material physics more
accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.