* 2025802
* SBIR Phase I:  Vergence tracking for automatically refocusing reading glasses
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Robert Konrad, ZINN LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of automatically refocusing
reading glasses for the two billion people with presbyopia, a common form of
vision loss with age that prevents focusing on nearby objects. Current
presbyopia corrections, such as reading glasses, bifocals, or progressive
lenses, are unwieldy or unnatural solutions that do not replace healthy vision.
An automatically refocusing system will provide an attractive alternative by
restoring natural vision, such that objects are brought into focus according to
the userâ€™s gaze. Furthermore, the loss in productivity brought on by presbyopia
in workers in industrial sectors will open an immediate opportunity in the aging
skilled labor market, where an automatically refocusing system will offer
significant benefits and users will tolerate a wider range of form factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to study basic vision science and user behavior in interaction with
an automatically refocusing system for presbyopia correction, address design
requirements for deployment at scale, and build a prototype system to validate
novel focus depth estimation techniques that can reach the power and
miniaturization targets of a commercial head-mounted product. Current state-of-
the-art eye tracking systems address only the highest performance
implementations of full 3D gaze estimation. The main technical objective is the
design of a low-power depth estimation technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.