* 2025228
* BCSER: Improving Peer-led Team Learning and Peer-Leader Training to Increase Undergraduate Student Achievement in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nadia Mills, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 309,763.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing undergraduate
student success in STEM courses. It will do so by improving implementation of
Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) and implementing research to examine the
effectiveness of these improvements. This project focuses on the effects of PLTL
in early mathematics courses. When PLTL was implemented in a remedial
mathematics course at the University of the Virgin Islands, students were able
to complete the course successfully. However, less than half were successful in
the subsequent course. This project will enhance the PLTL curriculum in this
class to improve students’ mathematical problem-solving skills. It will also
create new peer leader training modules, aimed at improving students’ non-
cognitive factors, such as sense of belonging, that may contribute to student
persistence and retention. Additionally, through conducting research regarding
the impact of the curriculum and peer-leader training, the investigator will
increase her capacity for STEM education research by building her quantitative
and technical writing skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During Year 1, this project
aims to create an enhanced PLTL curriculum for the remedial mathematics course
and develop an improved peer-leader training program during Year 1. In Year 2,
the PI will implement the curriculum, collect data about its impact, and analyze
data to determine the effectiveness of the revised PLTL curriculum and peer-
leader training. The following research questions will be addressed: 1) What is
the impact of an enhanced PLTL program on students’ pass rate, mathematics self-
efficacy, mathematics anxiety, perceptions of intelligence, sense of belonging
and beliefs about mathematics? 2) What is the impact of the new training program
on peer leader’s mathematics self-efficacy, mathematics anxiety, perceptions of
intelligence, and sense of belonging? 3) What is the impact of the peer leader
training and enhanced curriculum on peer leader effectiveness and student
engagement? To answer these questions, a combination of qualitative and
quantitative methodologies will be used. For questions 1 and 2, a quasi-
experimental design will be implemented, and descriptive and inferential
analysis methods will be used to determine significance. For question 3,
qualitative research methods will be utilized to analyze audio and video
recorded PLTL workshops. The PI is working with a team of three mentors who have
expertise in STEM education research, qualitative and quantitative research
methods, PLTL, and research evaluation. The STEM education research capacity of
the PI will be enhanced through frequent virtual meetings with mentors,
independent study in quantitative research in education, workshops, training in
statistical software, publication preparation, networking, and opportunities to
collaborate with other STEM education researchers. The PI will share the results
from the project via national and local conferences, and in peer-reviewed
journals. The project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building
capacity in STEM Education Research (EHR: BCSER) competition that is designed to
build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.