* 2025035
* Research Initiation: Influence of self-efficacy and social support on persistence and achievement in chemical engineering sophomores
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Marisa Orr, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 216,438.00

This research initiation project will help students more successfully navigate
the challenging chemical engineering curriculum. Specifically, the project will
focus on the sophomore year since this is when many students struggle and
potentially leave chemical engineering programs. By administering surveys to
students at the beginning and end of their sophomore year and tracking their
academic performance in courses, the project team will determine the factors
that influence student achievement and persistence in chemical engineering. This
project will also test whether student participation in a 2-day voluntary
workshop (“ChemE Camp”) - which includes team-building exercises, lab tours, a
hands-on project, presentations about upcoming courses and the curriculum, and
interactions with upper-level students and faculty - can impact these factors
and ultimately improve student achievement and persistence in chemical
engineering. Though designed for chemical engineering, the methods involved in
this study and the design of the workshop are adaptable and could easily be
tailored to other disciplines. Likewise, these findings can be applied more
broadly to other disciplines in science and engineering to improve student
retention, leading to an increase in the number of engineering graduates
entering the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the significant attrition
from chemical engineering programs occurs in the sophomore year when students
first begin to take major-specific courses. To address this issue, this project
will explore the impact of the Social Cognitive Career Theory constructs of
self-efficacy and contextual influences (specifically, social support) on the
achievement and persistence of chemical engineering sophomores. Surveys given to
students at the beginning and end of their sophomore year will use scales from
published instruments to assess students' chemical engineering self-efficacy,
coping self-efficacy, level of social and academic integration, and intent to
persist. These results will be combined with academic performance data for
sophomore-level chemical engineering courses to test the relationships between
the factors of self-efficacy and social support and the outcomes of academic
performance and persistence. Additionally, the effects of an intervention on
students' self-efficacy and social support will be tested. The intervention is a
voluntary two-day workshop ("ChemE Camp") offered to students just prior to the
start of the sophomore year. The workshop includes activities expected to
increase students' self-efficacy and social support. The effects of these
factors on student achievement and persistence are well-established in first-
year engineering and other introductory STEM courses, but the impact of these
factors on later courses has received much less attention. Given the high levels
of attrition in early major-specific barrier courses, studies specific to
sophomore students are worthy of further investigation. This sophomore student
cohort is a logical next opportunity for improving overall student retention and
the professional formation of engineers for the workforce. Since the workshop
activities are based on broad themes (team-building, integration with upper-
level students, informal interaction with faculty, etc.), they could easily be
adapted to create similar workshops for other STEM disciplines and at other
institutions. The results of this study will be disseminated to the engineering
education community via publications in relevant journals and presentations at
the American Society for Engineering Education annual conference, and to the
larger body of practitioners via the creation of short videos describing the
observed benefits of the camp and instructions on how to create and adapt a
similar camp at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.