* 2025254
* Synthesizing emerging results and identifying future research in an early-stage, magma-poor rift: A workshop in the southern East Africa Rift System
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* James Gaherty, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 139,887.00

The East Africa Rift System (EARS) is one of the best examples in the world of a
continent that is actively in the process of stretching and breaking apart; in
the past, these geological processes have culminated in the breakup of
continents and formation of ocean basins like the Atlantic Ocean. Although
continental stretching and breakup has occurred repeatedly over Earthâ€™s history,
the early stages in this process remain poorly understood. In addition to being
an important scientific topic, continental stretching is also essential to
understand for assessing geohazards; rift zones like the East Africa Rift System
are seismically and volcanically active. Over the past 10 years, a number of new
scientific studies focused on the southern part of the East Africa Rift System
have emerged that are providing new and surprising insights into the onset of
continental breakup. This award will support a 4-day workshop in the summer of
2021 in Malawi, which is located within the rift valley, to bring together ~50
US and African scientists to share and synthesize the results of these recent
studies to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of continental stretching
and associated hazards in the southern part of the East Africa Rift system. This
workshop will also provide opportunities to strengthen existing relationships
and form new collaborations between US and African scientists, training for
early career scientists, and public outreach on the rift and its hazards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EARS exhibits along-strike changes in magmatism,
deformation and cumulative stretching, offering the opportunity to examine
active rifting processes at different stages of development and study controls
on rifting. These attributes made the EARS an excellent locality to address
major questions about rifting posed in the NSF GeoPRISMS science plan. The
southern section of the EARS constitutes an endmember of this system in two
important respects: 1) there is limited volcanism at the surface, providing the
opportunity to more fully test models that require magmatism to weaken and thin
the lithosphere, and 2) relatively little cumulative stretching has occurred,
making it possible to observe controls on rift initiation. In the last ~5 years,
a number of US and international studies have yielded interesting and surprising
results on the southern EAR. However, because many EARS-related efforts were
funded late in the GeoPRISMS program due to the phased funding model and/or
leveraged efforts funded by other programs, there has not been an opportunity
for the interdisciplinary community to meet and discuss these results in the
context of the GeoPRISMS efforts. The 4-day workshop supported by this award
will enable US and African scientists to meet in person and share results; in-
person meetings are essential to foster communication and develop and maintain
strong international collaborations. The workshop will take place in the summer
of 2021 in Malawi, which is located within the rift valley, central to the focus
area of the workshop. Holding the meeting here will enable participation by more
African scientists, facilitate more networking between US and Africa scientists,
and allow for education and outreach efforts associated with the workshop. We
will carefully select attendees by application in order to ensure that
participants represent a cross-section of expertise, career stage and experience
working in Africa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.