* 2025563
* Using machine learning method to detect slow slip events in ocean bottom pressure data
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Meng Wei, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 446,376.00

This project seeks to improve the understanding of earthquakes and tsunamis in
subduction zones. Special tectonic signals that can be measured at the seafloor
may represent the release of tectonic stress in subduction zones. If so,
measurements from pressure sensors on the seafloor could be used to estimate
earthquake and tsunami risks. However, noise from ocean processes makes it
difficult to detect this signal accurately. This project will take advantage of
recent advances in a computational technique, machine learning, to develop a
better detector of this signal.. This project will support early career
scientists and people from underrepresented groups (Latino and Female) in STEM
fields. It will also support a graduate student and several undergraduates. This
project will develop teaching modules of machine learning at the graduate,
undergraduate, high school, and middle school levels. This project will publish
code in the public domain and share the teaching modules within the community
immediately after the project finishes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shallow slow slip
events provide a mechanism for strain release at the shallow part of subduction
zones, which is important for tsunami hazard assessment. For most subduction
zones, the trench is far from the coast and it is unclear whether shallow slow
slip events exist. Even in places where these events were detected, key
quantities such as the duration and magnitude were not well constrained. As a
result, the locking state of shallow subduction zones and the mechanism of
shallow slow slip events is still unclear. To answer these questions, this
project will take advantage of recent advancement in machine learning and the
accumulation of seafloor pressure datasets to improve our ability to detect
shallow slow slip events in subduction zones. Preliminary analyses of seafloor
pressure data from New Zealand have demonstrated that machine learning can
successfully identify known slow slip events and further reduce ocean noise in
seafloor pressure data. Using available data from several subduction zones, this
project will further improve the machine-learning detector to estimate the
duration, amplitude, and timing of shallow slow slip events. This project will
also develop an improved way to reduce ocean noise in seafloor pressure data by
using machine learning to capture the complex relationship of measurable
quantities in the ocean. Collectively, this project will provide better tools to
measure shallow slow slip events and assess the locking state of shallow
subduction zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.