* 2025457
* URoL:MTM2: Defining the ecological and genomic properties that underlie microbiome sensitivity and resilience
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Rebecca Vega, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,998,043.00

The microbiome is a community of organisms that lives on and within plants and
animals, playing a fundamental role in the health of their hosts. However,
scientists currently have limited knowledge about the processes underlying how
microbiomes respond to change and how such changes may alter the health
trajectories of their hosts. This project will implement a novel conceptual and
methodological framework to substantially advance discovery of these processes.
To transform understanding of how disturbances impact plant and animal
microbiomes, a series of experiments with three important aquatic organisms:
seagrasses, corals, and zebrafish, will be performed. The central aim is to
define the unifying principles and properties that define a microbiome’s
sensitivity and resilience to environmental changes. Moreover, this project will
determine how the microbiome’s sensitivity and resilience explains reductions or
improvements in their host’s health. The identification of such universal
properties holds potential to transform microbiome research and innovation,
particularly as it applies to health and natural resource management. To further
advance the ability of scientists to define the mechanisms that alter
microbiome-host interactions, researchers working on this project will develop
novel and freely available data analytic tools and software. Effective training,
outreach, and assessment programs that increase participation and advance the
future careers of microbiome scientists of all backgrounds will also be
developed. Lastly, during this project, efforts will likely yield theoretical
frameworks for predicting how host-microbiome interactions respond to
environmental variation, which holds implications for how optimally wildlife,
livestock, agricultural, and human health are managed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to define universal properties of host-associated microbiomes that
enable their ability to resist or recover from disturbances. To do so,
experiments to formally test whether innate properties of the microbiome
influence its response to and recovery from a disturbance will be conducted. To
uncover such properties, microbiomes of three model and phylogenetically diverse
aquatic host systems - corals, seagrass, and zebrafish – will be challenged with
three exogenous and environmentally relevant stressors – antibiotics, warming
waters, and pathogen infection. Modeling approaches will then be developed to
resolve universal properties of the microbiome that influence stress responses,
irrespective of the specific perturbation or ecological context of the
community. These System Agnostic Microbiome Measures, or ‘SAMMs’, will include
common ecological metrics as well as novel metrics developed using AI algorithms
that contextualize microbial features in a system-independent way. Host traits
will also be measured to model host-microbiome interactions before, during, and
after disturbance to understand how these properties relate to host physiology.
This project is distinctive in that it measures how host-microbiome systems both
respond to and recover from disturbances over time, considers interactions
between multiple ecologically relevant disturbances, and integrates the results
across systems to uncover generalizable trends. Lastly this work is expected to
develop foundational insights into how human activity impacts wildlife through
their microbiomes. Ultimately, it is anticipated that these efforts will
contribute to a future wherein microbiomes are managed or manipulated to buffer
their hosts from the impacts of the Anthropocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.