* 2025793
* Collaborative Research: New class of near-infrared fluorophores derived from DNA-templated silver clusters for deep tissue imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Petko Bogdanov, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2024
* USD 267,349.00

Since near-infrared (NIR) light penetrates much farther into biological tissues
than visible light, NIR fluorescence microscopy allows noninvasive imaging deep
into tissues and even whole organisms. However, deep tissue imaging is currently
hindered by a lack of small, bright, non-toxic biolabels that emit NIR light.
This project will develop brightly fluorescent NIR biolabels by harnessing a
class of promising tunable nanomaterials called DNA-templated silver clusters.
Silver cluster design and discovery will be carried out with novel machine
learning algorithms that learn from experimental materials and inform design.
The optimized NIR biolabels will be employed to study endocrine hormones central
to metabolic and cardiovascular disease and will also be broadly applicable for
biomedical research in other areas, such as tumor formation and metastasis.
Undergraduate and graduate student researchers participating in this project
will receive multidisciplinary training at the unique intersection of
biophotonics, nanomaterials, and data science, and research opportunities for
undergraduates will focus on California community college students and transfer
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second near-infrared window (NIR-II:
1,000-1,700 nm), biological tissues are transparent up to several centimeters
depth, making this spectral window ideal for deep tissue imaging. However, most
NIR-II fluorophores suffer from low fluorescence brightness, toxicity, or large
physical size. This project investigates promising yet underexplored fluorescent
DNA-templated silver clusters (Ag-DNAs) to develop small, stable, and modular
NIR-II biolabels with broad applicability for deep tissue imaging. Ag-DNAs are
composed of 10-30 silver atoms stabilized by short DNA oligonucleotides, with
500-1000 nm fluorescence colors selected by the DNA sequence. High throughput
experimentation and custom multi-objective machine learning models will be
developed to significantly extend the color palette of Ag-DNAs into the NIR-II
and optimize Ag-DNAs as stable, biocompatible fluorophores. As a proof-of-
principle, designed NIR-II-Ag-DNAs will be chemically attached to endocrine
hormone proteins to track metabolic hormones in vivo. This project significantly
advances the scientific framework for engineering metal clusters as novel
fluorophores and, more broadly, for data-driven design of biopolymer-based
biophotonic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.