* 2025104
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Investigating Time-Varying Relationships Between Interseismic Coupling, Slow Slip, and Seismicity Along the Mexican Megathrust and Sliver Fault
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Shannon Graham, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 173,163.00

Subduction zones are regions where one tectonic plate dives underneath another.
At the contact between the two plates, large thrust faults (megathrust faults)
pose major seismic risks to nearby populations. The magnitude of earthquakes and
the time between them depends on how the rocks grind past one another along the
faults, as well as how this movement varies over time and space. Some of the
rock movements can be transmitted within the continental plate through adjacent
tectonic faults. Therefore, to better assess the earthquake hazards associated
with subduction zones, one needs to study the plate boundary region as a system
of key faults. Here the researchers analyze the earthquakes and ground movements
associated with the subduction zone located on the west coast of Mexico. This
plate boundary has experienced three large earthquakes (magnitude &gt; 7.0) in
the last decade. Key portions of the megathrust fault lie under land and at
relatively shallow depths. This makes the fault particularly threatening for the
population, yet easier to study than in other locations. To unveil the complex
tectonics of the region, the team uses high-precision GPS and seismic recordings
collected over two decades. The researchers measure the fault strength and
identify patterns in space and time in the distribution of small earthquakes.
They also investigate slow ground movements and track the interactions of the
subduction zone with intracontinental faults. Outcomes of this project improve
the understanding of subduction zone tectonics. They also improve seismic hazard
assessment in Mexico and other regions threatened by megathrust faults, as in
Alaska and the northwestern US. The project fosters a collaboration between The
College of New Jersey and Miami University, as well as international
collaboration with Mexico. It provides support for an early career female
scientist, a graduate student, and training for undergraduate students notably
from groups underrepresented in Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
furthers our understanding of subduction megathrust environments. It takes
advantage of decadal-long time series in Mexico as well as sophisticated
analytical and modeling techniques, such as event template matching and 3D
finite-element modeling. It also accounts for recent discoveries, as the
observed correlated slow slip episodes (SSEs) and seismicity occurring on a
crustal sliver fault that accommodates the partitioning of oblique convergence
in Mexico. The Mexico subduction zone presents a shallow slab angle which brings
seismogenic and slow-slip source regions close to and beneath land. The study
benefits from this geometry which allows for accurate data acquisition.
Moreover, SSEs and megathrust earthquakes in Mexico have short recurrence
intervals. This enables studying multiple cycles of elastic rebound. The project
has three main goals: 1) Investigate temporal variations in interseismic
coupling along the Mexican megathrust and potential correlations with
seismicity; 2) examine spatial-temporal relationships between SSEs and
megathrust earthquakes in 2012, 2014, and 2018; 3) develop a modeling strategy
to resolve SSEs and strain accumulation on both the megathrust and a crustal
sliver fault. Results from each of these goals have important implications for
seismic hazard and risk assessment, and on whether one can quantify how those
hazards are changing over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.