* 2025006
* Detection and quantification of combinatorial RNA Binding Protein interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Fedor Karginov, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,482.00

In order for cells and tissues to properly develop, to respond to changes in the
environment and to maintain homeostasis, gene expression needs to be precisely
regulated. A major part of this regulation occurs post-transcriptionally, where
many RNA-binding proteins and small regulatory RNAs control messenger RNAs by
binding at specific sites. This project investigates how individual factors that
control gene expression interact with each other with synergistic or
antagonistic effects. The understanding of how gene expression is regulated in
an organism is key to developing a means of engineering the organism potentially
impacting food supply, health and environmental sustainability. The project
supports an intensive summer laboratory program for upper-level students and
provide valuable experience and mentoring in experimental research, scientific
reasoning, hypothesis building and communication. Undergraduates participate in
longer, year-round projects that allow in-depth exposure to laboratory science
and involvement in extended scientific projects. The project also fosters
development of future researchers. The goal is to significantly contribute to
preparing minority, low-income and disadvantaged students for professional
research careers in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Gene expression
and organismal development fundamentally depend on post-transcriptional
regulatory processes, where a large set of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and small
regulatory RNAs (ex., microRNAs) control messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by binding at
specific sites. While individual molecular functions of RBPs have been
traditionally studied, current evidence supports a model of combinatorial post-
transcriptional regulation by factors at the 3â€™ UTR which is a regulatory hub
where multiple RBPs interact to produce a combinatorially large set of
expression outcomes. However, there is a significant knowledge gap in
understanding the principles of these interactions. It is essential to identify
and characterize such RBP-RBP interactions on mRNAs transcriptome-wide, and such
approaches are currently lacking. This project addresses this critical need by
developing and applying a robust and quantitative detection platform and data
analysis framework to detect sites of combinatorial control of gene expression
by RBPs. In this project the focus is on applying the platform to interactions
between a key RNA binding protein, PUM, and the microRNA machinery. This
approach combines massively parallel reporter systems with precise RBP level
manipulation and statistical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Systems and Synthetic Biology and Genetic Mechanisms Clusters
of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.