* 2025541
* MTM2: Drivers of functional redundancy across microbiomes
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Barbara Campbell, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,500,000.00

Microbes are essential components of all ecosystems. Human activity has impacted
microbes across a wide range of natural ecosystems, including oceans, soils, and
human guts. In most cases, humans simplify these environments, resulting in a
decrease in the number of different microbial species present and a
corresponding decrease in the number of different functions that these microbes
can perform. Both losses have been linked to decreases in ecosystem health. What
is not well understood is whether human-mediated ecosystem simplification causes
losses in microbial ‘functional redundancy’ – the number of different microbial
species that can perform any given function. Functional redundancy is important,
because it provides ecosystem insurance – in a redundant system, when one
microbial species goes extinct, there is another waiting to take its place. If
human activity is driving large losses in functional redundancy, then microbial
ecosystems will become more and more fragile, and more and more prone to
collapse. This project is characterizing the functional redundancy of microbes
in a variety of ecosystems that range in habitat complexity by using
experimental research, theoretical modelling, and novel computational methods.
The end goals of this project are to identify rules that govern the relationship
between complexity, functional redundancy and health of microbial ecosystems as
well as train graduate students and postdoctoral scientists in interdisciplinary
research. This project is also helping to educate undergraduate students and the
public about the importance of science through social media outlets, videos, and
the development of interdisciplinary curricula for first year college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A decrease in habitat complexity has been linked to
decreases in microbiome taxonomic and functional diversity. By contrast, effects
on functional redundancy – that is, the extent of duplicity of function across
taxa – are poorly known. Functional redundancy, however, is a key predictor of
ecosystem stability and resilience. Thus, understanding the extent to which
functional redundancy is being lost is critical for predicting how microbial
ecosystems will respond to future change. The overall goal of this project is to
identify the ecological rules relating habitat complexity to functional
redundancy in both host-associated (human, mouse, plants), and environmental
(bulk soils, estuarine and marine) microbiomes. Specifically, this project is:
1. Determining how fundamental functional redundancy (gene encoded) and realized
functional redundancy (actively expressed) vary with habitat complexity. 2.
Developing deep learning algorithms to identify and link functional redundancy
in metagenomes and metatranscriptomes, and then comparing these algorithms to
more traditional techniques. 3. Characterizing the partitioning of redundancy
within genomes (core vs. accessory) and among taxa (e.g. based on genome size,
dormancy, growth rate), determining how this partitioning facilitates
maintenance of redundancy, and predicting how the impacts of habitat complexity
differ with distinct partitioning schemes. 4. Developing theoretical models
linking functional redundancy to habitat complexity via effects on taxonomic
diversity and mechanisms like environmental filtering and niche
partitioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Understanding
the Rules of Life: Microbiome Theory and Mechanisms Program, administered as
part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.