* 2025333
* SBIR Phase I:  Tailored Carbon Fiber Technology for High Volume Industrial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Connie Jackson, CROSSLINK COMPOSITES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2021
* USD 275,917.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is technology that encompasses the development
of customizable carbon fiber products and package formats at a low cost. Lack of
suitable raw materials and corresponding processes has largely stymied the
development and manufacturing of many high-volume industrial composite
applications. The current advanced material reinforcement knowledge base is
built on technology developed to serve space/aerospace composite material
applications, which are relatively low-volume and cost-insensitive markets. This
project focuses on creating a new platform designed specifically for high-
volume, cost-sensitive industrial composite applications. The resulting carbon
fiber products from this advanced material delivery platform can be tailored to
facilitate a broad range of industrial composite applications currently unmet or
underserved, such as automotive, wind energy and infrastructure applications.
This will potentially enable sizable performance and efficiency gains in those
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate proof-of-concept for a new carbon fiber format technology platform.
The proposed technology platform entails delivering carbon fiber with
customizable tow linear densities produced from a universal conversion feedstock
while seeking to maintain requisite and optimal physical properties of the
carbon fiber. Physical properties of multi-level samples will be analyzed
iteratively to determine acceptable linear density boundaries. Prototype
mechanical devices will be developed to explore multiple viable approaches to
optimize processes for the target product formats. The project also will
determine the material handling viability of the resulting products for
downstream composite uses. The project will explore the trade space of carbon
fiber production economics, application requirements, and product
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.