* 2025481
* STEVE Community Workshop: Advancing Understanding of a New Atmospheric Phenomenon; Westford, Massachusetts; Fall 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Philip Erickson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 45,039.00

This award is to organize a two-day community workshop for guiding science
investigations on a newly discovered upper atmospheric phenomenon named STEVE
(Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement). STEVE is a confined, mauve
colored optical phenomenon in the night-sky below the latitude of the
traditional (and well-known) auroral region. Properties and mechanisms driving
STEVE remain an exciting and unresolved geospace community challenge. This
workshop brings senior and early career scientists together with citizen
scientists to share their understandings and plan for future observational and
modeling activities to better understand the STEVE
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this workshop, observational and theoretical
geospace scientists and stakeholders will gather to disseminate STEVE research
findings, identify outstanding questions, and formulate future research plans
and collaboratory studies. The workshop will have two general foci: (1) serve as
a venue for developing observation strategies, experimental campaigns and
associated observation modes to fill in both synoptic and event-based data gaps;
(2) organize modeling efforts, guided by known characteristics to date, to
answer key community questions about STEVE physical morphology and dynamics. A
post-workshop white paper organized by the workshop steering committee will
efficiently capture community discussions, results, and future plans for
advancing geophysical understanding of STEVE. This document can also form inputs
to community science working groups that will help incorporate STEVE knowledge
into physical understanding of the geospace system. Articles on workshop
findings in community journals such as EOS will also maintain analysis and
observational momentum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.