* 2025931
* SBIR Phase I:  Project PAIR: Optimized Managed Care Through Personalized AI for Individuals in Recovery
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Ellie Gordon, BEHAIVIOR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,007.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a remote monitoring system that
can alert caregivers to relapses in opioid use. Over 23 million Americans are
addicted to drugs and alcohol, and these addictions billions per year. Most
tools to help people stay in recovery have low or mixed success rates. Reducing
relapse saves lives and families and it reduces rearrests, reincarcerations, and
rehospitalizations. In this proposal machine learning and pattern recognition,
both forms of artificial intelligence (AI) will be aid identification of and
response to potential relapse. Benefits include conserving emergency response
resources, but more importantly, improving long-term intervention
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will establish the feasibility of identifying and predicting a
future state of craving / obsession or relapse using physiological and
smartphone data, a use-case where physiologically underpinned alerts alter
current care coordination workflows, and a use-case where relapse after
discharge from inpatient facilities for rehabilitation can be significantly
averted. Technical objectives include: 1) devise a novel data-driven framework
for accurately and objectively estimating probability for relapsing into opioid
use using individualized classification models; 2) Deploy and assess efficacy of
model risk stratification system and monitoring dashboard at addiction treatment
centers through feedback from managed care providers; 3) Assess and compare
efficacy of craving vs. prediction models for just-in-time interventions vs.
standard practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.