* 2025214
* Quantum Coherence-Controlled Chemical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Xuedan Ma, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 479,991.00

Many industrially important chemical production processes require significant
energy input to drive the chemical reactions. When this power is provided by
heating the chemical reactants, undesired side reactions can take place reducing
the process yield and potentially posing a safety risk. While much more
controlled power inputs exist, sources such as lasers have fixed wavelengths and
so are limited to use in only a handful of reactions. In this work, a new
approach is proposed to use quantum mechanical principles to design chemical
reactors that can redirect random chemical reactant molecular motions to promote
a specific chemical reaction. Much like a catalyst, this would result in greater
chemical reactor efficiency. The unique combination of chemistry and quantum
mechanics proposed would lead to a new approach for chemical synthesis by
design. This project will leverage a close collaboration between the University
of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory for the successful implementation of
this multidisciplinary study. This research will also contribute to the
education and mentoring of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
involved through their training and research during the project. Outreach
programs developed during this project will foster the integration of research
and teaching, as well as the participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic ground state reactions rely
on the excitation of specific vibrational motions along the reaction
coordinates. However, selective excitation of one specific vibrational mode of a
chemical bond while leaving the others intact is challenging. The principle
intellectual merit of the proposed work is to address this long-standing
challenge faced by the chemical synthesis community and develop a reaction
control mechanism that not only allows bond-selective excitation of chemical
reactions, but also the modulation of reaction potential energy surfaces. The
quantum coherence approach developed here would enable the tuning of a
particular reaction channel’s potential barrier for its reaction rate
acceleration or deceleration. During the first stage of the project, we will
focus on understanding the influence of the quantum coherence effects on several
key reaction parameters, including the reaction rate, selectivity, and yield. In
the second stage, we aim to optimize the reaction control mechanism and adapt it
to potential scale-up applications. Two important chemical reactions will be
studied in this work and will serve as representatives of a wide range of
potential applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.