* 2025755
* LTER: Long-Term Ecological Research at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest (LTER8)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2027
* David Bell, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2027
* USD 3,771,425.00

The Pacific Northwest is experiencing increased drought and wildfire, and
decreased snow packs. There is much uncertainty about how its ecosystems of
forests, streams, and mountain meadows will respond. Ecologically, these
habitats are experiencing environmental changes in very different ways.
Socially, public values associated with these areas vary greatly and can be in
conflict with one another. The goal of this long-term project is to understand
how and why forested mountain ecosystems respond to changes in climate, land-use
decisions, and the relationship between climate and land-use decisions. Over the
next six years, research will focus on determining how physical and biological
processes interact to alter ecosystem and species responses to changing climate
in mountain ecosystems. Simultaneously, researchers will examine how forest
managers combine science and values to make decisions that affect these
ecosystems. Working with non-scientists in the arts and humanities, researchers
will enhance public literacy about science, demonstrate the value of long-term
ecological research, and convey the strong sense of place necessary to improve
the well-being of all stakeholders. The project will continue education and
outreach activities for teachers and K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.
Additionally, scientists will continue to engage the general public, with an
emphasis on enhancing participation of women, people with disabilities, and
those from under-represented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses the question: How do climate, natural disturbance, and land use -- as
influenced by values and decisions -- interact with biodiversity, hydrology, and
carbon and nutrient dynamics? Research will employ the ecological concept of
“interactions” to evaluate and characterize spatial and temporal patterns and
processes in old-growth temperate forests, streams, and montane meadows of the
HJ Andrews Experimental Forest in Oregon. Analyses of long-term climate data
will be used to investigate how forests modulate the expression of regional
climate to create local microclimates. More specifically, analysis of
temperature, snow, and vegetation data will be combined with short-term studies
of tree physiology, canopy microbiomes, and remote sensing of forest ecosystems
to examine how microclimate and legacies of land use and disturbance influence
populations, communities and ecosystem processes. Analyses of long-term bird,
fish, and vegetation data and integrated, multi-taxa experiments on birds,
lichens, trees, fish, and salamanders will examine how species interactions
amplify or reduce responses to microclimate. New studies of conservation ethics
and the effects of long-term ecological science on management will explore how
values filter the use of science in land-use
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.