* 2025864
* STTR Phase I:  Individualized circadian rhythm therapy via schedule-sensitive photic interventions in shared workspaces
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Eliza Van Reen, CIRCADIAN POSITIONING SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2022
* USD 274,740.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to support individuals with sleep disorders.
Sleep and circadian rhythms influence human performance, mood, decision-making,
learning, memory, alertness, and overall physical and mental health. The demand
for humans to perform critical work at adverse circadian phases while lacking
adequate sleep has played a role in some of the world’s most devastating
industrial and engineering disasters, as well as “everyday” incidents in the
workplace and on the roadways. The economic burden of sleep loss is estimated at
$411 billion/year in the US. Providing light appropriately can help address
these potentially dangerous situations. The proposed project combines hardware
design (fixed and wearable sensors), systems engineering and circadian rhythm
biology to provide individuals in shared spaces with targeted (primarily light-
based) interventions to improve their circadian rhythmicity, sleep and general
wellness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project integrates wearable and stationary biometric circadian sensors
for measuring the circadian state of each individual; indoor positioning sensors
for tracking ambient occupation patterns; controllers for delivering light and
other interventions; and algorithms for effectively managing conflicting and
competing schedules. Shared spaces offer several unique and highly
individualized challenges in terms of ensuring that the stimulus for one
individual does not interfere with another person. The studies will validate the
technology and provide data to train the algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.