* 2025384
* MTM2:CollaborativeResearch:Microbially-mediated epigenetic modifications alter host phenotypes
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Julie Hotopp, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,061,265.00

Symbiotic microbes can have enormous impacts on their hosts’ health and
evolution. Indeed, our own cells contain remnants of an ancient microbial
symbiosis – the mitochondrion – which continues to provide us with metabolic
capabilities essential to our physiology. Understanding the causes, mechanisms,
and consequences of host-microbe interactions has emerged as a critical research
objective at the interface of evolutionary biology, microbiology, ecology, and
development. This project is based on the discovery that a bacterial symbiont
changes the host cell in a particular way to protect it from viruses. In this
proposed project, the researchers will investigate these changes in the host
cell and identify how they alter host, bacterial symbiont, and invading virus.
The investigators will use the fruit fly, Drosophila, the bacterium, Wolbachia
that is a prominent member of the Drosophila microbiome, and the Sindbis virus
which infects Drosophila, as a model system to study this phenomenon. The
investigators will focus on RNA modifications to the fruit fly caused by the
bacterium, which affect virus infection. Novel computational tools and wet lab
protocols will be generated for dissemination to the broader community.
Understanding the molecular underpinnings of symbiosis will help to (a) leverage
that mechanism in the manipulation of agricultural and medically important
microbiomes (e.g. probiotics and paratransgenesis), (b) reveal basic biology of
broad relevance to life on the planet, and (c) better model the evolution of
these interactions. Broader impacts include the generation of a project-based
course at Indiana University focused on mosquito vectored viruses and outreach
to the broader public through Indiana’s Environmental Resilience
Institute.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful host-associated microbes sculpt host
cell biology in ways that are useful to them. Often, these changes in host
biology alter the ability of other microbes to colonize, protecting the host
niche for the first microbe. For example, colonization of insects with Wolbachia
endosymbionts can preclude infection by viruses. This fact has led to the
deployment of Wolbachia-infected mosquitos across the globe to limit the
transmission of vectored diseases. This project is based on RNA modifications
induced by Wolbachia that directly alter Drosophila cell biology and affect the
ability of viruses to colonize. Wolbachia upregulates a host methyltransferase
to limit virus replication and preliminary data suggest that the virus genome
itself is modified in a Wolbachia infected cell, altering mRNA stability. These
data lead to the following question:“How does a microbial symbiont alter the
epitranscriptomic landscape of host cells?” This proposed project will identify
modifications in both host DNA and RNA induced by Wolbachia and virus using
direct sequencing approaches (PacBio and ONT), benchmarked by more established
methods (bisulfite sequencing and mass spectrometry). In the process, wet lab
protocols for generation of appropriate controls for Nanopore sequencing and
bioinformatic pipelines for the analyses of epitranscriptomic datasets from
Nanopore sequencing will be developed. All resources will be made broadly
available and open access. Finally, the importance of these changes will be
identified using molecular virology and Drosophila genetics. In sum, this work
will identify how epitranscriptomic modifications link genotype to phenotype in
this important symbiotic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
the Understanding the Rules of Life: Microbiome Theory and Mechanisms Program,
administered as part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging
Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.