* 2025965
* SBIR Phase II:  Durable Superhydrophobic Smart Coating with Active Corrosion Protection
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Xuejun Zhang, SynMatter, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2024
* USD 991,881.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to dramatically improve the corrosion
protection of metal assets vital to the energy and transportation industries.
Corrosion contributes to the loss of structural integrity of metal structures,
which poses a risk to human safety and the surrounding environment. Metal
corrosion costs an estimated $2.5 T globally, with US costs representing roughly
25%. Durable, anticorrosive, highly water-repellent coatings using special
materials can potentially double the lifetime of coatings on oil platforms and
ships in a way that protects the environment. This extends maintenance cycles
and reduces asset lifetime maintenance costs up to 50%. The high performance
will also reduce the number of coating layers, reducing labor costs up to 25%
per maintenance cycle. This technology will improve structural safety, reduce
maintenance frequency, lengthen the operating lifetimes, improve environmental
characteristics, and reduce the costs of operating and maintaining metal
assets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project further translates coatings of superhydrophobic smart particles for
high-performance anticorrosion paints. These superhydrophobic particles offer
new on-demand release of corrosion inhibitors (active corrosion protection) and
superhydrophobicity (passive corrosion protection) into one multi-functional
material, unlike current state of practice. The platform nature of the
technology enables inclusion of numerous types of corrosion inhibitors to
safeguard delicate marine environments. Smart particles can then be incorporated
into many existing coating systems to deliver a unique combination of durable,
anticorrosive, and highly water-repellent coatings. This project will optimize
production processes and conduct verification and validation
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.