* 2025641
* EAGER: Sustainable Energy Bike Lanes with Applications in the City of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,12/31/2023
* John Attia, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 340,402.00

This activity is in response to NSF Dear Colleague Letter Supporting Transition
of Research into Cities through the US ASEAN ((Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Cities) Smart Cities Partnership in collaboration with NSF and the US
State Department. Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) will be partnering
with University Tenaga Nasional (UNITEN) at Kuala Lumpur (KL), Malaysia, to
develop renewable energy sources for bike lanes in KL. Kuala Lumpur is the
largest city in Malaysia, and it is home to approximately 1.808 million people.
The city has an 11 km long dedicated bicycle lane to reduce traffic congestion.
The partnership between PVAMU and UNITEN will accelerate innovation in bike lane
energy technologies. The vision of the project is to develop composite power
generating cells that will generate power when bikes are ridden on the power
generating cells. The energy will be harvested from composite power generating
cells and will be laid on the bike lanes. The harvested energy will be used for
emergency lamps along the bikeways to give more safety to the bikers or provide
electric power for electronic signs installed alongside the bikeways. In
addition, the harvested energy will be used for charging gadgets and provide
purified water for bikers or pedestrians. The multi-sourced energy system will
have applications in supplying power for (i) rainwater purification through
reverse osmosis systems, (ii) emergency lights, and (iii) charging stations in
the bike lanes in the city of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The system will be
initially tested at PVAMU and will then be integrated with UNITEN and piloted in
Kuala Lumpur. The project will have a huge impact on the green lifestyle of the
people at Kuala Lumpur. Moreover, the research matured in this project may be
suitable for use in other ASEAN cities as well as many cities and towns in the
United States to provide renewable energy sources for their bike
lanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the project are: (i) develop a
composite power generating cells that generate power under pressure, (ii) design
charge collection electronic circuits to store the generated power, (iii)
fabricate an integrated pad system with power generating cells, charge
collection circuits, battery storage, and paint, (iv) install and test the
integrated pad system at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The activity will leverage
research at Prairie View A&amp;M and UNITEN. To enable the use in bike lanes,
thin-film PZT cells with optimized thickness will be developed. The energy and
thickness of the film will be determined for each type of nanomaterial of the
PZT cell. Experiments will be conducted to determine cellsâ€™ edge-to-edge
distances, total energy output, the thickness of the PZT, and time responses of
energy accumulation. A microcontroller-based energy monitoring system will
manage the energy production and consumption for mobile charging applications.
The cells will be configured with a matrix of paint strips on bike lanes. In
addition to the composite power generating cells, solar panels will be combined
in various places throughout the bike lanes to the energy-collection-rail, thus
creating the sustainable multi-sourced energy system for the bike lanes. Various
experiments will be performed to optimize the energy process from the bike lane.
The design will be tested at PVAMU and then integrated into a bike lane
infrastructure in Kuala Lumpur. The PVAMU and UNITEN team will be collaborating
with city planning personnel to validate the concept and support evaluation as
part of KL smart city activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.