* 2025040
* I-Corps: Microscopic ID tags using optical wireless integrated circuit technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Paul McEuen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new class of intelligent, inexpensive, and nearly invisible
identification tags. There is a compelling economic and societal need to connect
physical objects to the digital world online. For example, counterfeit products
siphon revenue from legitimate companies and undermine quality control,
sometimes in life-threatening ways. Approximately $1.8 trillion of counterfeit
goods are sold annually, a number growing at 15% per year. The market for fake
pharmaceutical drugs is $200 B, electronic chips and semiconductor products is
$170 B, and jewelry $50 B. The proposed technology is a potentially powerful
solution to this pressing problem, especially for objects that are difficult or
impossible to label with radio frequency identification RFID tags due to the
RFID’s large size, incompatible materials, or cost. This proposed tag would be
the size of a speck when viewed by the naked eye. includes microelectronic
components, jewelry, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, watches, and even bullets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a new
class of ID tags that use optical wireless integrated circuit (OWiC)
technologies. These devices combine silicon microelectronics with optical
components to use light for power and communication. The technologies used to
produce OWiCs have enabled integration of silicon electronics into remotely
accessible packages as small as 100 µm x 100 µm x 10 µm. These hundred-micron-
sized ID tags are: (i) effectively invisible; (ii) intelligent, with thousands
of on-board transistors for secure authentication protocols; and (iii)
integrated, with a built-in optical communication system made of
photovoltaics/microLEDs. The cost to manufacture per tag is projected at less
than a penny. These features give the ID tags the intelligence of a small
computer to ensure security, a reasonable cost to encourage broad use, a small
footprint, and a simple light-based interface for hand-held
scanning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.