* 2025625
* GeoPRISMS Synthesis Workshop: Volatiles from Source to Surface
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Madison Myers, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2022
* USD 54,221.00

Volatiles (e.g., water, carbon dioxide, sulfur, chlorine, fluorine) play
important roles in nearly every Earth process, from the makeup of our atmosphere
to whether a volcanic eruption will be explosive. The ability to quantify and
track the distribution and migration of volatiles through the Earth is
fundamental to the understanding of numerous processes but requires diligent and
clever methods for measuring volatile concentrations. This project will support
a GeoPRISMS synthesis workshop on volatiles. Despite the clear significance of
volatiles, challenges remain in understanding their storage within Earth,
fluxes, chemical interactions, and roles in processes in and around tectonic
plate boundaries. In the last decade, the GeoPRISMS program has led to immense
progress towards understanding volatiles, but it remains to synthesize these
findings across disciplines. The objectives of the workshop will be to (1) share
and synthesize progress within the broad research community; (2) identify
outstanding questions and foster solutions with focused working groups; (3)
develop and integrate students with early-, mid-, and late-career scientists
into new research initiatives; and (4) build collaboration in a
multidisciplinary community. This workshop will collect and distribute datasets
and education materials, as well as create 1-minute videos that highlight
researchers in different stages of their careers that have contributed to the
GeoPRISMS program in the last
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of volatiles in
Earth processes ranges from the structural and compositional evolution of a
subducting slab, rift initiation, mantle melting, magmatic differentiation,
magma ascent, and volcanic eruption and gas emission. These processes exert
fundamental controls over the composition and properties of Earthâ€™s crust,
mantle, and atmosphere. The ability to understand and link these processes and
track their distribution and migration throughout Earth is a fundamental
requirement for linking observation and process. Interdisciplinary research
projects allow for topics such as volatile transport to be approached from
multiple perspectives and in varied tectonic settings, providing more
observations and more robust models than can be achieved by single-discipline
studies. To continue advancement in the rich and diverse field of volatiles, a
workshop will be held to share discipline and GeoPRISMs site specific findings
and interpretations, which will identify regions of spatial and/or scientific
overlap, define focused and tractable questions, and identify action items to
help address these questions. Fundamental to the success of interdisciplinary
projects, however, is a basic understanding of all of the involved methodologies
and their limitations. The early career portion of this workshop will serve to
help bridge that gap for upcoming scientists that have had less exposure to
interdisciplinary projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.