* 2025483
* Collaborative Research: MTM1: Microbial Genomic, Transcriptomic, and Survival Response to Common Built Environment Lighting
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Kevin Van Den Wymelenberg, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 10/31/2023
* USD 325,000.00

The vast majority of individuals in the world spend at least 90% of their time
indoors. While indoors, these individuals are exposed to a combination of
artificial and natural light extending into the nighttime hours. In addition to
our own light exposure, indoor microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi, are
also exposed to differing combinations of natural and artificial light. At
present, the consequences of light exposure on the microbial world are poorly
understood. The goal of this research is to examine the consequences of varying
light exposure on the microbial world. By creating a better understanding of the
impact building illumination has on microorganisms, researchers can better
understand how it might be possible to control their activity, survival, and
functions within the built environment. Additional benefits to society resulting
from this research result from science experiences for K-12 teachers to teach
them how science is performed through experiential learning. This effort will
enhance STEM education through incorporation of teacherâ€™s science training in
the classroom. Further benefits result disseminating results through public
talks and social media outreach focused on children and young
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to understand
the mechanisms underlying microbial responses to architectural lighting
conditions within the built environment. This will be achieved by assessing the
impact of light on microbial communities using viability quantitative polymerase
chain reaction, high resolution genome sequencing, and transcriptomic analysis.
Axenic cultures isolated in microcosms will be exposed to conditions simulating
typical indoor lighting, reflectance, spatial, temperature, and humidity
conditions in the built environment. Varying light exposure include
presence/absence of light, as well as diurnal light cycles typical in office
environments. Following characterization of the axenic cultures, mock microbial
communities composed of the axenic cultures will be exposed to the same lighting
conditions, permitting discernment of light-associated impacts in survival and
transcriptional output from those communities induced through competition. High-
resolution dynamics of microbial survival and transcriptional expression will be
assessed from individual species function to reveal information on the
mechanisms of symbiosis, survival, and demise of microbial component species and
communities associated with light in the built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.