* 2025668
* Plate Boundary Structure and Deformation Workshop
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Helen Janiszewski, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 64,916.00

This project will support a two-day workshop at the University of Hawaii at
Manoa related to plate boundary structure and deformation at rifts and
subduction zones. The primary goal of the workshop is to present and synthesize
research results that have been funded by the NSF-GeoPRISMS (Geodynamic
Processes at Rifting and Subducting Margins) Program related to understanding
the tectonic processes that underpin movement at convergent and divergent plate
boundaries. Approximately 50 scientists will participate in the workshop onsite
at UH Manoa, of which at least 23 will be early-career scientists (student,
postdoc, of pre-tenure faculty within 10 years of PhD). The program will consist
of keynotes, posters, and lighting talks to communicate the breadth of active
science conducted by participants, as well as discussion sessions and
opportunities for early career development. There will also be a half-day pre-
workshop meeting for early-career scientists. The aim is to have participation
from an interdisciplinary group of scientists representing all five GeoPRISMS
focus sites to encourage novel collaborations. To facilitate synthesizing
research results and address data legacy targets, all participants will be
required to make their GeoPRISMS datasets open-access and provide a doi
indicating their location; these will be cataloged and shared. The workshop
organizers will employ specialized video services from Montana State University
to create ~ 1 minute outreach videos that capture scientific discoveries of the
GeoPRISMS program; these and the keynote talks will be made available on
YouTube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing understanding of plate tectonic theory
hinges on investigations of tectonic processes acting at both convergent and
divergent plate boundaries. Together, these plate boundaries primarily balance
Earthâ€™s rock cycle and shape our planet. The workshop aims to bring a group of
scientists together to highlight discoveries determined through NSF GeoPRISMS
funded projects encompassing both the Rift Initiation and Evolution (RIE) and
Subduction Cycles and Deformation (SCD) initiatives. The workshop will primarily
tackle three outstanding questions associated with plate boundary structure and
deformation processes: (1) What are the relationships between fault zone
rheology and deformation and how are they constrained across a range of temporal
and spatial scales in the field and lab? (2) How does the rheology of the crust
and mantle influence and/or record deformation at plate boundaries? (3) What
feedbacks exist between larger scale lithospheric processes, fault zone
rheology, and surface processes? The workshop will facilitate interdisciplinary
interactions that cross-cut research expertise (e.g. geochemistry, geology,
geodynamics, seismology, geodesy, EM, etc.) and study locations (i.e.
encompassing all GeoPRISMS focus sites) to address questions pertaining to
fundamental tectonic processes and motivate future research collaborations by
encouraging active participation from all
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.