* 2025683
* Workshops: Using Physics Education Research to Improve High and Middle School Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2023
* USD 296,006.00

An online workshop with approximately 100 participants to be held July 13-17,
2020 and an in person week-long workshop with approximately 25 people will
provide a series of sessions from leading learning scientists, education
researchers, and physics education researchers on evidence-based pedagogical
strategies to transform high school physics curricula across representative high
schools and set the stage for the creation of an inclusive network to support
and improve physics education in high school and middle school. The workshops
will contribute toward addressing the considerable shortage of high school
physics educators in every state in the U.S., even though enrollments in high
school physics have been steadily increasing since the 1980s. In addition to a
shortage of high school physics teachers in the U.S. and increased student
enrollments, less than half of high school physics courses in the U.S. are
taught by an educator with a physics degree. The short-term goals are to provide
access to relevant evidence-based teaching practices to transform high school
physics curricula, as well as to strengthen partnerships between high school
teachers, their professional peers, and leading physics education researchers.
Workshop partnerships have the potential to spark novel ideas for curricular
interventions and potential interventions that could inform scaled up
initiatives. Workshop participants will also have the option of participating in
a research study focused on understanding current challenges for physics high
school teachers. In addition to improving physics high school curriculum the
second aim is to better understand how to overcome challenges faced by high
school teachers and to develop partnerships between high school educators and
higher education experts to increase the number of students who have access to a
quality physics education. As a result of bringing these different communities
into a single workshop, the set of diverse perspectives will be a source of
innovation focused at solving challenges that go beyond access to physics
education and affect STEM success at the university level, long-
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the workshops is provided
by the emphasis on expert leaders in the learning sciences, educational
researchers, and physics education researchers. The aim is to close the gap
between the use of teaching methods in high school physics that benefit fewer
students and increase curricular innovations, based on the presentation of
leading educational researchers, to foster what is known about the most
effective and high impact study skills, motivation, peer-to-peer learning, and
persistence in physics. The PI plans to incorporate peer-to-peer learning to
start discussions amongst workshop participants and also plans to collect,
analyze, and disseminate their curricular redesigns. The participants will help
the workshop community identify the challenges that need to be addressed given
the increases in student demands for access to physics high school
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.