* 2025108
* Student Support for the 46th International Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB 2020)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Chen Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

The provided support will enable about 15 US-based students to attend and
participate in the 46th International Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB
2020)to be held in Tokyo Aug. 31st to Sept. 4th, 2020 (https://vldb2020.org/).
The VLDB conferences are a premier international technical event centered on
various aspects of database research and practice. The VLDB conference provides
a forum that promotes students and researchers to identify scientific
foundations for building large-scale database management systems that can work
ever more effectively. Efforts will be made to broaden the participation of
underrepresented students and researchers. The conference will thus contribute
directly to training the next generation of scientists who are both consumers
and developers of technology in database management system design and
implementation. The involvement of US-based students will have a direct impact
in creating a highly-qualified workforce who can take on the emerging data
science challenges of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Database research
profoundly influences domains that include health sciences, the emerging field
of Internet of Things (IoT), service-oriented computing, real-time business
analytics, and social computing. The VLDB conference series provides researchers
and practitioners from academia, industry and government agencies with an
excellent opportunity to share their research and experiences on all aspects of
data management and analysis at scale. The aims of the conference are multi-
fold: (1) to provide an international forum for sharing research results related
to the investigation of major challenges in next-generation database research;
(2) to stimulate interactive discussions on research in the database area
through panels, posters, tutorials, student scholar roundtables, etc.; and (3)
to motivate and engage future generations of researchers via the many conference
and workshop presentations, interactive poster sessions, and panel and breakout
sessions. The VLDB 2020 Proceedings are will be broadly accessible at The
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment
(http://www.vldb.org/pvldb/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.