* 2025437
* The catalytic activity and subcellular trafficking of plant cellulose synthase complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Christopher Staiger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2023
* USD 649,823.00

Cellulose is a polymer of glucose monomers that can be produced by plants, many
oomycetes, and some bacteria. Plant cellulose is used to make clothes, produce
paper, and generate biofuels. In plants cellulose is synthesized by cellulose
synthase protein complexes situated at the cell surface and it serves as a major
cell wall component that controls plant cell shape and overall plant
architecture. Cellulose synthase complexes require sophisticated regulatory
mechanism to be delivered to the cell surface and perform their catalytic
functions in cellulose biosynthesis. This project will use multidisciplinary
approaches to examine specific aspects of this regulation. The project will
contribute to outreach programs by hosting high school students in the
laboratory and providing training to high school science teachers. This project
will also involve numerous undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds, thus
stimulating research interest in plant biology and promoting STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is widely recognized that the subcellular
transport of the cellulose synthase complex is essential for cellulose synthesis
in plants, its unclear whether the catalytic activity of the cellulose synthase
complex is related to its subcellular transport. This project aims at using
chemical genetic methods and mutant analysis to discover how the catalytic
activity of cellulose synthase complexes impacts their subcellular trafficking.
Chemical inhibitor treatment combined with live-cell imaging will be performed
to examine how catalytic activity affects different steps of cellulose synthase
complex subcelluar trafficking. A series of cellulose synthase mutants that
carry mutations at important amino acids for predicted catalytic activity will
be analyzed for their growth phenotypes, cellulose content, and mutated protein
trafficking dynamics. The research is expected to increase understanding of the
relationship between cellulose synthase complex catalytic activity and
subcellular trafficking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.