* 2025057
* Diversity of Tropical Intraseasonal Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Bin Wang, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2023
* USD 672,898.00

The large-scale atmospheric circulation in the tropical region strongly
fluctuates on a timescale of a few months. Such tropical intraseasonal
“oscillation” (ISO) is dominated by the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO)
phenomenon between November-April and the Boreal Summer Intraseasonal
Oscillation (BSISO) phenomenon between June-October. The MJO typically elicits
patterns of enhanced rainfall (and deep clouds) that evolve eastward while BSISO
produces northeastward migrating intense rainfall patterns. Both phenomena
greatly impact weather and climate worldwide. Recent observations have revealed
that events associated with MJO/BSISO are quite diverse, differing strikingly in
structure, propagation, lifecycle, and global impacts. Characterization and
understanding of ISO diversities and their climate variations are crucial for
realistic modeling and skillful prediction of global atmospheric variations.
However, to date, they are largely unknown. Thus, this research aims to reveal
the distinctive forms of ISO diversity and its impacts on extreme weather
events, and to understand the fundamental processes governing the diversity and
its decadal variability and future change. Results from this research can shed
new light on tropical dynamics and monsoons as well as improve weather and
climate forecasting for regions of over 1 billion people impacted by ISO. The
researcher plans to host an international workshop to galvanize community
interests in ISO. He will mentor a post-doctoral research scientist and train a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives are to:
(a) detect and characterize a full range of ISO diversity in their initiation,
propagation, structure, amplification/decay, and impacts, (b) elucidate the
mechanisms responsible for generation of the diversified ISO behavior, (c)
reveal global and regional sources of ISO decadal variability, and (d) quantify
how the ISO diversity responds to anthropogenic forcing. To address these
objectives, the researcher will employ a strategy of combining process- and
dynamics-oriented diagnostics, theoretical analyses, and modeling. Results from
this work may lead to a new conceptual framework for understanding ISO
complexity and a new avenue to unravel root causes of ISO decadal variability
and its future change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.