* 2025233
* NNCI: Cornell NanoScale Science and Technology Facility (CNF)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,550,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Cornell Nanoscale Science and
Technology Facility (CNF) as part of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure (NNCI) will offer an external user program open to all US
researchers, delivering prompt, affordable, hands-on 24/7 shared access. CNF is
both regional and national in scope, drawing users from throughout the US, with
the goal of enabling transformative research and accelerating commercialization
across a range of research fields. The new research and technology development
that the CNF makes possible will transform numerous fields of engineering and
science, addressing many of NSF’s 10 Big Ideas including Convergence Research,
Quantum Leap, the Data Revolution, the Future of Work, the Rules of Life and NSF
Includes. CNF will cultivate communities of researchers in less-traditional
areas through partnership with other disciplinary centers, through activities
such as subject-area workshops and through appointment of an Associate Director
focused on life science and convergence research. The CNF will also provide
education and outreach programs targeting a wide range of researchers,
undergraduates, and K-12 students, with the broader goals of providing a hands-
on research education to a new generation of diverse engineering and science
students, fostering interdisciplinary interactions among diverse research
communities, extending the benefits of nanofabrication to less-traditional areas
of research, and interesting more young students in technology and science. The
CNF will continue to help companies to fabricate prototypes and develop and
refine new processes, working with local and state technology incubators to
assist the transition to commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The unique capabilities that the CNF will make available
to the nation's researchers include: i) world-leading electron-beam lithography
and production quality optical lithography tools for nanofabrication, ii)
flexibility in contamination-free materials processing through its strong and
diverse toolset enhanced by those for state-of-the-art atomic layer deposition
and etch, iii) experienced and knowledgeable staff, solely dedicated to user
support who will train even novice users in sophisticated, safe nanofabrication
methods and share knowledge in topics ranging from quantum qubit production to
application of artificial intelligence to nanofabrication, and iv) a proven
record of success in serving a large user base, experienced in convergent
research, while providing an unequaled level of service to external users. This
combination of capabilities enables realization of research visions and
commercialization of discoveries. Organized educational and outreach programs
are designed to benefit several target audiences. CNF will teach new
nanotechnology researchers to expertly operate at the research frontier through
hands-on training on state-of-the-art tools, in-depth minicourses, and subject-
area workshops. Experienced nanotechnology researchers will benefit from
advanced technical workshops in partnership with leading tool vendors. Diverse
undergraduate students will participate in unique summer research experiences,
including students from a new partnership with Morgan State University, an HBCU.
Young K-12 students and their families will be encouraged to become engaged in
technology and science through the highly-popular Nanooze, NNCI’s CNF-produced
online science news magazine and a national partnership with
4-H.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.