* 2025490
* NNCI: Nanotechnology Collaborative Infrastructure Southwest (NCI-SW)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Gabriel Montano, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,580,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Nanotechnology Collaborative
Infrastructure Southwest (NCI-SW) advances regional and national STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) opportunities by providing open access
to faculty expertise, staff know-how, and a state-of-the art toolset for
nanotechnology discovery, innovation, and education. Based on the campuses of
Arizona State University (ASU) and Northern Arizona University (NAU), the NCI-SW
works hand in hand with facility users to address grand challenges that the
southwestern US and the nation as a whole will be confronting in the coming
decades. These challenges include developing healthcare solutions for global
pandemics; creating new materials for quantum security and computation;
achieving water and food sustainability; and enabling new industries through
workforce development and low volume manufacturing. We provide technician
training through advanced laboratory classes for students enrolled in community
colleges offering two-year degree and certificate programs in nanotechnology.
With a focus on developing opportunities for Hispanic and Native American
students at community colleges in Arizona and New Mexico we provide remote on-
line access to a scanning electron microscope, and recruit participants for
summer research experiences. And we are studying the impact of nanotechnology on
society in Arizona and across the NNCI network to provide government agencies,
non-governmental organizations, industrial stakeholders as well as scientists
and engineers the tools they need to better inform science policy
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
NCI-SW are to build a regional infrastructure for nanotechnology discovery and
innovation, while addressing societal needs through education and
entrepreneurship. By providing access to three core facilities and faculty-led
centers of excellence we provide intellectual and infrastructural strengths in
bio-synthetic nanomaterials; semiconductor device, sensor, and micro-electro-
mechanical systems fabrication; advanced electron microscopy and materials
characterization; quantum materials; renewable energy; the environmental impact
of nanotechnology; geosciences to understand natural nanomaterials; and
computational nanoelectronics. By providing access to a new compact x-ray free
electron laser (CXFEL) source we will enable new materials characterization
opportunities for the wider NNCI community. The CXFEL will allow the study of
semiconductors, quantum materials, and nano-bio systems at timescales and energy
levels that would otherwise require access to a synchrotron or linear
accelerator. The NCI-SW will partner with other NNCI sites to provide
intellectual leadership and anticipate future needs of the nano earth-systems
research community. Social scientists working with NCI-SW faculty will explore
ways to better align nanotechnology research and development with the public
good as part of a network wide research community focused on the societal and
ethical implications of nanotechnology. We shall disseminate best practice in
cleanroom management though a regional association of laboratory managers from
ASU, and the Universities of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. The NCI-SW will
continue the network-wide Science Outside the Lab program to educate the next
generation of nanotechnologists about science policy decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.