* 2025805
* FW-HTF-P: Redesigning the Future of Construction Work by Replicating the Master-Apprentice Learning Model in Human-Robot Worker Teams
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Joyce Chai, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The construction industry could benefit significantly from increased
productivity, use of modern work processes, improved relationships among
stakeholders, and increased attention to safety and health issues of
construction workers. In the absence of these improvements, a chronic shortage
of skilled construction workers has developed, largely due to a retiring
workforce and the reluctance of younger generations or people of different
abilities to pursue such careers. More recently, the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic has caused serious economic difficulties and schedule delays on
construction projects, since it is hard to maintain social-distancing on
construction sites. These impacts further emphasize the need for construction
techniques that can allow workers to perform tasks remotely, decreasing the
number of on-site workers at any one time to ensure worker health and safety.
This planning grant will support investigation of the potential of human-robot
teams to transform future construction work and the profile of future
construction workers. It is expected that such changes would result in new
career opportunities and significant benefits to the industry. The project team
envisions that human workers will use technology to teach co-robots to perform
construction work tasks remotely, resulting in symbiotic human-robot teams that
can be widely deployed in the construction industry. This approach parallels the
classical Master-Apprentice vocational model prevalent in today’s construction
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research planning
grant is to explore the feasibility and potential of a human-robot team through
engagement with a range of stakeholders. The proposed activities for this
planning project include: 1) Fact-finding surveys distributed to representatives
of construction firms, current construction workers, and potential future
construction workers (high school students); 2) Technology pilot presentation
and feedback from representatives of construction firms and workers; and 3) A
comprehensive research program development workshop with expert stakeholder
participants from academia and industry. These activities will allow the
research team to set the foundation for developing a convergent research agenda
that reshapes the future of construction work into a human-robot partnership
that supports a self-sustaining cycle of lifelong learning, knowledge-transfer,
and effective teamwork. Ultimately, the results of this project will inform the
opportunities and challenges of incorporating co-robots on construction sites
without replacing the current workforce or adversely impacting the construction
work process. The success of this planning grant will pave the way for a
significant research effort that takes a human-centered approach toward the
future of construction work and ensures that it improves accessibility, quality
of life, productivity, and job satisfaction. The PIs will recruit a diverse
group of students and partners from industry and academia and pursue broad
dissemination of the research findings in academic and industry venues. This
project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier
cross-directorate program to advance design of intelligent work technologies
that operate in harmony with human workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.