* 2025811
* Comparative genomic and spatial analysis of DNA replication in maize and sorghum
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* William Thompson, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,325,302.00

All living organisms must accurately and completely duplicate their DNA genomes
during growth and development. In eukaryotes, DNA replication occurs within cell
nuclei, and is tightly choreographed in both space and time. This project will
compare the DNA replication timing programs and their interplay with chromosome
organization and function in two important cultivars of maize and their close
relative, sorghum. The high level of genetic diversity in these plant lines will
be exploited to learn more about how their replication timing programs are
regulated. Understanding this process is important because chromosomal events
that occur early in development, and are coupled to DNA replication, may impact
gene expression programs and observable traits throughout the plant life cycle.
The project will train the next generation of scientists to conduct
interdisciplinary research, and help them develop collaborative skills and
professional networks needed to address major challenges in biology and
agriculture. The project will also introduce undergraduates and high school
students from underrepresented groups to maize genetics and modern plant
research through summer research experiences. It will also provide an
opportunity for the general public to learn about genetics and breeding of
important crops like maize through field demonstrations and the production of a
book illustrating the artistry and science of maize
mutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA replication is a highly regulated process that
integrates many aspects of genome structure and function, including
transcriptional activity, chromatin structure, epigenetic state, and 3-D
structure. This project will explore these linkages in plants by exploiting the
excellent genetic, genomic, and cytological resources for maize and sorghum. The
project builds upon earlier studies that used in vivo labeling of newly
replicated DNA in combination with flow sorting of nuclei to characterize
replication timing (RT) programs in the root tip meristem of B73 maize. The
first aim will use B73 root meristems to define and visualize replication
initiation regions (IRs), to define genome-wide transcription rates, and to
examine replication in the context of cytological and molecular interactions in
both interphase and replicating nuclei. Analysis of these data in combination
with existing data on RT and chromatin accessibility will provide a strong
mechanistic view of the replication timing program in B73 root meristems. In the
second aim, the maize B73 profiles will be compared to RT programs, IR
distributions, transcriptional activity, genomic features and chromatin
accessibility in sorghum (S. bicolor) and the maize Mo17 inbred line. These
experiments will define regions in which replication is altered in different
genotypes and begin the process of understanding how replication programs are
genetically determined. The project will further establish replication time as
an important integrative genomic annotation and shed light on the functional
compartmentation of plant genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Award was co-funded
by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems and the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.