* 2025364
* Accelerating Open and FAIR Data Practices Across the Earth, Space, and Environmental Sciences: A Pilot with the NSF to Support Public Access to Research Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Shelley Stall, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 623,694.00

This project implements FAIR data practices across the Earth, space, and
environmental sciences. By the end of the project, data citations for data
funded by NSF EAR grants are captured in the NSF Public Access Repository (NSF
PAR) and knowledge of leading practices and workflows around data citation are
well known across the AGU community. This project, funded as a pilot activity
for the NSF PAR system, will have the outcome of strengthening the ecosystem for
data in support of publications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;AGU will work with its
publishing partner Wiley to ensure that data citations are tracked and exposed
in articles. CHORUS will develop technical connections with Scholix to obtain
data citation information to augment its publication information that it makes
available to NSF. AGU will join Dryad as a member and use the Dryad repository
as a location for data deposit when a discipline specific repository is
unavailable. Outreach activities targeting awareness and adoption will be
organized through AGU and ESIPâ€™s Data FAIR workshops at scientific meetings,
journal society meetings, and repository community
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.