* 2025828
* SBIR Phase I:  Cognitive Communications Payload Module for CubeSat Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Robert Corrigan, BLUE CRANIUM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2021
* USD 255,937.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance communications and on-board
processing capabilities for small satellites or CubeSats, which is important
with growing civil and commercial demand for satellite communications services.
The proposed payload module provides a number of cognitive communications
functions focused on intelligent networking capabilities for CubeSat platforms
and swarms. These functions enable robust, reliable global connectivity by
allowing for customer CubeSats to efficiently and autonomously communicate
within swarms and with other networks for applications including Earth
observation, sensing, situational awareness, new space, and communications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop and demonstrate a flexible, comprehensive cognitive
communications payload module to enhance communications functions in networking
for CubeSat platforms and swarms. This project will demonstrate the technical
feasibility of the proposed innovation, apply advanced and emerging on-board
processing and communications technologies, and develop and integrate hardware
and software to develop a prototype payload module for CubeSat applications. The
prototype will perform several cognitive functions allowing for intelligent
networking for CubeSat platforms and swarms: intelligent routing, network self-
healing, ad-hoc networking with other available networks, and data store and
forward capabilities for sparse networks and network build-up phase. Autonomous
operation will improve data transmission, data packaging and routing, latency
mitigation, and user-initiated services for commercial, government, and academic
CubeSat operators. This effort will focus on three key areas: 1) developing the
cognitive engine architecture and software, 2) acquiring and integrating a
software-defined radio and single-board computer, and 3) developing an
appropriate API. The objective of this project is to prototype the cognitive
communications payload module in preparation for testing, demonstration, flight
qualification, and commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.