* 2025315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Modal Study of Gesture in a Spatial Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gary Holton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,758.00

Spatial orientation is arguably one of the fundamental tasks of human language,
and speakers use an array of strategies to situate objects, give directions, and
categorize landscape features. The languages spoken in regions near large oceans
are particularly well-known for their reliance on the land-sea opposition for
spatial orientation, and this distinction is reflected in vocabulary. Thus, one
would locate a house as ‘landward’ or ‘seaward,' rather than ‘left’ or ‘right,’
or ‘north’ or ‘south.’ Crucially, spatial vocabulary is almost always
accompanied by spatial gestures, such as pointing with hands, arms, head, or
facial features. Often, these gestures are not just supplemental but play a
critical role in conveying spatial meaning. Yet, most research on spatial
language has focused solely on the speech stream rather than the visual
component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on cutting-edge methodology, this study
uses video recordings to analyze spatial language and gesture in a language of
the Austronesian language family. The study will provide novel data on a little-
studied yet linguistically diverse area of the language family. Moreover, the
research will provide critical new documentation of a minority language
currently undergoing rapid language loss. Working with local collaborators, the
doctoral student will collect high-quality audio and video recordings of natural
speech as part of a community-driven documentation effort. These recordings will
be supplemented by unpublished legacy archival data. Recordings will be
transcribed, translated and annotated for spatial features, and correlations
between spoken and gestural features will be noted. All collected data will be
publicly archived. The analysis of language, space, and gesture in this language
will broaden the scientific understanding of the nature of space in language.
Further, gesture has hardly been studied and its relation to spatial
communication remains poorly understood. Because the use of gesture varies
areally, it is important to diversify the regions where gesture has been
documented in order to broaden understanding of the multitudinous ways that
gesture can facilitate communication. To do this, the study will employ novel
methodologies that incorporate gesture as an essential part of linguistic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.