* 2025615
* EAGER: Discovery of Next Generation Durable Non-toxic Inorganic Red Pigments
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Mas Subramanian, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

PART 1. NON-TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colors play a vital role in our lives
and how we respond to surroundings. Inorganic color pigments are used to
generate colors in paints, glass, ceramics and plastics. However, the world has
never had a truly safe durable inorganic red pigment. Currenty known inorganic
red pigments contain toxic metals such as cadmium, mercury or lead. Driven by
environmental laws, these red pigments have to be replaced and discovering a
safe durable bright red pigment is the holy grail of colorant producing
companies. The central theme of this materials chemistry project, which is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, is the discovery of next generation durable non-toxic
bright red inorganic pigments based on transition metal oxides and itâ€™s
derivatives that can be used in artist colors, industrial paints and other
coating technologies. This project significantly contributes to education and
research training for graduate and undergraduate students in the field of solid
state materials chemistry. High school students participating in the project
gain valuable hands-on research experience and learn the pathways to advanced
education and career in STEM disciplines. New materials are drivers of new
phenomena and technologies. Designing new materials with superior color
properties is a scientific grand challenge, the pursuit of which will provide
the basis for new color technologies and revolutionize our society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2. TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory research, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, is aimed at the discovery
of new stable bright red inorganic materials that can be used as red color
pigments. The focus is on the discovery of complex inorganic materials with
unusual structural features. The common coordinations for transition metal
cations in inorganic functional materials are tetrahedral and octahedral.
Transition metal oxides with cations in trigonal bipyramidal coordination are
rare but recently known to produce brilliantly colored blue oxides of
considerable scientific and commercial interests as pigments; e.g. YInMn blue.
By understanding the crystal structure-optical property relationships for
trigonal bipyramidal cations in various complex inorganic oxides, the
researchers design new transition metal oxides with red producing chromophores
(e.g. chromium) that can be developed into commercially viable red pigments.
This project also explores novel mixed oxides, oxyfluorides and oxysulfides with
cations containing lone-pair electrons where there is a tin 5s or bismuth 6s
band located above the oxygen 2p band and the resulting bandgap are tuned to
produce compounds with brilliant yellow, orange and red colors leading to next
generation pigments. Designing new materials with superior color properties is a
scientific grand challenge, the pursuit of which will provide the basis for new
color technologies and revolutionize our society. This project significantly
contributes to education and research training for graduate and undergraduate
students in the field of solid state materials chemistry. High school students
participate in this project as summer interns and gain valuable hands-on
research experience and learn the pathways to advanced education and career in
STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.