* 2025669
* MTM1: Network properties of fungal-bacterial interactions: Predictive modeling and functional analysis of the Hawaiian Drosophila gut microbiome
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joanne Yew, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

How an animal develops, reproduces, and adapts to its environment depends upon
not only the traits encoded by its genome, but, as well, the contributions of
its microbiome. In many microbial communities, the interactions between bacteria
and fungi have profound effects on community properties and host physiology.
However, little is known about the mechanisms by which interactions between
kingdoms contribute to a healthy microbiome and promote host fitness. This
proposal seeks to understand the role of bacterial-fungal interactions in the
host physiology of Drosophila (pomace flies) from the Hawaiian clade. Hawaiian
flies have adapted to a wide range of environments and lifestyles. The
remarkable diversity of Hawaiian Drosophila ecology together with the relatively
simple mix of bacterial and fungal species found in their gut provide an
excellent system for understanding how microbes help host animals adapt to
diverse habitats and diets, potentially catalyzing the evolution of new species.
Elucidating the basic principles that govern microbe-microbe and microbe-host
interactions holds promise for the development of novel antimicrobial treatments
and improving the cultivation of agricultural products. The findings of the
proposed project will have broad applicability to the conservation of endangered
native Hawaiian fauna (including Drosophila) by identifying microbe-related
strategies that will improve host health and survival. The University of Hawai‘i
and Chaminade University of Honolulu are minority-servicing institutions with
Native Hawaiian students comprising, respectively, 16.5% and 19% of the student
body. Involving students from underserved populations with data science and
microbiology methods, including the tools developed for this project, will
increase the pool of trained scientists in the region and encourage multi-
generational Native Hawaiian engagement with STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypothesis of this proposal is that bacterial-fungal interactions
benefit host fitness by stabilizing the microbiome and enhancing host metabolic
processes. Preliminary work using in silico network modeling, high throughput
amplicon sequencing data, and microbial manipulation experiments reveal that i)
bacterial and fungal members in the gut of Hawaiian flies are likely to interact
based on their patterns of co-occurrence; and ii) fungal function is critical
for host fitness. The central hypothesis will be addressed with the following
approaches: first, computational tools will be generated to allow robust
prediction of microbial interactions and emergent community phenotypes such as
stability, growth, and resilience to pathogens. Second, bacterial and fungal
species will be isolated from native Hawaiian Drosophila guts and cultured in
isolation or in pairwise combinations. Metabolomic profiling and measurements of
community properties under normal and stressed conditions will be used to
identify differences between mixed and pure communities as well as beneficial
and deleterious combinations. The data will be used to refine and validate in
silico models. Finally, the effect of interkingdom interactions on host
physiology will be determined by inoculating Drosophila with various microbial
combinations and measuring the impact on host metabolite profile and life
history features such as fertility, stress resistance, and lifespan. Metabolomic
data will be used to identify candidate pathways underlying microbial-host
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.