* 2025476
* URoL: MTM 1: Chemistry of cnidarian symbiosis: microbiomes role in association, morphogenesis, and protection
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Mark Martindale, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,868.00

Many cnidarians, including corals, anemones, and jellyfish, contain
photosynthetic algae that supply them with critical nutrients. Habitat changes
associated with human activity can destabilize this symbiotic relationship,
leading to a rapid rise in recent coral bleaching events. These bleaching events
often have devastating effects on reef ecosystems, which are amongst the
biodiverse communities on the planet. Although there is increasing evidence that
the bacterial and fungal microbiome has an important role in the physiology of
healthy animals, relatively little is known about the microbiome of cnidarians
or the role of their microbiome in mediating cnidarian-algae symbiosis. This
research project will systematically examine the microorganisms associated with
cnidarians, the compounds these microbes produce, and the effects these
compounds have on cnidarian physiology and symbiosis. The results from these
experiments will provide key insights into cnidarian biology, which is urgently
needed for the design and implementation of global preservation efforts.
Furthermore, this research is likely to yield general insights into animal-
microorganism relationships, since cnidarians are one of the oldest animal
lineages and provide an important evolutionary perspective, the diversity of
cnidarians allows comparative approaches, and the strong interactions in this
system will expose general principles. In addition, this project has a strong
education and public outreach component, including a teacherâ€™s workshop to bring
new lab-based curriculum to local public-school districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symbiotic relationship between cnidarians and
phototrophic dinoflagellates (family Symbiodiniaceae) has a critical role in
cnidarian physiology. Recent findings suggest that both the cnidarian host and
the symbiotic dinoflagellates are associated with complex bacterial and fungal
microbiomes. However, little is known about the diversity of these communities,
their secondary metabolome, or how they affect cnidarian physiology and
cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis. The proposed research will address this
knowledge gap by using metagenomics to describe the cnidarian-associated
microbial communities, comparative metabolomics analysis to identify compounds
produced by both the host animal and microbes, and in vivo assays to determine
the effects of microbes and metabolites on cnidarian physiology. The first aim
of this project will identify the effects of the microbiome on coral-algae
symbiosis using the anemone Exaiptasia. This research will describe the
bacterial and fungal diversity in the host, the effects of microbiome
manipulation on coral bleaching, the metabolome of symbiotic and aposymbiotic
hosts, and the effects of metabolites from cultured microbes. The second aim of
this project will determine the effects of the microbiome on coral development
and symbiosis using the upside-down jellyfish Cassiopea. Life cycle transitions
in this jellyfish are dependent on the presence of symbiotic dinoflagellates,
and this project will identify the bacterial and fungal community in Cassiopea,
the metabolome of different life cycles, and the effects of the microbiome on
animal development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by
the NSF Understanding the Rules of Life (URoL) Big Idea initiative and the
Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the Division of Chemistry at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.