* 2025470
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Addressing Extreme Weather Related Diarrheal Disease Risks in the Asia Pacific Region
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Amir Sapkota, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop a multidisciplinary approach
to developing early warning systems for infectious diseases. As extreme weather
events are increasing in frequency, duration, and intensity, countries
especially in the Asia Pacific Region experience elevated rates of diarrheal
disease morbidity and mortality, with more than 873,000 deaths/year reported in
South Asia alone. Early warning systems to address infectious disease threats
are of considerable interest within the public health community as this approach
resonates with the principle of disease prevention, a core underpinning of
public health. Public health practitioners require early warning systems on time
scales needed to provide adequate time to prepare for and respond to projected
conditions. Weather-based warnings are too short for public health professionals
and communities to plan for the threats; and climate projection-based warnings
are too distant in the future; therefore, this project will focus on seasonal to
sub-seasonal time scales. The project will engage with researchers, NGOâ€™s
governmental, and community organizations from the Asia Pacific Region,
including Taiwan, India, China, Vietnam, Nepal, Bangladesh, and Indonesia to
undertake comparative analyses of diarrheal disease risk associated with extreme
weather events. The goal is to develop a transferable, seasonal to sub-seasonal
early warning system that can be implemented across the Asia Pacific Region to
reduce extreme weather-related diarrheal disease burdens and improve community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.