* 2025505
* ISS/Collaborative Research: 3D Bone Marrow Analogs to Determine the Contribution of Mechanical Signals to Aging MSC Function in Microgravity
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Aykut Satici, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 10/31/2023
* USD 465,051.00

Mechanical signals generated by exercise combat obesity and maintain a healthy
musculoskeletal system. Age and reduced physical activity disrupt mechanical
signaling and diminish the potency of stem cells within the bone marrow that
replenish bone-building cells. Even though poor skeletal health is a major cause
of injury and disability among aged individuals, the reason for reduced bone-
building responsiveness to exercise in older individuals, compared to younger
individuals, remains a knowledge gap. This project will quantify the mechanical
forces that cells are subjected to in bone by using novel 3D printed tissue
engineering constructs. Combining this technology with the aging conditions
caused by microgravity in experiments to be conducted on the International Space
Station will reveal the putative connections between aging and physical activity
at the cellular level. Ultimately, these efforts may lead to non-pharmacologic,
regenerative strategies to improve muscle and bone health in in older adults, in
those who must undergo extended bedrest, and astronauts. The multidisciplinary
approach taken in this bioengineering project will be an excellent platform to
fascinate and engage the next generation of students and young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major technical barrier in studying the
mechanical environment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) that reside within bone
marrow is that there are no model systems currently available that can replicate
the mechanical complexity of the bone marrow compartment. To close this gap,
this work will develop a 3D printed bone marrow analog system that combines an
in vivo environment with the accessibility of an in vitro culture system. This
will permit a systematic approach of study. To study cellular mechanical
environments within these marrow analogs, the approach will include an
experimental setup and a complementary and validated finite element model. These
mechanoactive marrow environments will provide a novel tool for
mechanobiologists to systematically study the effect of the mechanical
environment on cell responses in 3D. Utilization of this novel system in this
project will specifically advance mechanobiology knowledge by: (1) quantifying
the mechanoresponse of old MSCs in a young bone marrow geometry and vice versa,
thereby identifying the contribution of mechanical stress environment to the
mechanosignaling capacity of aged MSCs. (2) establishing, for the first time,
how the mechanical stress environment contributes to microgravity-simulated
aging of MSCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.