* 2025187
* Experimental and Computational Studies of Ligated 3D DNA Crystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chengde Mao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 492,251.00

This grant will focus on understanding fundamental physical properties of DNA
crystals. DNA is one of the most essential components of life as it carries
genetic information. Recent scientific advances have shown that DNA may be used
as a versatile engineering building block. Based on sequence complementarity,
DNA molecules can spontaneously self-assemble to form complex structures, which
can be programmed by computer-aided designs. This approach has been exploited to
create functional architectures with sub-nanometer precision and exquisite
programmability. Despite the exciting potential, DNA self-assembly has been
limited to very small lengthscales, mostly 100 nm or less. Large DNA constructs
often become unwanted aggregates or suffer from instability. This research will
investigate structural properties and mechanical behaviors of DNA materials, in
order to develop guiding principles for creating macroscopic DNA constructs. The
effort will combine advanced experimental measurements with modeling and
computational capabilities to understand the fundamental relationship between
the design parameters, assembled structures, and physical properties. This
research will also be complemented by an educational and outreach program to
advance the public understanding of biomolecular nanotechnology. Activities
include (i) research-based engineering education for undergraduate students and
(ii) development of a hands-on module for K-12 students that illustrates the
principles of DNA self-assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the
research is to study structural mechanics of three-dimensional (3D)
architectures from DNA. The team recently discovered a route to assemble
triangular DNA unit motifs into a macroscopic crystal which can be further
strengthened via enzymatic ligation. This project will use ligated 3D crystals
as a model system. The research objectives include: (1) development of layered
3D crystals from DNA, (2) understanding of design and synthesis parameters, (3)
characterization of self-assembled structures, and (4) elucidation of the
structure-property relationship. The results from state-of-the-art
nanoindentation experiments will be complemented by theoretical modeling and
molecular dynamics simulations to gain insights on the crystallinity,
elasticity, and deformation behaviors. The fundamental knowledge from this study
will lay the foundations for the synthesis of macroscopic 3D DNA materials with
structural stability, controllability, and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.