* 2025270
* ECR: BCSER: Conference: Integrating STEM Education Research Collaboration for Regional Prosperity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Alexis Petri, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The proposed three-day conference "Integrating STEM Education Research
Collaboration for Regional Prosperity" will highlight topics relevant to STEM
education and workforce development in the greater Kansas City region. STEM
education topics will include supporting student success, broadening
participation in STEM, and developing partnerships between two- and four-year
institutions. Regional prosperity topics will include identifying high-impact
practices to retain STEM majors, promoting STEM careers, and building coalitions
among regional stakeholders. Participants will present research and learn from
each other while working together to identify how post-secondary education can
improve its commitment to STEM student success and regional prosperity. The
conference will support local and national efforts that increase STEM degree
attainment, diversify the STEM workforce, and expand interdisciplinary
approaches to post-secondary STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference has four goals: 1) Support STEM education researchers to identify
critical challenges, opportunities, and actionable solutions to retain STEM-
aspirational students and graduate a diverse workforce; 2) Engage best practices
on the frontiers of collective impact, institutional transformation, and data-
informed collaboration; 3) Apply new knowledge and innovations to projects
addressing both institutional and societal needs; and 4) Provide a venue for
research dissemination and collaborative problem-solving. The conference will
convene a "Think Tank” (conference plus networked improvement community) of top
researchers, practitioners, and professionals who will collaboratively design,
collect, and analyze data. Results of this analysis will support STEM education
improvements to prepare a diverse STEM workforce that will promote increased
regional prosperity. Ultimately, the conference outcomes will contribute an
actionable set of data that can be useful for demystifying factors related to
post-secondary attrition in the region and identifying feasible educational
technology and pedagogies to improve STEM student retention. Additionally, the
conference will develop a general ecosystem model focused on the unique
academic, social, and cultural factors influencing STEM education research. The
project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build
individuals' capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.