* 2025434
* ISS: Unveiling the Mechanical Roles of Gravity and Buoyancy in Embryonic Brain and Heart Torsion
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Zi Chen, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Life originates in water. Most embryos develop in fluids with buoyancy, a force
that only exists when there is gravity. Many species are pseudo-symmetric, and
as such, breaking the left-right symmetry is essential for proper development.
For example, axial rotation occurs in the development of many mammals and birds,
and is one of the earliest developmental events that breaks the left-right
symmetry. During axial rotation, the embryonic brain undergoes rotation to
correctly place the organs. If it fails to do this correctly, significant birth
defects can result. The research goal of this award is to understand how body
forces such as gravity and buoyancy affect embryonic development and symmetry
breaking. The project will examine how the absence of buoyancy and gravity
change the growth and brain torsion in chicken embryos in experiments to be
conducted on the International Space Station. These experiments, together with
computational simulations, will be employed to identify the key mechanical
factors driving axial rotation. The research results will be incorporated into
solid mechanics and biomechanics courses, and the development of high school and
undergraduate research experiences. Computational models will be made available
on a website, and videos of this research will be uploaded to YouTube. An annual
workshop will be held to host visitors and share scientific knowledge. The
results of this work will benefit life on earth by increasing our understanding
of embryonic development, which may lead to new ways to prevent birth defects.
This research combines embryo experiments in space with computational modeling
to identify the regulative role of physical forces in the early development. The
team will study how changes in buoyancy and gravity can affect the growth of
brain and heart, and how the development of brain and heart are interdependent
during the process of embryonic brain torsion, an important symmetry-breaking
event that is essential for establishing the correct body plan. Physical forces
drive and regulate the twisting of the brain. Thus, the idea that brain torsion
not only depends on body curvature (flexure) and the forces exerted by the
vitelline membrane, but is also a result of heart development and body forces
such as gravity and buoyancy will be explored. The hypothesis that buoyancy
helps the heart and brain tube maintain the right morphology, and that the
disturbance in buoyancy or heart development will be detrimental for symmetry
breaking and embryonic development will be tested. The work will unveil new
mechanical aspects of morphogenesis and develop new models for embryonic
development that take into account the effects of body forces. Insights gained
from this work will enhance our understanding of mechanics of embryogenesis,
particularly the development of left-right asymmetry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.