* 2025297
* RESEARCH-PGR: Comparative Genomics and Biochemistry of Colored Nectars
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Marshall Hampton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,342,077.00

Nearly 90% of flowering plants produce floral nectar, the volume and composition
of which have been correlated with the efficiency of animal-mediated pollination
that impacts the production of 87 out of 115 (~76%) of the leading global food
crops which represents an annual value of $29 billion in the U.S. alone and
accounts for one-third of total food production. Although sugars are the
predominant nectar solutes, ~10% of nectar dry weight is represented by many
types of non-sugar solutes, including specialized metabolites, like pigments.
Pigments play essential roles in biotic interactions throughout the Tree of
Life, with natural pigments having a global market value of &gt;$5B annually.
This project will use a comparative genomics interdisciplinary approach to test
the central hypothesis that colored nectars contain novel and known pigments,
which evolved from being selectively favored through having spectral qualities
attuned to pollinator vision. The activities outlined in this study are wholly
novel and will provide new insights into the biology of an essential plant-
animal mutualism on a genome-wide scale by (1) systematically profiling nectar
pigments across species; (2) determining to what extent nectaries can actively
control non-sugar nectar content, with an emphasis on nectar pigments; (3)
understanding how evolutionary and natural history impact nectar quality with
respect to pigment content; (4) identifying and characterizing enzymes involved
in pigment synthesis; and, (5) systematically evaluating the true biological
functions of nectar pigments. With respect to broader impacts, the project will
help train the next generation of plant biologists by providing research
training experiences for undergraduate, graduate, and middle school students. In
addition, the project will take advantage of the broad public interest in the
conservation of plant:pollinator interactions through citizen science
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-pollinator interactions have at least
partially driven the massive species radiation observed in the angiosperms,
leading not only to extreme diversification in flower size and morphology, but
also the accompanying chemistries behind attractants (color and scent) and
rewards (nectar and pollen). Although rare, one floral trait that has evolved
multiple times is colored nectar, which is suggested to serve as a visual cue of
reward to prospective pollinators. Approximately 70 plant species are known to
produce colored nectars, but the identities of these pigments, their associated
syntheses, and true biological functions, have not yet been described. To
address this gap in knowledge, the overarching goal of this project is to
decipher the diversity, synthesis, and function of nectar pigments within a
phylogenetic and evolutionary framework. The specific aims of this project
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Systematic identification of nectar pigments in
20+ taxa of diverse lineages via LC MS/MS, including multiple sister taxa with
different colored nectars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Comparative transcriptomics
and proteomics of nectaries and nectars. RNA-seq will be conducted on nectaries
throughout floral maturation to enable comparative mining of pigment synthesis
pathways, as well as nectar protein identification, which we predict to be
involved in pigment formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Determine mechanisms of
pigment formation. This aim will characterize the role of nectar proteins in
pigment formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Initiation of functional analyses of
nectar pigments. Nectar pigments may serve as visual cues to pollinators. This
aim will evaluate if colored nectars are visible and conspicuous to suspected
pollinators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All methods and datasets will be made
publicly available through the project website (www.nectarygenomics.org) and
publications. Long-term access will be provided through established public data
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.