* 2025732
* Learning Methods for Decentralized Control in Multi-Agent Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rahul Jain, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Multi-agent systems (MAS) are expected to become increasingly prevalent in
military and civilian domains. Decentralized control and decision-making by
agents is a fundamental driver of the diverse applications of multi-agent
systems. Agents are expected to act and make decisions without relying on a
centralized command structure. Communication and coordination among agents may
have to be carried out over sparse, intermittent, unreliable, low data rate
and/or noisy communication networks that preclude the possibility of centralized
information and decision-making. A key design challenge is to find efficient
ways of computing decentralized control and decision strategies for a team of
agents. The problem is further compounded by various kinds of uncertainties -
uncertainties about the environment, noisy observations, unreliable
communication as well as uncertainties in the system model. In this project, we
aim to develop learning-based methods for decentralized control in multi-agent
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The research develops the
following: (i) learning-based practical methods for computing near-optimal
decentralized control policies for multi-agent systems with known system model.
(ii) online decentralized learning algorithms for control of multi-agent systems
with unknown system model. We aim to develop decentralized algorithms that
asymptotically find the optimal decentralized policy for such systems and learn
in the most efficient way possible. The proposed research will lay the
foundations for Learning-based Decentralized Optimal Control, which is expected
to become increasingly important for emerging multi-agent system applications.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research will significantly impact
the science of multi-agent systems, autonomous robotic systems, and
reinforcement learning. It will introduce a systematic and practical learning-
based approach to design of multi-agent systems that has long been lacking in
the literature. The educational impact of the proposed research will include:
(i) providing graduate students with a multi-disciplinary training in stochastic
control, online learning and optimization, (ii) involvement of undergraduate
students during summer to perform computational and lab experiments (iii)
efforts to recruit female and under-represented minority students in our
projects; (iv) The research results will be incorporated in classes on
reinforcement learning, stochastic systems, and decentralized control taught by
the principal investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.