* 2025974
* SBIR Phase I:  High-throughput injectability screening of high concentration protein formulations by multiplexed microfluidic quartz resonators
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Zehra Parlak, Qatch Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,748.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances a new type of drug delivery. Protein-
based drugs (biologics) have become more popular due to their high specificity
of activity and generally low level of side effects. Biologics treat many
conditions, impact lives of millions of patients, and have a global revenue of
over $100 B. Patients prefer and comply with injectable versions of biologics
because injections are rapid and make home-administration possible, unlike IV
infusions that require clinic visits lasting several hours. However, the
development and utility of many biologics is hampered by their inability to be
used via injections because they are thick liquids. The technology developed in
this project will act as an early-stage screening to determined the suitability
of potential drug formulation for injection, enabling delivery of new
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will increase the number
of injectable protein-based therapeutics by providing early screening of protein
formulation viscosity. Viscosity measurements early in formulation development
are currently not possible because the existing viscometers require high
material volumes. Therefore, injectability of new protein-based formulations
cannot be tested until significant amounts of material are developed, typically
at late stages of preclinical research. This project will create a high-
throughput viscometer that requires only drops for each test, for formulation
optimization; it will determine the feasibility of multiplexing microfluidic
quartz sensors on the same substrate to achieve simultaneous viscosity
measurements. Specifically, in this project, 1) the electronics for the
multiplexed sensors will be developed, 2) the multiplexed sensors will be
designed using analytical and finite element models, and 3) these designs will
be executed by microfabrication. Finally, the multiplexed microfluidic quartz
sensors will be tested by analyzing relevant formulations
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.