* 2025706
* GEM: From the Micro to the Macro--Identifying the Mechanisms Responsible for Megaelectron-Volt (MeV) Electron Microbursts and Quantifying Their Role in Global Radiation Belt Losses
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jacob Bortnik, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 397,386.00

The dynamical evolution of the Earth’s radiation belts is governed by the
relative balance between particles being accelerated and transported into and
lost from the magnetosphere. Relativistic electron microbursts are one source of
particle losses in the magnetosphere. This work is a modeling effort to better
understand the physical process of losses from microbursts. The work will have a
broader impact on the technological infrastructure that supports our society and
national security, due to the significant space weather hazard that radiation
belt electrons pose to Earth-orbiting spacecraft. Two undergraduates and one
graduate student researcher will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort
will develop a computational framework to identify the physical mechanisms that
produce relativistic electron microbursts in the Earth’s outer radiation belt
and to quantify, for the first time, accurate loss estimates due to this
scattering process. The science investigation will be carried out as follows.
Numerical ray tracing will be used to calculate the chorus wave power spectrum
(frequency and wave normal angle) as a function of time and location along a
given magnetic field line, including Landau damping. Then, the wave power
distribution will be used to calculate the resultant pitch-angle change near the
loss cone at each point along the field line due to resonant interactions with
the obtained chorus wave field, including nonlinear effects. This is then
repeated for a set of test-particles (i.e., energetic electrons) over a range of
initial energies. For an assumed radiation belt electron distribution taken from
an empirical model, the work calculates the spatio-temporal dependence of the
electron flux precipitated into the ionosphere due to the derived resonant
pitch-angle scattering. Repeating this entire procedure across a range of
locations provides a map of the electron flux precipitated into the ionosphere
as a function of time, position, and energy, due to resonant interactions with
chorus waves. With these model calculations in hand, the work explores and
evaluates the various potential mechanisms involved in the scattering through
parameter variation, for example by increasing/suppressing Landau damping, or by
restricting/including higher order resonances. These mechanisms will then be
additionally scrutinized through data-model comparisons, both statistical and
for an individual event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.