* 2025462
* NNCI: Southeastern Nanotechnology Infrastructure Corridor (SENIC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* David Gottfried, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,500,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Development of nanoscale materials and
devices, and incorporation of these components into full systems, is an
important part of addressing global challenges in energy, health, and the
environment. However, nanoscale science and engineering often requires the use
of complex and expensive tools and facilities for the fabrication and
characterization of these materials and devices. This necessitates the support
of shared national resources for both basic research in academic institutions
and the translation of these discoveries into commercial products by small and
large enterprises. As part of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure (NNCI) program, the Southeastern Nanotechnology Infrastructure
Corridor (SENIC) establishes a partnership between the Institute for Electronics
and Nanotechnology at the Georgia Institute of Technology and the Joint School
of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering, an academic collaboration between North
Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCA&amp;T) and the University of North
Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG). This national resource provides open access to
nanofabrication and characterization facilities and tools along with expert
staff support to a growing user community across the southeastern U.S. The SENIC
infrastructure will strengthen and accelerate discovery in nanoscience and
nanoengineering, addressing important national research priorities including the
NSF 10 Big Ideas encompassing topics such as quantum science, convergence
research, and biomedical technologies. In addition, because societal and
economic needs require a skilled workforce trained in the tools and techniques
of nanotechnology, SENIC implements a comprehensive education and outreach
program, embedded with lessons in social and ethical responsibility, designed to
reach a broad and diverse audience of students, teachers and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;With access to 350
nanotechnology fabrication and characterization tools, SENIC's goal is to
provide a one-stop-shop approach, covering both top-down approaches using
nanoscale patterning, as well as bottom-up approaches based on nanomaterials
synthesis and additive processing. Programs and activities are designed to
address user awareness, accessibility, and affordability. SENIC will operate
with an interdisciplinary culture where engineers, scientists, physicians,
educators, policy experts, and economic development professionals work together
with shared access to facilities and tools and a deep understanding of industry
opportunities and societal challenges to promote the accelerated translation of
invention into innovation. In addition, SENIC will work in partnership with the
other sites in the NNCI network to create a research ecosystem that is
strengthened by collaboration, sharing of best practices, scholarly interaction,
and mutual support. Furthermore, the SENIC partners will work with undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as partner with 2-year technical colleges, to
produce science and engineering professionals from diverse backgrounds who are
ready to meet the global workforce demands of the 21st century. In tandem, our
outreach activities, teacher training, and public awareness events will
encourage K-12 students, targeting schools and districts with underserved
populations, to participate in the STEM pipeline and will help create an
informed citizenry that supports the safe and responsible development of
nanotechnology. The SENIC societal and ethical implications program will be
embedded into our mission and operation, and will address the intellectual,
societal, and economic impact of nanoscale science and engineering enabled by
the NNCI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.