* 2025637
* REU Site: The Intersection of Linguistics, Language, and Culture
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Isabelle Barriere, Molloy College
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 73,074.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences.
As such, it has both scientific and societal benefits, and it integrates
research and education. While the goal of models in the language sciences is to
provide universal explanations, the bulk of research is still conducted on
English and other majority languages. Moreover, research in the language
sciences -- despite growing awareness of the need for diversity -- is largely
carried out by practitioners from majority language communities. This is
problematic for two distinct reasons: findings are not representative of the
increasingly diverse US population and neither are researchers, clinicians and
educators. This 29-week Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program
addresses these two issues by equipping 14 undergraduate students per year from
under-represented communities with the skills and knowledge required to become
successful in graduate programs focused on speech, language and communication
sciences and in working with members of linguistic minorities. The program will
include six key modules: (i) Establishment of a community of scholars through
active participation in academic seminars, (ii) Mentored Scientific research,
(iii) Research Ethics training, (iv) Research dissemination, (v) Participation
in workshops to prepare a graduate school application portfolio, (vi)
Organization of a translational conference for students, professionals and
community leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruiting students who use lesser-
studied languages, spoken and signed, and non-mainstream varieties of English,
and having them conduct research with Mentoring Faculty who are experts in the
various fields related to language sciences (Theoretical Linguistics, First and
Second Language Acquisition and Processing, Bilingualism, Speech, Language and
Communication Sciences, Developmental and Acquired Disorders) applied to lesser
studied varieties of English and other languages, constitutes an important step
toward redressing the imbalance and ensuring that the field will benefit from
the scholarly study of the linguistic and cultural diversity found in New York
City. The program will benefit from both the tremendous ethnic, linguistic, and
cultural diversity of Brooklyn and Queens, in the recruitment of student
participants as well as project participants, and the nine mentors' state-of-
the-art research facilities that include university-based laboratories such as
Long Island University Downtown Brooklyn Speech-Language-Hearing Clinic,
Brooklyn College Linguistics Laboratory, the City University of New York
Graduate Center Developmental Neurolinguistics Laboratory as well as off-campus
sites including the Endangered Language Alliance, Haskins Laboratory and YVY
Research Institute located in a Head Start program that serves 3,000 children
speaking 15 distinct languages. This REU program thus serves two purposes: to
involve undergraduates in research projects that can be expected to contribute
publishable results and novel data sets that will be made available to the field
through open-access websites, while simultaneously encouraging and preparing
minority students to undertake graduate work on diverse languages and cultures.
Overall, this REU site will prepare students to become accomplished researchers
and practitioners in the Speech-Language-Communication Sciences equipped with
the knowledge and skills to work with minority languages and cultures.