* 2025096
* Research Initiation: Graduate Student Mental Health and Stress in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* David Feil-Seifer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Mental health is a key attribute for success in graduate programs. However,
previous studies demonstrate a growing mental health crisis in graduate
education, which can contribute to issues with productivity, departure, and
student well-being. Engineering students are not immune to this crisis, yet are
one of the least likely disciplines to seek help for mental health concerns.
Despite this trend, there is a relative lack of literature available to provide
evidence-based practices for addressing the causes and persistence of mental
health issues for engineering graduate students. To address this need and to
begin the process of advocating for systemic change, this project will explore
how faculty and student attitudes about mental health intersect with the
institutional features that direct action when a mental health crisis arises.
Understanding these facets of mental health in academia is a first step toward
changing the policies and practices that have perpetuated the mental health
crisis in engineering. This project will develop evidence-based practices to
improve student mental health services in graduate engineering programs. The
study will also develop a new engineering education faculty member by fostering
his skills and equipping him to be a contributing member of the engineering
education research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the above
goals, this study will systematically explore how faculty and student attitudes
about mental health intersect with institutional features and shape programmatic
trends. Specifically, the project will answer the following research questions:
(1) What are the institutional and individual features that influence students’
attitudes about mental health? (2) What are the institutional and individual
features that influence faculty attitudes about mental health? (3) What are the
different attitudes about mental health across engineering degree programs? To
answer the three research questions, this work will employ a three-phase multi-
method qualitative study. In Phase 1, engineering graduate students’ and
engineering faculty’s attitudes about mental health will be examined through the
use of Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis. The attitudes of each group
will be examined separately and then each group will be compared to understand
the ways these perceptions intersect and influence action. Leveraging the
experiences of Phase 1, Phase 2 will refine existing interview protocols and
develop a codebook for deductive coding. Phase 3 will utilize the results of
Phases 1 and 2 to phenomenographically examine how graduate student and faculty
attitudes about mental health are influenced across departmental structures and
cultures. The results from each of these phases will highlight the ways
participants’ lived experiences influence their attitudes about and actions
toward mental health and the ways institutional structures create variability in
these attitudes. Findings from all phases will be used to shift institutional
policies and practices that exacerbate the mental health crisis. Specifically,
we will work with university counseling centers and engineering programs to
develop policies and training that are aligned with emergent findings and
existing best practices. Training will be conducted locally and nationally to
propagate models that support engineering graduate student development. The
combined efforts of this work will develop a new engineering education
researcher while shifting cultural defaults to remove barriers, stigmas, and
consequences that surround seeking mental health
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.