* 2025061
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Discovery Enabling Systemic Advancement and Faculty Inclusion Across Ranks (DESAFIAR)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mitch Avila, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,695.00

California State University Channel Islands (CSUCI) will implement an NSF
ADVANCE Catalyst project called DESAFIAR (Discovery Enabling Systemic
Advancement and Faculty Inclusion Across Ranks). CSUCI is well positioned for a
Catalyst grant, due to a strong campus emphasis on increasing inclusivity,
recent changes in critical administrative positions, and an expected 60% growth
in campus size. The latter will lead to adding STEM faculty in numbers that
allow a dramatic change in the STEM faculty composition. The Catalyst work will
enable significant learning about important systemic factors to ensure equitable
experiences for current and newly hired faculty. The project will focus on four
goals: 1) Implement robust data tracking around each stage of faculty
recruitment and hiring practices; 2) Explore perceptions and realities of equity
and transparency in faculty teaching and service loads; 3) Review policies and
practices; 4) Collaboratively develop a 5-year plan to enhance faculty diversity
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five-year STEM faculty equity plan will
incorporate lessons learned from data collection and policy review, a thorough
literature review of ADVANCE and faculty-equity related works, and from
consulting with CSUCI leadership and others in the ADVANCE network through site
visits to ADVANCE awardees and participation in the ARC Networkâ€™s conferences
and webinars. By adapting discovery efforts modeled by different types of
institutions to our context of a midsize regional public institution where over
half of the enrolled students are from groups historically underrepresented in
STEM or are lower-income and first-generation students, we will increase
understanding of how particular equity initiatives generalize across
institutions and institutional types. Lessons learned will be shared to promote
analogous changes at other institutions, thus contributing to the development of
a diverse STEM workforce in academia and in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional equity assessments and the development of
five-year faculty equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit institution
of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.