* 2025091
* Conference on a Pilot Study Design for Air Quality in Africa
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,405.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) supports conferences in areas of science
and engineering that bring experts together to discuss recent research or
education findings or to expose other researchers or students to new research
and education techniques. NSF encourages the convening in the U.S. of
international conferences. The University of Maryland College Park will organize
a workshop to bring together experts from the U.S., Ethiopia, and Europe to
develop a roadmap for future research to advance the fundamental understanding
of the spread of pollutions in highly polluted emerging megacities in Africa,
such as Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. The conference will be held on June 11-13, 2020.
Students and faculty from Historically Black Colleges and Universities and other
Minority Serving Institutions will attend this workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the large uncertainties in emissions and the
potential for atmospheric chemistry and boundary- spanning climate impacts that
are region specific, a focused workshop to identify the science questions unique
to African megacities is critical. Detailed air quality studies in Africa may
reveal novel atmospheric chemistry processes that may not be common in highly
sampled regions in the northern mid latitudes. This new information could have
significant implications for improved chemical mechanisms for air quality models
and could provide guidance for laboratory-scale process studies. The workshop
will identify and report on the observational and modeling requirements for
rigorous experimental design addressing the unique needs from an African
megacity point of view. It will discuss what science goals can be accomplished
from a short-term intensive measurement campaign and discuss requirements for a
long-term data collection effort to quantify primary and secondary emissions
that may assist air quality regulators in Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop is co-funded by the Directorates of Geosciences and Education &amp;
Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.