* 2025814
* FW-HTF-P: Planning for the future of rural telerobotic surgical healthcare
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Stephen Seslar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 149,999.00

This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) Planning Grant
project will contribute new understanding of how geographical and organizational
separation between telerobotic surgical team members affects the use of
telerobotic technology to reduce disparities between rural and urban healthcare
access and outcomes. According to the Center for Disease Control, people who
live in rural areas are more likely than urban residents to die prematurely from
all five of the leading causes of death. With over 46 million Americans living
in rural areas, the scope of this problem is considerable. Census data shows
that the elderly -- who are generally most in need of specialty healthcare --
disproportionately live in rural communities. At the same time, healthcare
workforce studies have demonstrated a critical lack of specialists in rural
healthcare settings. This disparity leads to a lack of timely access to the
life-saving specialty surgeries that are afforded to urban residents.
Telerobotic surgery has the potential to effectively bring the benefits of
skilled specialty operators to rural areas, however the barriers to the
implementation and the testing of novel telerobotic solutions are not well
understood. Recent studies suggest that the impact on the functioning of the
operating room team due to the displacement of the operator during robotic
surgery may outweigh any purely technological factor. This exploration into
rural telerobotic operation will ultimately benefit the US healthcare system as
a whole and could have a profoundly positive impact on patients living in rural
US communities. The multidisciplinary approach employed will ensure that the
voices of all stakeholders will be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
planning project brings together a team of experts in sociology, robotics,
economics, cybersecurity, computer science, and healthcare to carry out
fundamental research into telerobotic surgery using a multidisciplinary
framework. The overarching goals of the project are to build a powerful new
multidisciplinary research team to explore rural telerobotic operations,
identify and prioritize the questions that need to be addressed, refine
hypotheses, and inform future experimental design. To accomplish these goals, we
will use three essential research tools: a stakeholder workshop; technical
ideation and basic prototype development; and mock telerobotic surgical
procedures. The multidisciplinary research group will focus its initial efforts
on understanding the impact of geographic separation of the physician-operator
from the operating room team as it relates to communication, hierarchy, and
trust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.