* 2025151
* NNCI: Virginia Tech National Center for Earth and Environmental Nanotechnology Infrastructure (NanoEarth)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of ultra-small objects
and how to manipulate them, known as nanotechnology, is not only revolutionizing
fields like medicine, personal electronics, and national security, but it is
also deepening our insights into how the Earth works and sustains life. The air
one breathes, the soil in which crops are planted, the metals from minerals that
build industries, and the contaminants that can cause profound harm (from
arsenic to dangerous bacteria and viruses), are all related to and/or influenced
by the vast store of nanomaterials that make up the planet. Despite the
technical challenges inherent to studying these ultra-small nanomaterials, there
is an urgency to understand the roles they play in the health of air, water, and
soil, the sustainability of Earth’s natural resources, and even the transmission
of diseases and toxic agents. The Virginia Tech National Center for Earth and
Environmental Nanotechnology Infrastructure (NanoEarth) will accelerate the
progress that Earth scientists and engineers have made in studying,
understanding, explaining, and utilizing Earth for the well-being of all. Our
facilities and expertise will be shared broadly to help maximize the societal
impacts of user projects and queries into the nanoscale systems that sustain
life on Earth. NanoEarth users are welcomed from across the US and around the
world. Not only do we serve leading scientists and engineers, but we also serve
diverse users from small to large companies, governmental and non-governmental
organizations, and students from K-12, community colleges, liberal arts
colleges, and minority-serving institutions.
(245)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;NanoEarth provides
an NNCI site to specifically support researchers who work with nano
Earth/environmental science and engineering at local, regional, and global
scales, including the terrestrial, atmospheric, hydrological, and biological
components of these fields. The national presence of NanoEarth is significantly
enhanced by a close partnership with the Environmental Molecular Sciences
Laboratory (EMSL) at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). We provide
substantive support and capacity-building for multiple NSF 10 Big Ideas, such as
“Understanding the Rules of Life”, “Growing Convergence Research", and
“Navigating the New Arctic”. We strive for a comprehensive understanding of
nanosystems in complex natural or manmade environments by providing holistic and
interdisciplinary expertise, from hydrogeology to mineralogy to environmental
engineering. Our approach of scaling from a single molecule to entire ecosystems
will provide next-generation models for inspiring engineering innovation in a
broad range of fields, such as electrochemistry, biochemistry, biomechanics, and
biomedical engineering. NanoEarth facilities include a broad array of high-end,
state-of-the-art electron-, ion-, and X-ray-based characterization tools, sample
preparation laboratories, extensive nanomaterials synthesis facilities (in
aqueous, soil/solid media, and atmospheric environments), characterization
tools, experimentation/reactor systems, and meeting and office space for
visitors. NanoEarth also provides broader impact initiatives including
substantial funding for supporting multicultural and underserved populations,
and outreach programs with high school science teachers and rural agricultural
students. The overall contribution of this NNCI site will be to accelerate the
growth of a field that is revolutionizing the understanding of Earth and
environmental sciences and engineering. (246)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.