* 2025178
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Bioenergy Recovery from Wastewater in an Integrated Microbial-Algal Photobioelectrochemical System
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2020
* Zhen He, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2020
* USD 70,338.00

Municipal wastewater treatment processes consume significant amounts of energy.
However, the organic materials fed into the waste treatment process offer the
potential for energy-positive waste water treatment if this waste organic
material can be converted into energy. A microbial fuel cell is a device that
contains special strains of bacteria which consume organic matter in waste water
as a fuel to generate electricity and help clean up the water. Although
microbial fuel cells have shown promise for sustainable and energy- positive
waste water treatment, their performance is low. An unconventional way to
improve their performance is to integrate the microbial fuel cell device into a
cultivation chamber which grows algae from sunlight. The project will
investigate the synergistic aspects the combined algal-microbial fuel cell for
its potential to boost electricity production, reduce operating costs by
eliminating the external aeration requirement, and remove inorganic as well as
organic materials from waste water. The educational activities associated with
this project make use of microbial fuel cell demonstrations to stimulate
interest in environmental engineering and waste water treatment topics with
undergraduate students, K12 students and teachers, and the public.

The overall goal of the research is to study the potentially synergistic
interactions of a microbial fuel cell integrated into an algal bioreactor as a
new platform for energy-positive waste water treatment. In this combined system,
the algae generate oxygen which is needed by the microbial fuel cell electrode
to drive aerobic micro-bioelectrochemical processes, whereas this same process
generates carbon dioxide needed by the algae. This in situ source of oxygen has
the potential to intensify electricity generation and eliminate the aeration
requirement. The algae can also remove inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus to help
further treat the waste water. The research has four objectives. The first
objective is to construct a nutrient budget model based on fundamental
understanding of the transformation of inorganic and organic nutrient forms
within the algal-microbial fuel cell. The second objective is to examine how
different algal species affect the stability of bacteria within the microbial
fuel cell electrode and the algal biomass productivity. Towards this end,
metagenome analysis will be used to identify metabolic functions related to
different taxa which are critical to process performance. The third objective is
to quantify treatment of organic materials within the algal-microbial fuel cell
using mixotrophic algae. The fourth objective is to conduct system development
and optimization with different configurations, including scalable systems.
Through these objectives, this research seeks to gain a fundamental
understanding of critical algae-bacteria interactions during nutrient uptake and
electricity generation, and will also reveal the pathways of carbon, nitrogen,
and phosphorous transformation via physical, chemical, and metabolic processes.