* 2025923
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering the Multiscale Determinants of Atypical Femoral Fracture using MRI and CT-Based Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ani Ural, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,784.00

This award supports fundamental research to uncover the factors that contribute
to atypical femoral fracture. Atypical femoral fracture is a rare side effect of
long-term use of some drugs to treat osteoporosis. Osteoporosis, or a decrease
in bone strength, is responsible for over two million bone fractures annually in
the United States. This increases mortality and decreases quality-of-life. This
project will make a computer model of atypical femoral fracture, based on images
from real patients. It will then be used to study how the effects of bone
geometry and material properties (for example, how hard or soft a bone is)
combine to determine fracture risk. This new understanding of atypical femoral
fracture made possible by this project will ultimately improve the ability to
identify those at risk and may also enable new drug discovery to avoid all types
of bone fracture. These longer-term outcomes will result in improved quality of
life for patients and reduced health care costs. This project will also include
activities to improve long term faculty diversity in science and engineering
through outreach to groups underrepresented in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently neither a systematic experimental or
computational study that has identified which factors are the most important
determinants of atypical femoral fracture, nor a suitable computational model
for assessing such types of fracture. Thus, the overall goal of this project is
to identify the fundamental mechanisms that lead to atypical femoral fracture
using a novel, multimodal, image-based, and multiscale computational bone model.
The project will develop and validate multiscale whole femur computational
models based on magnetic resonance imaging and high resolution micro-computed
tomography. This new model will be used to determine the individual and coupled
effects of macro- and microscale properties on atypical femoral fracture, as
well as the critical levels of these factors that would lead to atypical femoral
fracture. As a result, this novel computational modeling approach will provide
unique information on the most important determinants of atypical femoral
fracture that cannot be directly identified by
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.