* 2025158
* NNCI: Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* William Wilson, Harvard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS) at
Harvard University was created with a clear vision to provide a collaborative
multi-disciplinary research environment to support world-class nanoscience and
technical expertise, for the community of researchers from academia and
industry. The goals of CNS are: Facilitating leading-edge research and education
in the fabrication, imaging, and characterization of nanoscale structures across
the disciplines of applied physics, biology, chemistry, electrical engineering,
geology, materials science, medicine and physics; Creating a collabortive
nanotechnology community by providing shared instrumentation facilities and
infrastructure, expert staff, synergistic meeting places, and educational
opportunities conducive to productive scientific engagement. As the New England
hub of the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), the
focus of the technical team is to develop specialized tools, processes,
instrumentation, and expertise to help design, characterize, and fabricate novel
materials, nanostructures, devices, and systems, that go beyond conventional
approaches. CNS pushes the envelope of Quantum Science and Engineering. CNS
offers tools for nanofabrication, electron microscopy, and characterization of
nanoscale systems, with technical expertise and assistance provided by its
staff. CNS is one of the most active nanofabrication and imaging facilities in
the world. With its diverse user base, well-established infrastructure, and
outstanding facilities, CNS is well placed to continue as a technology leader.
In addition, CNS plays a key role training the nation's next generation of
scientists and engineers. It has an established Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program, as well as an annual summer nanotechnology seminar
series. A CNS Scholars Program will bring in underrepresented researchers, and
an internship program will train U.S. veterans in nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Since its creation in
2001, CNS has become a key nanotechnology resource for the nation. CNS has
developed diverse and versatile facilities including multi-length-scale optical
and electron-beam lithography, focused ion beam (FIB) and reactive ion etch
(RIE) systems to shape structures quantum devices and photonic structures, and
soft lithography expertise to enable fabrication of a wide variety of
microfluidic systems and devices for translational bioscience. These tools allow
users to push the frontiers of quantum engineering, nanoscale electronics and
photonics using nontraditional materials, and they enable the development of
sensor systems for biomedicine. CNS researchers pursue advanced topics including
quantum science, plasmonics, diamond photonics, nanoscale sensors, and atomic-
layer devices. CNS has an outstanding suite of imaging and characterization
tools including an aberration-corrected STEM, a high resolution TEM, a CryoTEM,
and an Atom Probe for 3D tomography, as well as scanned probe microscopes, and
linear and non-linear optical microscopes. Its characterization tools permit
detailed analysis and assessment of materials, components, and systems,
providing researchers with a comprehensive platform for quantum technology and
nanotechnology research. CNS focuses on advancing world-class nanotechnology
research, fostering the transfer of new technologies into products for
commercial and public benefit, developing and sustaining educational resources
to develop a skilled nanotechnology workforce, and supporting the evolving
infrastructure and advanced tools needed to support excellence in quantum
science and nanotechnology research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.