* 2025215
* Workshop on the proposed Network of Mountain Observatories for Composition of the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Sara Lance, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 29,886.00

The Workshop on the proposed Network of Mountain Observatories for Composition
of the Atmosphere (MOCA) will bring together atmospheric scientists to develop a
long-term plan for coordinating research efforts at multiple high-elevation
sites within the continental U.S. Atmospheric measurements at high altitudes are
sparse, and continuous sampling at mountain research observatories provides
access to critical information about long-term changes in regional background
atmospheric composition, as well as seasonal and diurnal processes and extreme
episodes (e.g. wildfires, radionuclide releases, volcanic ash, dust storms, and
stratospheric intrusions). The proposed network spans across different climatic
zones and ecosystems in the U.S. and includes four internationally recognized
atmospheric research observatories, which have been in operation for decades and
are well-positioned to observe both atmospheric flow to the continental U.S.
from the west and atmospheric flow to the east. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
goals of the workshop will be to: (1) further develop and refine the research
objectives within each of the proposed science themes (reactive trace gases,
greenhouse gases, aerosols and radiation, and clouds and precipitation); (2)
identify critical measurements needed to meet these research objectives; (3)
identify strategies to leverage measurements within different science themes to
address additional research objectives or to better address existing research
objectives; (4) identify research objectives that would especially benefit from
a common set of measurements across sites; (5) develop metrics to prioritize
research objectives; (6) evaluate the measurement infrastructure and data
management needs for each site to be incorporated into the Global Atmospheric
Watch (GAW) network as a global station; (7) encourage critical discussion about
how best to implement and manage such a broad range of research objectives
across multiple sites, including a data management plan; (8) develop a timeline
for each research objective, following initial instrument integration at each
site; (9) identify opportunities for meaningful and productive collaboration
with other agencies and local/regional stakeholders; and (10) identify
strategies for sustaining long-term, well-calibrated measurements at each site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conclusions from the workshop will be disseminated through
a workshop summary publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.