* 2025676
* 2020 NSF CISE-SBE Workshop on Harnessing the Computational and Social Sciences to Solve Critical Societal Problems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Frankie King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,998.00

This award funds the 2020 NSF CISE-SBE Workshop on Harnessing the Computational
and Social Sciences to Solve Critical Societal Problems. This invitation-only
three-day meeting will be to be jointly convened by the National Science
Foundation Directorates for Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE) and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE). It is increasingly
apparent that many of the systems on which our society depends for its health,
prosperity, and security are neither purely social nor purely technical ones.
Rather, they are socio-technical systems. For example workplace relationships,
media markets, health delivery systems, and criminal justice organizations are
all increasingly characterized by a complex mixture of human actors and
institutions on the one hand, and digital platforms and algorithms on the other
hand. Efforts to design, manage, audit, and ultimately improve these systems to
the benefit of society therefore lie at the intersection of the computational
sciences and the social-behavioral sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will bring together experts from nationally recognized institutions comprising a
diverse range of stakeholders and perspectives drawn from academia, industry,
government, and philanthropy to discuss three core themes at the intersection of
the computational and social-behavioral sciences. This intersection has been an
area of increasing research interest and innovation in recent years, generating
new conferences, funding opportunities, and jobs, both in academia and industry.
In order to generate practical solutions to real-world socio-technical problems,
however, a number of challenges must be overcome that will require new streams
of funding and also new models of collaboration, between the computational and
social-behavioral sciences, and also among academia, government and industry.
The workshop is organized around three core substantive themes, each of which
corresponds to a contemporary societal concern of widespread interest:
increasing opportunity for all Americans, while reducing harmful disparities;
improving the trustworthiness of the information ecosystem; and empowering the
skilled technical workforce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to sketching out a
research agenda for each of these substantive areas, the workshop would also
focus attention on four cross-cutting challenges: building large-scale, shared
data infrastructures for research purposes; partnering with industry around
problems of shared interest; fostering collaborations between CISE and SBE
researcher; and developing training and educational
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.