* 2025202
* The Lowell Observatory Native American Astronomy Outreach Program: Completing the Kayenta Unified School District collaboration
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Deidre Hunter, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 11/30/2023
* USD 229,977.00

The project will fund the final year of a partnership in collaboration with
4th-8th grade teachers in the Kayenta Unified School District (KUSD), located in
the Navajo Nation of northern Arizona, as part of the Lowell Observatory Navajo-
Hopi Astronomy Outreach Program (NAAOP)in the 2020-2021 school year. Teachers
are paired with an astronomer/educator from Lowell Observatory who regularly
visits the observatory. Star parties are held in partnership with tribal
educators who present traditional knowledge, and students visit Lowell
Observatory as a culminating experience. In the spring of 2021, the NAAOP and
the veteran KUSD teachers will hold a Navajo Nation-wide teacher workshop in
order to share the curriculum and perspectives on cultural connections with
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop, test, and revise an
astronomy-centered curriculum unit for each of the 4th-8th grade levels. The
curriculum uses Project Based Learning, and is aligned to Arizona, Common Core,
Next Generation Science, and Navajo tribal standards. Students are kept together
as a cohort over the course of the three-year collaboration, and their interest
in STEM and STEM careers is assessed annually through student surveys. Results
will be tallied at the end of the project and shared with stakeholders and the
education and outreach communities through journals. The results of the teacher
workshop will also be shared with the teaching and outreach communities, and the
curriculum will be put online in a teacher-friendly package that can be
downloaded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.