* 2025125
* Acquisition of a continuous flow isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) system for the Organic Geochemistry Core Facility at Brown University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 387,476.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program award
supports acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) system for
climate, environmental, and biogeochemical research at Brown University. The new
system will be a critical tool for ongoing and planned research projects of four
principal investigators at Brown with demonstrated records of NSF funding, and
an incoming new faculty member, as well as for educational and outreach
activities. The instrument will be managed and maintained as part of Brownâ€™s
Organic Geochemistry Core Facility so that it can serve a large number of
domestic and international students, visitors, and collaborators. Investigators
and technicians have a successful record of operating and maintaining several
mass spectrometer systems in the past 20 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRMS
would be configured for continuous flow (CF) isotope ratio measurement of
individual organic molecules that have been selected via gas chromatography
prior to inlet to the IRMS. Compound-specific isotope analysis (CSIA) using CF-
IRMS is central to deciphering archives of climate, environmental and ecosystem
change, gaining new insights to biogeochemical cycles, and fostering inter-
disciplinary collaborations. CSIA can be used to better infer paleoenvironmental
conditions such as the dominant plant types extant in the past or the structure
of food webs in natural ecosystems. Prior to the development and use of CSIA,
bulk isotopic measurement of organic matter made up of a complicated mixture of
molecules produced by different organisms confounded interpretation of targeted
paleoenvironmental processes and conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.