* 2025217
* MTM 1: Experimental framework for marine fish microbiomes through synthetic communities and multi-omic approaches
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Eric Allen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2023
* USD 498,850.00

Fish are recognized as a major global food resource, key ecological components
of aquatic ecosystems, and have been valuable laboratory model organisms to
study vertebrate biology. Like all animals, fish harbor rich communities of
symbiotic microorganisms both upon their external body surfaces, such as the
skin, and internally, such as the gut. These microbial populations play
important roles in the health and fitness of their hosts by providing protection
against invading pathogens, regulating immune functions, and the breakdown of
environmental and dietary compounds. This project investigates the microbiota
associated with two common marine fish species with contrasting feeding
ecologies, the carnivorous Pacific chub mackerel and the herbivorous opaleye.
Robust cultivation systems will be developed to propagate fish-associated
microbes in the laboratory and analyzed using high-throughput DNA sequencing and
small molecule detection methods. The data will be incorporated into a
computational model to analyze and predict microbiome interactions. Thus, this
research will provide an experimental framework to understand microbial
contributions to fish biology and reveal the intricate interactions between
microbes within the fish gut microbial ecosystem. This work has broad
significance for understanding microbial activities that promote the diversity
and ecology of marine fishes and can inform sustainable aquaculture practices by
manipulating the fish microbiome to improve fish health and aquaculture yield.
Additional benefits to society include the training of undergraduate and
graduate students and the development of STEM education modules that explore the
ocean microbiome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbiota associated
with marine fish represent an uncharted source of novel catabolic and
biosynthetic pathways that impact the physiology and ecology of their hosts.
This project will pioneer the development of robust in vitro bioreactor
cultivation systems to replicate and propagate marine fish gut microbiota in the
laboratory to assess and experimentally manipulate metabolic outputs of the fish
microbiome. Classical and high-throughput cultivation methods will also be used
to obtain isolates representing different fish gut microbiome functional guilds
from natural samples and in vitro bioreactors. These isolates will be assembled
into reproducible and experimentally tractable synthetic communities to study
emergent properties of community organization and microbe-microbe interactions.
Multi-omic data sets (metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and untargeted
metabolomics) will be integrated using computational modeling approaches (neural
network statistical methods) to discover linkages between key microbial taxa,
their enzyme diversity, metabolite production, and biotransformations within the
high-fidelity bioreactor systems. The project will deliver new perspectives on
microbiome dynamics in aquatic animals, setting the foundation for future
microbiome-host studies and novel resources for microbial
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Understanding the
Rules of Life: Microbiome Theory and Mechanisms Program, administered as part of
NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences. Co-funding is provided by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.