* 2025250
* Collaborative Research: MTM 2: Using successional dynamics, biogeography, and experimental communities to examine mechanisms of plant-microbiome functional interactions
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Leonora Bittleston, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2024
* USD 441,649.00

Microbial communities (microbiomes) play important roles in animals, plants, and
even whole ecosystems. However, microbiomes are constantly changing through time
and space. These changes can have big impacts on the health of animal or plant
hosts and the functioning of entire ecosystems. For this reason, uncovering
rules that govern how microbiomes change across time and space is essential for
understanding how they affect their hosts and ecosystems. This project builds on
previous understanding of different strategies used by microbes to survive and
compete for resources and applies it to studying the ecosystem that forms in the
‘pitchers’ of the carnivorous pitcher plant, Sarracenia purpurea. Through a
combination of experiments and modeling, the microbiome will be studied to
determine how microbial community functions change over time, how the host plant
influences microbiome formation, and how the microbiome affects the host plant.
The results will be compared with other aquatic, plant- and soil-associated
microbiomes, to understand how S. purpurea pitchers can be relevant models for
understanding roles of microbiomes in larger ecosystems. The project will train
the next generation of scientists in interdisciplinary skills. The researchers
will involve undergraduate and graduate students including those who are under-
represented in STEM research, train students in coding to develop a Sarracenia
microbiome website for public education, develop K-12 educational modules, and
present interactive public lectures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project employs
interdisciplinary approaches including molecular genetics, biochemistry,
ecological modeling, multivariate statistics, and biogeography to characterize
microbiome succession, functions and host interactions. It builds from the
Yield-Acquisition-Stress (Y-A-S) predictive framework, which characterizes
microbial life history strategies based on functional traits related to cell
growth yield (Y), resource acquisition (A) and stress tolerance (S), with the
microbiomes changing proportions of these strategies over time. The Y-A-S
framework has yet to be applied to microbiome succession or functions important
for host and ecosystem health. The project will determine dynamics of functional
succession across climatic gradients using field-sampling of natural communities
over broad biogeographical scales, test how host factors influence microbiome
succession using experimental manipulations of natural pitcher communities, and
examine microbiome effects on host fitness using experimental bacterial
communities. A cutting-edge approach with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and
Random Forest models will be used to identify Y-A-S life strategies based on a
trait matrix derived from metagenomes, RNA transcripts, and measured biochemical
nutrient transformation functions. A meta-analysis will compare succession and
function of other plant- and soil-associated microbial communities to explore
the generality of rules for microbiomes across
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.