* 2025989
* INFEWS: U.S.-China: Food-Energy-Water Feedback Mechanism, Integrated Modeling and Coordinated Management:  A Comparative Study of China Jing-Jin-Ji Region and US Central Valley CA
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2025
* George Van Houtven, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This research project will use modeling techniques that integrate agricultural
land use, energy generation, and hydrologic systems to predict future food-
energy-water (FEW) relationships. With the Central Valley, California (United
States) and the Jing-Jin-Ji region (China) as case studies, a harmonized
scenario-analysis approach will be developed to evaluate potential synergies and
trade-offs of infrastructure development and policy priorities. Results from
policy simulations will inform potential solutions to future resource
limitations. In the U.S. case-study region, modeling will inform policy
discussions by offering a more detailed depiction of land-use systems in the
Central Valley, while accounting for the economic opportunity costs of
agricultural land displacement under new policies and renewable energy-siting
considerations. Additional simulation analysis will test alternative solutions
to challenges in each region, including groundwater storage set-asides, new
water trading schemes to assess whether these solutions are resilient to future
socioeconomic, policy, and environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
previous nexus studies have incorporated land use considerations for
representing agricultural production possibilities, the dynamic feedback between
large-scale renewable energy expansion, agricultural land resource management,
and water resource demands under alternative future climate conditions needs
further exploration as planned for this project. Furthermore, this research will
explicitly inform updates to the publicly available California Value Integrated
Network (CALVIN) hydro-economic modeling infrastructure for the Central Valley
region by offering new perspective potential land use trajectories in the region
under agricultural water demands that might evolve over time with renewable
energy infrastructure investments and groundwater management dynamics.
Harmonized scenario analysis in collaboration with the Chinese research team
will provide a comparative assessment of nexus challenges and solutions under
changing socioeconomic, policy, and environmental conditions. The research team
will offer insight into how institutional constraints on the FEW nexus can
impact optimal resource allocation and potential solutions that could improve
sustainability outcomes in the FEW nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.