* 2025679
* SBIR Phase I:  Research and Development for the A-Pod HAB Trap and Removal Process
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Higgins, HIGGINS ENVIRONMENTAL ASSOCIATES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 254,504.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (Phase I) project
is to reduce human and environmental health risks posed by Harmful Algae Bloom
(HABs) impacts to water resources. Communities across the nation allocate
substantial financial resources to address HABs in their water bodies as HABs
can be extremely toxic. However, this ecological problem can be treated as an
eco-mining opportunity because HABs are tiny eco-miners that scour, collect, and
concentrate excess nutrients in water bodies. The proposed technology is an eco-
sensitive mining technology designed to harvest, trap, and permanently remove
these HABs, their toxins, and the often ore-grade concentration of nutrients
they contain. This project will advance a technology to permanently and
sustainably removing the HABs, their toxins and the excess nutrients they
contain. As a fully scalable and rapidly deployable, cost-effective technology,
it will rapidly resolve HAB impairments and related health
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project is to
target HABs, trap them through mechanical filtration, separate them through
flotation, and monitor and test the effluent water for toxins. The proposed
research is focused on development of remote and automatic operation
capabilities to further minimize potential contact with HABs. The process can be
deployed in less than one day to surround and control small or very large areas
of HABs, does not require a land-based treatment area, and does not need
electricity or high capacity pumping systems to work. It can trap and remove
HABs actively or passively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.