* 2025305
* Biochemical Implications of the Transfer of a Structural Gene between DNA and RNA Viruses.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Stedman, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The recently-discovered Cruciviruses are viruses that appear to have evolved by
unexpected gene swapping between DNA and RNA viruses. This project will
investigate this gene swapping by examining how a RNA virus coat protein can
encapsidate DNA instead. The project will provide a platform for career
development for young scientists, in particular those from underrepresented
groups. Furthermore, results from this project will be integrated into outreach
to the general public. This research will shed light onto virus origins and how
viruses evolve and has potential impacts for
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the
characterization of capsids of cruciviruses and related RNA viruses, using
standard molecular techniques and electron microscopy to detect differences in
encapsidation of DNA versus RNA. While the capsid of cruciviruses and closely
related RNA viruses could have the ability to package both DNA and RNA, further
adaptations may have occurred to optimize the packaging of one nucleic acid type
versus the other. The study of the biochemical properties of the capsid of
cruciviruses will expand our knowledge on the phenotypic plasticity of virus
encapsidation, reveal possible packaging determinants for DNA versus RNA, and
provide insight into the evolutionary history of cruciviruses. Moreover, this
research will provide proof-of-principle data for the elucidation of the
enigmatic crucivirus host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.