* 2025832
* RoL:NSF-BSF: (Dia)pausing aging. The role of vitamin D synthesis and signaling in the control of development, aging, and pace of life
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jason Podrabsky, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,151,260.00

The typical lifespan of all species is determined by both genetic and
environmental factors, with genetic factors being of primary importance.
Lifespan is often divided into and studied as discrete periods such as embryonic
development, puberty, or senescence, although these phases are all part of a
continuous process that is likely controlled and regulated by the same genes.
Pace of life refers to the speed with which organisms move through these
developmental phases, and there is a general correlation between metabolic rate,
pace of life, and lifespan; high metabolic rates typically lead to faster pace
of life and shorter lifespans. This basic relationship is illustrated in the
classic story of the tortoise (slow, low metabolism, long-lived) and the hare
(fast, high metabolism, short-lived). There are a shared group of genes in all
animals that are known to participate in embryonic development, determination of
metabolic rate, and affect the process of senescence (aging). One important gap
in our knowledge of pace of life and aging is the mechanisms by which these
shared genes are regulated differently to generate a “fast” or “slow” pace of
life. This work capitalizes on the unique biology of annual killifishes to study
how extremes in pace of life are regulated during different phases of the
lifespan, but within a single species. These small fish can put life “on hold”
for months or even years by entering into a profound state of dormancy during
development. However, once they become adults, they age very rapidly and die
within a few months. The goal of this work is to understand the role of vitamin
D in regulating rate of development and aging in all animals using annual
killifishes as a model. This project engages students in cutting-edge gene
editing techniques, provides training in science education to help directly
inform the public, and supports international collaboration in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores vitamin D3 signaling by
using CRISPR/Cas9 technology to knockout the vitamin D3 1-a hydroxylase
(cyp27b1) enzyme; the enzyme responsible for production of the active form of
the vitamin that activates the vitamin D receptor (VDR). These genetically-
modified animals will allow us to determine how the VDR, a nuclear receptor with
broad actions and multiple protein partners, can mitigate complex phenotypes
across the life span of an individual. This work will explore how the VDR may
alter the epigenetic landscape of the genome through partnering with various
chromatin modifying enzymes. Importantly, this work has the potential to
transform our understanding of how environmental cues may be integrated into
vertebrate developmental programs to determine complex phenotypes like diapause
and aging. Finally, because the work focuses on two independent origins of this
fascinating and complex life history, the work will provide an opportunity to
explore mechanisms of convergent evolution and to identify how the promiscuous
nature of nuclear receptors such as the VDR can be used to generate complex
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant was cofunded by the Integrative
Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems,
the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, and The Rules of Life in the Division of Emerging
Frontiers in Directorate for Biological Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.