* 2025990
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Global Financial Market Practices in Urban Resilience Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Stephen Collier, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 18,000.00

This project investigates how changing financial market practices associated
with environmental variability risks impact cities and those who live in them.
The research will make significant contributions to an understanding of the
financial drivers that shape how cities respond to a changing environment. The
work will enhance knowledge of the impact of unaffordable flood insurance,
property devaluation, and governmental management in cities impacted by these
increased environmental risks. Understanding the impact of these changing
practices on urban life is critical for creating equitable and effective urban
governance. Findings from this project will be disseminated in open-access
articles for public use and the project will support the training of doctoral
student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses an integration of expert
interviews, ethnographic observation, and documentary analysis to examine the
role of changing financial market practices in urban resilience planning. The
research will be conducted in coastal cities that are already experiencing the
effects of a changing environment and that have put into place resilience bonds.
Specific research questions that the investigators will answer include: (1) What
kind of problem(s) does environmental variability pose to key financial market
actors, and how do they address these problems in their practices?; (2) How do
these practices inform governmental action on resilience?; and (3) How might
market-driven action impact residentsâ€™ ability to make financial claims in the
future? This project offers a novel perspective on two increasingly pervasive
contemporary problems that face societies around the world: how to finance urban
resilience, and how changing risk rating practices create urban inequalities and
uneven social and environmental outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.