* 2025906
* SBIR Phase II:  Early Detection of Anomalies in Large-Scale Gas Networks
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Krishna Karambakkam, EigenPatterns Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2022
* USD 999,855.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce the incidence of natural gas
pipeline failures across the country within the next 3 to 5 years. Every year
there are a few hundred 'significant' pipeline accidents (fatalities or
significant property damage) causing massive damage to life and property,
dispersing hazardous materials and disrupting gas delivery services. Such events
can have severe consequences for a utility including bankruptcy, billions of
dollars in liabilities, civil/criminal penalties and higher insurance premiums.
This proposed scalable and economical capability to proactively identify
potential issues prior to catastrophic failure will significantly reduce the
likelihood of such failures without requiring additional infrastructure. The
project will also help prevent unauthorized third-party activity near pipelines,
a leading cause of accidents. The methods developed in this project can be
directly applied to improve detection accuracy in other contexts such as power-
grids, computer cluster management and financial fraud
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to detect
anomalies in large-scale gas-utility networks through statistical inference from
continuously observed time-series data on pressure, temperature, and network
characteristics. Anomalies within gas-utility networks occur for various
reasons, such as sulphur or ice buildup, regulator malfunction, corrosion/aging
of hardware, and human error. Such failures are often preceded by detectable
signatures in the time-series of gas-pressure data. Early detection of such
signatures with significant advance warning (90 minutes or more) allows
corrective action that will avoid loss of life, property damage and service
disruption. This project proposes new methods for the rapid estimation of short
and medium timescale models of gas pressure behavior from real-time pipeline
data, along with methods for constructing prediction bands through Monte Carlo
and stochastic optimization techniques. Such methods are non-generic and their
success relies crucially on exploiting specific structural properties unique to
network-level gas-pressure time series. The proposed stochastic optimization
techniques will probabilistically classify identified anomalies into failure
type, allowing the prioritizing of network level emergency operations. The
project will also develop scalable automated high-dimensional classification
models to detect construction activity from satellite and other image data, to
initiate preventive action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.