* 2025608
* NNCI: Mid-Atlantic Nanotechnology Hub (MANTH)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,150,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology, the application of the
science of the very small, is revolutionizing our lives - a few examples include
faster electronics, smaller biomedical implants, better batteries, materials
with high strength or self-cleaning abilities, and small machines that can sense
our physical world. Nanotechnology development often requires access to a large
and highly specialized fabrication and characterization infrastructure as well
as the related scientific expertise. The Mid-Atlantic Nanotechnology Hub (MANTH)
is a partnership between the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) and the Community
College of Philadelphia (CCP) that provides not only research and development
infrastructure access, but also educational outreach opportunities in
nanotechnology. Research and development access is provided through Penn’s Singh
Center for Nanotechnology, located in highly accessible Philadelphia - a short
drive from over one hundred academic institutions and the industry-rich mid-
Atlantic region, walking distance from a busy Amtrak rail station, and eight
miles from a major air hub. MANTH also introduces our regional community to
nanotechnology through extensive education and outreach programs that engage
pre-college students (including reverse field trips and on-site programs),
associates degree students (including internship opportunities and curriculum
development with CCP), undergraduate students (including a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates program), and graduate students. MANTH operates translational
seed grant programs to allow new ideas to be advanced to prototypes that can
spark new nanotechnology companies. By welcoming researchers into MANTH, as well
as educating and informing our community, we catalyze research and innovation
advances in nanotechnology in our region and throughout the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Mid-Atlantic
Nanotechnology Hub (MANTH) of NNCI is a research infrastructure and workforce
development partnership between the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) and the
Community College of Philadelphia (CCP). MANTH provides open access to leading-
edge R&amp;D facilities and expertise for researchers conducting activities
within all disciplines of nanoscale science, engineering, and technology.
MANTH’s workforce development programs provide nano-relevant education and
training opportunities at multiple levels – from high school, through associate’
degrees (with CCP), to undergraduate and graduate studies. MANTH serves nearly
700 users, with over 40% of these users currently external to Penn. It is a
MANTH priority to engage with the region to ensure that a diverse set of
historically underrepresented researchers and research areas, as well as
educators of these current and future researchers, are included in our
nanotechnology activities. We hold pre-college events for exposure to STEM and
nanotechnology, and in-house training opportunities for local colleges and
universities, including historically STEM-underrepresented colleges. We reach
out to underserved schools (both students and teachers) in the Philadelphia
region both through our Nano Day activities, as well as through individual
events. We visit local elementary schools on ‘reverse field trips’ to discuss
nanotechnology. We facilitate the path from research to product by providing
seed grant access to our facility to allow innovative new ideas to be
prototyped, together with other support for local small businesses. By acting as
a catalyst for growth of nanotechnology in this region, we realize our goal to
further nano literacy on all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.