* 2025718
* SBIR Phase I:  Masking Agents to Promote Ingestion of Organic Pest Ant Bait
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Satya Chinta, Foresight Science & Technology Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 210,876.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the development of an environmentally neutral
product for control of red imported fire ants (RIFA), aggressive pests that
occur in high densities and are specialists of urban, rural, and agricultural
habitats, particularly in southern states. The RIFA affects many economic
sectors and cause billions of dollars in damage and control costs annually.
Their large numbers and potent sting disrupt the quality of life for millions of
Americans and 5-10% of these may develop hypersensitivity to their venom,
creating significant medical costs. The RIFA reproductive system lead to rapid
re-infestation of treated areas; therefore, continuous use of control measures
is required, with associated environmental risk. This project will enable
commercialization of a new bait that is environmentally neutral and cost
competitive. It will be the first new active ingredient for RIFA control in 20
years. Our novel application of masking agents for RIFA control is expected to
have a general impact on the discovery of new pest control active ingredients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will advance the translation of
novel active ingredients for effective RIFA pest mitigation. Prior testing has
indicated that additives are needed for this type of pesticide. This project
will test additives and optimize formulations for field use of the new
ingredients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.