* 2025299
* SBIR Phase II:  Next-Generation Capillary Electrophoresis with Mass Spectrometry for Biopharmaceutical and Biomedical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Oluwatosin Dada, GMJ TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,195,701.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be the development of a new instrument for biological research,
biomedical research, and biopharmaceutical drug development. Capillary
electrophoresis (CE) is a powerful technology with great potential for
bioanalysis. It was the workhorse tool for the completion of human genome
project that contributed to the DNA sequencing revolution. The technology will
offer benefits to biopharmaceutical drug development companies by increasing the
efficiency of product characterization for quality improvement. This new system
could lead to breakthroughs in drug development, early diagnosis, and treatments
for deadly human diseases such as cancer, diabetes, and neurodegenerative
disorders. The technology may be of value not only in biopharmaceutical and
biochemical research markets but also in food, clinical, and environmental
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a next-generation
capillary electrophoresis with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (CE-
ESI-MS) for protein characterization. CE-ESI-MS allows efficient separation and
characterization of several biochemical species, including proteins. The CE-ESI-
MS technology will be developed for ease of use. It will use a novel fluidic
nanoport for sample and buffer manipulation to allow analysis from 1 microliter
or less volume for small samples. In addition, the instrument will utilize a
novel electrospray ionization interface with integrated optical detection.
Combining CE's ultrahigh efficiency with robust quantitative characteristics of
optical detection and the molecular identification of mass spectrometry will be
a powerful tool for bioanalysis. This combination may represent a significant
advancement over the state-of-the-art and enhance the means of interrogating
proteins and their biochemical functions in biological samples. With simple
automated design and ease of use, the technology may significantly enhance the
robustness and capabilities of CE-ESI-MS for fast, efficient, and deep
bioanalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.