* 2025249
* Mechanistic Understanding and Control over Electrokinetic Assembly and Separation of Colloids in pH Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Taylor Woehl, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 358,103.00

Separating micron-sized particles in liquids is an important operation in many
chemical processes. The separation of particles based on differences in
composition or surface properties is especially challenging because it cannot be
achieved with conventional filter-based methods. Nevertheless, these separations
are important in many environmental and industrial applications, including
particle removal from wastewater, assessing levels of microplastics in
waterways, and cell assays using whole blood. Electric fields represent a
promising solution for separating colloids because they allow spatial control
over particles in large- and small-scale devices and are energy efficient. This
research project investigates the concurrent use of electric fields and pH
gradients to manipulate micron scale colloidal particles and to control their
assembly and separation. Interactions between the colloid surface chemistry, the
pH gradient, and the electric field lead to a dynamic surface charge on the
colloids as they move through the pH gradient. This dynamic property results in
a wide range of new phenomena such as particle levitation, separation of
colloids based on size, density, and surface chemistry, and formation of bilayer
colloidal films. The project researchers will conduct experiments to determine
how particle composition, size, shape, and surface chemistry affect the behavior
of colloidal particles in electric fields and pH gradients. The research team
will host high school students for 9-month research internships. The group also
will develop and administer laboratory modules demonstrating colloid and
interfacial science phenomena to middle school students at a summer STEM camp at
the University of Maryland. Aspects from the research project will be integrated
into a graduate-level course on colloid and interfacial
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to measure the phoretic
and advective motion of micron-scale colloids in pH gradients and low frequency
(&lt; 1 kHz) oscillatory electric fields and to establish the underlying
electrokinetic forces. Microscopic pH gradients will be generated
electrochemically near the electrode surface by redox reactions of electroactive
quinone molecules, which consume or generate protons at the electrode-
electrolyte interface. The behavior of the colloids in a parallel plate
electrochemical cell will be observed with optical and confocal microscopy. The
colloids will experience various competitive and synergistic phoretic and
advective forces, including electrophoresis, electroosmosis, electrohydrodynamic
fluid flow, and sedimentation, which together will determine the assembly state
and levitation height of colloids above the electrode surface. A scaling model
for the electrokinetic forces acting on the colloids will reveal that dynamic
colloid surface charge and dipole field interact synergistically to control
particle assembly state and to levitate colloids to a unique position above the
electrode that depends on the particle and electric field properties. These
phenomena will be exploited to demonstrate that mixtures of similarly sized
particles with different shapes and different surface chemistries can be
separated and assembled into bilayer colloidal
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.