* 2025951
* SBIR Phase I:  A Cloud-based, AI-enabled ECG Analysis Platform for More Efficient Arrhythmia Detection
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Peng Zhang, ZBEATS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2021
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is help cardiologists with new tools for
electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring, classifying heartbeats and detecting
irregular rhythms. This project will develop a system that uses machine learning
to monitor heart condition and enable advanced, accurate detection of potential
problems, saving lives and reducing health care costs. It will leverage novel
algorithms and effective interactive tools to improve
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will develop machine learning algorithms and annotation tools to
automate ECG analysis. Two machine learning (ML) algorithms will be developed.
The first ML method will consist of two stages: 1) process single cardiac beat
classification; and 2) cluster them into ECG waveform templates to detect and
classify arrhythmia. Three tools will be developed for further disambiguation.
Technical tasks include: (a) test the accuracy of the ML algorithms per
ANSI/AAMI EC57:2012; (b) evaluate the effectiveness of interactive tools with
clinical advisors and potential users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.