* 2025046
* BCSER  Optimal Timing of Introductory Biology I: Implications for Motivation and Achievement
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Osterhage, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 277,359.00

Nearly half of undergraduate students who pursue STEM disciplines ultimately
change fields. Many who leave STEM majors do so after taking introductory
courses that serve as “gatekeepers” to degree progression. Low grades and
interest in introductory courses are important barriers to retention. A
preliminary study shows that undergraduates who complete Introductory Biology I
later in their college career earn lower grades and are more likely to fail than
students who complete the course within their first year. The goal of this
project is to identify motivational and academic factors that drive performance
among first-year and upper-level students in introductory biology. The project
will involve analysis of structured interviews and the development and
implementation of a comprehensive survey to assess students’ attitudes and
beliefs about introductory biology. Ultimately, this work will inform approaches
that foster success of all students in introductory coursework. Moreover, the
project might identify interventions that could reduce achievement gaps among
student groups, including those historically marginalized in STEM fields. The
proposed project incorporates a tailored professional development plan that will
advance the PI’s expertise in conducting biology education research. Through a
certification program in educational research methods, mentorship from a leader
in educational psychology, and participation in professional learning
workgroups, the PI will gain skills necessary to fulfill research objectives.
This opportunity will allow the PI to build a focal area in biology education,
fill a national need for biology education researchers, and contribute to the
training of the next generation of education
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performance in introductory college coursework
is directly correlated with retention and degree completion. Few studies have
investigated how timing of course completion may affect students’ motivation and
academic outcomes. Preliminary data indicate that, despite having more
experience at the college level, students who first attempt Introductory Biology
I after their first year of college have significantly worse outcomes than
first-year students. The proposed project aims to identify underlying
motivational and academic elements that contribute to the performance of first-
year and upper-level students in introductory biology. The research will involve
students enrolled in Introductory Biology I at the University of Kentucky
(annual enrollment = 1,300). The study will be sufficiently powered to explore
specific subsets of students such as under-represented minorities and first-
generation students. A mixed methods design will involve analysis of structured
interviews and the development and implementation of a comprehensive survey to
assess students’ attitudes and beliefs about introductory biology. The project
will harness the statistical power of large-scale survey data to identify latent
variables that drive performance. Identifying differences in motivation and
achievement between first-year and upper-level students would represent a
fundamental contribution to the field and inform curricular and pedagogical
interventions. The research aim will be fulfilled using skills gained through a
professional development plan consisting of a certification program in
educational research methods, mentorship from a leader in educational
psychology, and participation in working groups. Through these opportunities,
the PI will gain skills in survey design, qualitative methods, and advanced
statistical analysis. The PI will develop a deep understanding of educational
and social science research methods, perform rigorous fundamental research, and
contribute new knowledge to the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build individuals’
capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and
STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.