* 2025633
* NNCI: Soft Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Jian Cao, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,300,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology
Experimental (SHyNE) Resource NNCI site is the Northwestern University (NU) led
collaborative venture with the Pritzker Nanofabrication Facility (PNF) of the
University of Chicago (UC). SHyNE builds on each institution's long history of
transforming the frontiers of science and engineering. Soft nanostructures are
typically polymeric, biological, and fluidic, while hybrid represents systems
comprising structures and hybrid materials comprising soft-hard interfaces.
SHyNE facilities provides broad access to an extensive fabrication,
characterization, and computational infrastructure with a multi-faceted and
interdisciplinary approach for transformative science and enabling technologies.
SHyNE provides specialized capabilities for soft materials and soft-hard hybrid
nano-systems. SHyNE enhances regional capabilities by providing users with on-
site and remote open-access to state-of-the-art laboratories and world-class
technical expertise to help solve the challenging problems in nanotechnology
research and development. SHyNE covers non-traditional industries: agricultural,
biomedical, chemical, food, geological and environmental, among others. A
critical component of the SHyNE mission is scholarly outreach through secondary
and post-secondary research experience and integration with course/curricula as
well as societal and public outreach through a novel nano-journalism project in
collaboration with the Medill School of Journalism. SHyNE promotes and
facilitates active participation of underrepresented groups, including women and
minorities, in sciences and utilizes Chicago's public museums for broader
community outreach. SHyNE leverages an exceptional depth of intellectual,
academic, and facilities resources to provide critical infrastructure in support
of research, application development, and problem-solving in nanoscience and
nanotechnology and integrates this transformative approach into the societal
fabric of Chicago and the greater Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;SHyNE is a solution-centric, open-access collaborative
initiative with strong ties with Northwestern University's International
Institute for Nanotechnology (IIN), in partnership with University of Chicago's
Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering. SHyNE open-access user facilities
bring together broad experience and capabilities in traditional soft
nanomaterials such as biological, polymeric or fluidic systems and hybrid
systems combining soft/hard materials and interfaces. Collectively, soft and
hybrid nanostructures represent remarkable scientific and technological
opportunities. However, given the sub-100nm length-scale and related
complexities, advanced facilities are needed to harness their full potential.
Such facilities require capabilities to pattern soft/hybrid nanostructures
across large areas and tools/techniques to characterize them in their pristine
states. These divergent yet integrated needs are met by SHyNE, as it coordinates
Northwestern's extensive cryo-bio, characterization and soft-nanopatterning
capabilities with the state-of-the-art cleanroom fabrication and expertise also
at UC's Pritzker Nanofabrication Facility (PNF). SHyNE addresses emerging needs
in synthesis/assembly of soft/biological structures and integration of classical
clean-room capabilities with soft-biological structures, providing expertise and
instrumentation related to the synthesis, purification, and characterization of
peptides and peptide-based materials. SHyNE coordinates with Argonne National
Lab facilities and leverages existing super-computing and engineering expertise
under Center for Hierarchical Materials Design (CHiMaD) and Digital
Manufacturing and Design Innovation Institute (DMDII), respectively. An
extensive array of innovative educational, industry and societal outreach, such
as nano-journalism, industry-focused workshops/symposia and collaborations with
Chicago area museums, provide for an integrated and comprehensive coverage of
modern infrastructure for soft/hybrid systems for the next generation
researchers and the broader society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.