* 2025980
* SBIR Phase II:Polyvalent Bacteriophages as Livestock Feed Additives and Alternatives to Antibiotics for Pathogen Control and Improved Animal Performance
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Jacques Mathieu, Sentinel Environmental Group LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,165,274.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be to mitigate the spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria. In the
United States, antibiotic resistance is estimated to cause over 2 million
illnesses, 23,000 deaths, and cost $55 billion annually. Worldwide, it causes
700,000 deaths annually, and reduces global gross domestic product by
approximately 1.5% through its impact on income, productivity, investment and
healthcare costs. The animal sector accounts for up to 80% of antibiotic
consumption in some countries. However, antibiotic feed additives are widely
used in the cattle industry because they provide significant economic and animal
welfare benefits by reducing the incidence and severity of liver abscesses. As
the industry already operates on narrow profit margins, withdrawing antibiotic
feed additives may be financially catastrophic for many producers, and could
lead to supply chain disruption. This project provides a solution to the beef
cattle industry through development of a cost-effective alternative to
antibiotic feed additives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
develop a bacteriophage-based feed additive to inhibit the growth of the primary
etiologic agent of bovine liver abscesses, Fusobacterium necrophorum, and reduce
or eliminate the need for antibiotic feed additives in feedlot cattle. The first
project objective is to convert a library of temperate bacteriophages to
obligately lytic mutants to enhance their suitability for long-term inhibition
of Fusobacterium necrophorum in cattle rumen. The second objective is to
optimize and scale up production of these bacteriophages and develop a product
formulation that can be readily integrated into cattle rations. The final
objective is to conduct feeding trials to optimize dosing requirements and
obtain in vivo proof of efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.