* 2025117
* ISS: Gravitational Effects on the Faraday Instability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 669,969.00

When two immiscible liquids are subject to an oscillating mechanical field that
is applied perpendicular to their interface an instability may arise. This
instability is manifested by the sudden generation of waves and fluid motion at
the interface and is termed the Faraday instability. The effect of gravity on
vibration-induced instability at the interface between liquid bilayers will be
investigated. Experiments performed on the International Space Station will test
theories about the onset of the Faraday instability and its associated flow
patterns. This study will be the first attempt to utilize the unique environment
of microgravity to obtain information on the Faraday instability problem.
Addressing this question could impact important processes here on Earth,
including microfluidic mixing in bio-separations, microscale heat transfer,
additive manufacturing, atomization-fuel injection, and patterned substrate
development. The project involves graduate and undergraduate students working
with space-implementation partner engineers. The project also involves both high
school and middle school students from rural schools through summer science
programs, in-class demonstrations, hands-on experiments, and live displays of
microgravity experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faraday instability arises
from resonance between the applied frequency of shaking and the natural
frequency of a liquid system with an interface. The morphological patterns of
the interface are dominated by gravity and insensitive to interfacial tension.
It is hypothesized that, when gravity is absent, the length scales of the
instability are much smaller than under Earth’s gravity bringing out the
dominant effect of interfacial tension. This, in turn, ought to cause the
interface to rupture in the absence of gravity for small frequencies, but not
for high frequencies. This research project seeks to validate models for Faraday
instability with defining experiments conducted in the absence of gravity on the
International Space Station, comparing these to ground experiments. The project
also seeks to determine when the interface saturates to standing waves and when
it breaks catastrophically to rupture. Experiments involve direct imaging under
frequency and amplitude control while the theory involves Floquet and nonlinear
analyses that employ high fidelity spectral methods. Validation of models by
irrefutable evidence gathered under a well-controlled, unique microgravity
environment have the potential to be translatable to other important fields such
as acoustic, electrostatic, and magnetic levitation and forcing of fluid
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.