* 2025873
* SBIR Phase I:  Utilization, Condition, and Location Tracking for Clinical Assets
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Neil Diener, EMANATE WIRELESS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2021
* USD 255,221.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve the quality of healthcare in
the United States by reducing the costs to maintain clinical equipment. US
hospitals spend $93 billion yearly on medical equipment life cycle costs (second
only to personnel). Large inefficiencies exist; a typical hospital has 25% over-
inventory of equipment, resulting in $1 M annually in unnecessary capital and
operational expense. Current monitoring systems use wireless tags to locate
equipment but these do not reduce equipment maintenance costs. This proposal
will develop a new tag with sensors and software to monitor not only equipment
location but also utilization and condition to optimize inventory levels. This
system will generate further savings by optimizing equipment service intervals
based on usage and condition rather than simply elapsed time. Most importantly,
this system will improve patient outcomes by detecting faults requiring
immediate service, such as drops and failing mechanical components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will advance development of technology enabling hospitals to optimally
manage clinical equipment. The solution mounts small battery-powered wireless
tags (with sensors and machine learning algorithms) on equipment for monitoring.
The research plan will address three main technical challenges: applicability,
scalability and readiness as follows: 1) Applicability: Measure a wide variety
of device types, analyze collected sensor data, identify algorithms mapping
sensor data to context, and test performance under real-world scenarios; 2)
Scalability: Develop procedures and tools to create an algorithm library for the
thousands of device-type/make/models in the hospital market; and 3) Readiness:
Characterize the cost-size-battery life trade space, with a goal of tag life of
10 years, including exploring battery alternatives,sensors with deep-sleep
modes, and adaptive algorithms maintaining device context with maximum sleep
intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.