* 2025777
* Collaborative Research:Host and microbial contributions to wax ester lipid digestion in Arctic whales
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Amy Apprill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 704,071.00

This project will advance understanding about the contribution of host and gut-
associated microorganisms to the digestion of wax esters, a major prey lipid, in
the Arctic-dwelling bowhead whale. Digestion and storage of lipids, the most
energy containing of all food molecules, are essential to the physiology (i.e.,
heat balance, growth, and reproduction) of mammals. Despite the importance of
this process, there is little knowledge about how marine animals digest wax
esters, an abundant lipid in the marine food web. The bowhead whale is
critically dependent on wax ester digestion and fat accumulation, but
nonetheless thrives in a freezing environment and lives longer than any other
mammal on Earth. Thus, this work will extend knowledge about bowhead whale,
microbiome and digestive processes beyond what is currently known in other
mammals, including humans. This research will provide scientists with a
framework to investigate how changes in prey, due to changing climate, may
impact whale digestion and fat gain. The team will communicate project findings
broadly through publicly accessible narratives shared through press releases and
an on-line magazine. The Native Alaskan hunters and their families are an
integral part of this project and also possess extensive traditional and
recorded knowledge about the bowhead whale. To strengthen partnerships between
scientists, managers, and stakeholder communities, the team will hold
conversations about this project with the Whaling Captain’s Association and
their families in Utqiagvik, Alaska, the northernmost U.S. city that hosts
Native subsistence bowhead whale hunts, and has a population of approximately
60% Iñupiat Eskimos. This project will also train undergraduates in emerging
host-microbiome research methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together expertise in lipidomics, microbial ecology, whale physiology and
genomics to address how the host, gastrointestinal tract microorganisms, and
their interactions play a role in wax ester lipid digestion, a fundamental
metabolic process that is understudied in marine animals. The investigators plan
to conduct experiments and analyses centered on two aims: 1) to examine the
enzymatic potential for host-based digestion of wax esters and 2) to determine
if gut-associated microorganisms digest wax esters. These analyses will result
in a conceptual model for wax ester digestion in whales, based on host and
microbial interactions and processes. Specifically, the team plans to conduct
experiments with digestive fluids and intestinal contents collected from up to
five different sites within the gastrointestinal tract of subsistence-harvested
bowhead whales to examine the hydrolysis of isotope-labeled wax esters, and the
contributions of the host and the microbial community to digestion. This project
has the potential to advance and produce knowledge on microbial hydrolysis of
wax esters, a lipid of considerable importance and abundance in the ocean, for
which no microbial degradation sources are yet known. Results may be applied to
predicting how climate change may affect bowhead whale feeding ecology. The
researchers will engage in public education outreach activities with Native
Alaskans to exchange knowledge about bowhead whales and by presenting results to
the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.