* 2025110
* Visiting Innovative Scholar Research Program for Institutions Orienting to National Needs (VISION)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Damon Tull, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,947.00

The new generation of senior leaders at U.S. small and medium colleges and
universities (SMCUs) recognizes the need to establish a science and engineering
(S&amp;E) research culture on their campuses to become more competitive for
state and federal funds, to enhance the opportunities for their students, and to
participate in innovation and entrepreneurship in support of the national
economy. However, their institutions often lack capital and infrastructure
resources required to pursue these opportunities. These leaders need a means to
identify, recruit, cultivate, and retain innovative faculty to fulfill their
research missions. SMCU faculty who want to perform research are often deterred
by high teaching loads, in some cases as many as 5 classes per term. Change is
needed, especially at minority serving institutions (MSIs) including
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs) which educate an increasing percentage of the population
needed to meet the emerging global challenges to U.S. primacy in science and
engineering innovation. With more than 58% of 965,000 S&amp;E doctorates in non-
academic positions, the investigators believe there is an opportunity to grow
the faculty ranks and equip a new generation to pursue scholarly work at these
critical institutions for the benefit of U.S. global competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Visiting Innovative Scholar Research Program for
Institutions Orienting to National Needs (VISION) aims to catalyze sustainable
research activity at SMCUs in strategic areas of national concern by disrupting
the high teaching loads that impede faculty led research and transferring key
practices in teaching, research, and innovation to SMCU leaders and faculty.
VISION seeks to ultimately achieve these goals by recruiting, training, placing,
and supporting early and mid-career S&amp;E doctoral degree holders to serve as
visiting scholars at SMCUs. In this pilot, VISION specifically addresses the
national strategic concern to accelerate U.S. research activity and to broaden
participation in computing information sciences and engineering (CISE). The
proposed work will establish a cohort of research-oriented, full-time, junior
and senior faculty from five minority serving institutions, to serve as VISION
Faculty Fellows and the intellectual core for research in CISE fields at their
respective schools. Appointments will be for up to two years. Fellows will
receive training and mentoring in research program development, teaching and
learning, and innovation and entrepreneurship, through the University of
California, Davis, an emerging Hispanic Serving Institution. UC Davis
collaborates with VISION through their Institute for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship in the Graduate School of Management; the Center for
Educational Effectiveness; the Office of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusionâ€™s
collaboration with the Office of Research; and the College of Engineering -
where Computer Science is housed. VISION will study the impact of this
collaborative model on the Fellows and the research mission of their home
institutions. The investigators expect to advance the understanding of the
research and teaching needs of MSIs, contribute to the societal goals of
accelerating the participation of persons from underrepresented groups in
innovative research and teaching in the faculty ranks, and strengthen
institutions that train students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.