* 2025727
* Solar Sharing: Assessing the potential for co-locating agriculture and renewable energy production in drylands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Greg Barron-Gafford, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,918.00

Finding a sustainable solution to our growing needs for food and renewable
energy production under a variable climate remains a grand challenge. This
project will examine the potential for co-locating food and renewable energy
production on the same parcel of land – a practice called ‘agrivoltaics’.
Growing food in the understory of a canopy of solar photovoltaic panels may lead
to multiple benefits, including increasing the efficiency of land use, while
reducing the need for impacting natural landscapes. However, both crops and
solar panels are sensitive to changes in temperature and climate. This
comparative research will link field measurements of plant and solar panel
performance in a traditional setting and this novel co-location system to
determine the costs and benefits of agrivoltaics. This research will be
conducted across multiple dryland environments to broaden scientific learning
about how well suited agrivoltaics is to different climates, irrigation laws,
and social contexts. Local farmers, K-12 students from traditionally
underrepresented groups, and university partners will lead the research and
education efforts. The food produced in the study will be shared with the
community, along with the scientific findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Food and
energy security are national priorities. Both require land for production and
are sensitive to changes in temperature and climate. Mounting demands for food
and energy will only increase competition for land dedicated to their
production. Co-locating food and energy production can have positive impacts
across food, energy, and water systems by taking a more holistic systems
approach and focusing the research across multiple dryland environments that
vary in terms of temperature, timing of precipitation, and social context. Using
a blend of field measurements and numerical modeling, this project will assess
the impacts of agrivoltaics in terms of altering how water, carbon, and energy
move through an ecosystem in terms of micrometeorological impacts, carbon
cycling and storage, food and energy production, and mitigating sensitivities to
environmental pressures. From a food system perspective, this research will
determine 1) how being grown in the shade of solar panels can ease plant stress
to high light and water demands, 2) how it might extend the growing season of
crops, and 3) how much the shading of soils help slow evaporation, thus reducing
the need for irrigation in drylands. From an energy perspective, the research
will examine how much a solar panel can be cooled by the passive process of
transpirational water loss from an understory of crops. Co-locating food and
energy production may not only reduce land use conflicts, but also increase the
production of more marginal lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.