* 2025200
* Understanding the evolutionary optimization of enzyme dynamics and specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Ronald Koder, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2025
* USD 900,000.00

Enzymes, the protein catalysts for biological reactions, are able to efficiently
perform difficult chemical transformations with a high degree of specificity.
The evolution of enzymatic function is believed to begin with a dynamic
promiscuous enzyme, which then evolves to be more rigid and specific. By
contrast, the protein design community has historically targeted highly stable
and inflexible protein scaffolds. While the field has achieved the ability to
design proteins with atomic-level precision, the creation of biologically and
industrially relevant levels of enzymatic function has proven more elusive.
CDM13 is simple, dynamic self-assembling ‘pre-evolved’ binuclear metalloprotein
capable of performing a number of widely differing catalytic reactions. This
promiscuous primordial enzyme provides a unique model system to study in detail
what early enzymes were like and to examine the pathways in functional sequence
space that connects these primordial enzymes to present day enzymes. This
project will not only generate an improved understanding of natural binuclear
enzyme evolution and function, but also in a palette of robust binuclear
enzymes, which may prove useful in future microbial biofuel projects and as
environmentally friendly hydroxylation catalysts. As part of the project
undergraduates, graduate students and New York City Public High School teachers
will be trained in the interdisciplinary science of biophysics at an institution
with a student body which is composed of &gt;55% underrepresented minorities. An
outreach plan is presented which includes the development of a new planetarium
demonstration of protein structure and dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CDM13 is
a simple, dynamic self-assembling ‘pre-evolved’ binuclear metalloprotein capable
of performing a number of widely differing catalytic tasks in solution and in
vivo at rates that approach those observed in the natural binuclear enzymes that
catalyze these reactions, including methane hydroxylation and arylamine
oxidation as a diiron enzyme and hydrogen peroxide oxidation as a di-manganese
enzyme. The binuclear enzyme family members each have two metal ions bound
within a D2-symmetric antiparallel four alpha helical bundle. This class of
proteins is ideal for because the natural binuclear enzymes have almost
superimposable backbone structures, and thus aspects of the evolved catalytic
functions can be easily transplanted. This project centers on the use of CDM13
to look at the evolution of specificity, dynamics, and bioenergetic coupling to
protons on several different forms of multielectron catalysis in a single
scaffold, positively identifying critical features necessary for enzyme function
and specificity and giving us a new window on how modern enzymes have evolved
their substrate and structural specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.