* 2025322
* STTR Phase I:  A Pair of Linked Cartographic Maps of our Brain Derived from Clinical Glaucoma Data
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Gautam Thor, Retinal Registry
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve the accessibility of eye health
care. Glaucoma is a major cause of irreversible blindness but can be addressed
with early detection, and the prevalence increases with age. However, existing
tests can be tiring and difficult and require specialized equipment. This
project will advance an inexpensive test for early detection for treatment. This
low-cost, tablet-based tool can offer universal, cost-effective glaucoma
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project advances novel retinal testing for glaucoma detection through
improved modeling and data analysis of the visual system. This project analyzes
visual field test results to reveal a pair of linked cartographic maps that
transmit central and peripheral retinal information to the brain through grouped
retinal nerve fiber bundles segregated in a conformal mapping. A cone of photons
displays the visual field information on the central S2 spherical non-Euclidean
Riemann surface centered around the foveal axis, which lacks representation in
the brain and can be considered as a singularity or reference region for each
eye. Information on the S2 surface is transmitted through bundles of retinal
nerve fibers that are grouped to represent single surfaces, and modeled as
though the eye is a S3 4-dimensional hypersphere, with the blind spot being a
singularity region and serving as the reference point. The retinal nerve fiber
bundles transmitting the information to the brain are passively reordered at the
blind spot and bring about an inversion of the Y (Up-Down) axis. Information
from both eyes enables parallax removal and leads to depth perception.
Information from the peripheral retinal regions of each eye is crossed across
the optic chiasma and provides spatial locations of objects during peripheral
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.