* 2025122
* How Are Ultrahigh Temperatures Attained in Continental Crust?  A Petrochronological Investigation of the Basin and Range Lower Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Smye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 279,812.00

Continental crust that is rich in the element silicon appears to be unique to
planet Earth and is critical for life, but the mechanisms that facilitate the
long-term stability of this crust are unclear. Preservation of rocks that have
attained temperatures greater than 900°C in the cores of old continents implies
that ultrahigh temperature metamorphism and associated partial melting of the
crust is critical for crustal stabilization. This research will address the
primary question: How are extreme temperatures attained within the continental
crust? The project will reconstruct the pressure-temperature-time history of
rocks that were erupted from a section of continental lower crust that is
actively undergoing ultrahigh-temperature metamorphism: the Basin and Range
Province of the United States and Mexico. A combination of analytical techniques
will discriminate between potential heat sources. The research will support an
early career scientist, foster the training of a graduate student, and engage
undergraduates in academic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing how the
Earth’s crust attains extreme temperatures is relevant to the development and
distribution of body forces, flow of crust and chemical differentiation of the
Earth. Using a suite of complementary techniques, this project will use
xenoliths to test three hypotheses (crustal thickening, mantle thinning, or
magmatic underplating) for the attainment of ultrahigh temperatures in
continental lower crust beneath a zone of active extension. Accessory-mineral
(zircon, monazite, titanite, and rutile) U-Pb dating and trace element depth-
profiles will be used to derive the pressure and temperature history of the
lower crust over the lifespan of the Basin and Range province. Lu-Hf garnet
dates will be used to constrain the timing of prograde metamorphism. Petrologic
constraints will be derived from Pressure-Temperature pseudo-sections, optimal
thermobarometry, and trace-element thermometry. In conjunction, these techniques
will be used to measure the timing and duration of ultrahigh temperatures in
addition to portions of the prograde Pressure-Temperature evolution. The
complete dataset will allow for rigorous testing of the three
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.