* 2025362
* ISS: Engineering Multiple-Compartment Cartilage Tissue Construct for Space and Terrestrial Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yupeng Chen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The human musculoskeletal system is sensitive to biomechanical cues. Mechanical
stimulation is important to cartilage health. An absence of biomechanical
loading causes articular cartilage to decay. Our natural cartilage has limited
ability to repair itself. Therefore, it is a significant challenge to regenerate
authentic cartilage tissue after it degenerates. On Earth, prolonged joint
immobilization can cause cartilage degradation. In microgravity, the similar
absence of biomechanical loading caused likely also damages cartilage tissue and
cells. In this work, we will develop an engineered cartilage tissue construct to
overcome the presumed degradation of cartilage in microgravity. This work will
benefit life on Earth by improving our understanding of the effects of
microgravity on cartilage. The results of this work may lead to new therapies to
treat cartilage injuries. The results of this work will also benefit astronauts’
health when they return to Earth. Furthermore, outcomes of this study will be
used to introduce undergraduate and graduate engineering students to tissue
engineering and nanomedicine. In addition, this work will increase diversity
among biomedical engineers by encouraging underrepresented students to engage in
science and engineering. Additional outreach activities are planned for
middle/high school students and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical stimulation is critical to maintain
chondrogenesis (differentiation into cartilage) and cartilage homeostasis
(health maintenance); an absence of biomechanical loading results in degradation
of articular cartilage. Because natural cartilage has limited self-repair
ability, it is a significant challenge to regenerate authentic cartilage tissue
after it degenerates. On Earth, prolonged joint immobilization can cause
catabolic (breakdown) activities of chondrocyte and subsequent cartilage
degradation. In space, the absence of biomechanical loading caused by
microgravity most likely also damages chondrocyte function and cartilage
homeostasis. If we can engineer a cartilage tissue construct to overcome the
presumed degradation of cartilage in microgravity, it should also improve tissue
engineering research and healthcare on Earth. This work will create a construct
which can automatically supply itself with mechano-responsive microRNA as a
therapy to restore cartilage cell chondrogenesis. The result will be a long-
lasting (homeostatic) cartilage tissue construct to maintain cartilage cell
chondrogenesis and homeostasis in the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.