* 2025797
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Anthropomorphic Robotic Ankle Prosthesis with Programmable Materials
* CSE,IIS
* 08/12/2019,08/31/2024
* Panagiotis Artemiadis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 757,565.00

There are currently 2 million Americans living with an amputation; the majority
of those amputations are of the lower limbs. Leg amputation is a significant
life-altering event that has an overwhelmingly negative effect on many aspects
of life, even years after the injury. Leg amputation can cost in excess of $1.8
million per individual. Most available prostheses are designed to replicate some
aspects of normal ankle function during level-ground walking. These prostheses
allow many individuals with below-knee amputation to return to basic daily
activities. However, these devices are best suited for level-ground walking and
many users experience difficulties during other important tasks, such as walking
on slopes, stairs, or different terrains. Therefore, the general aim of this
project is to address this gap in the design of existing powered ankle-foot
prostheses by enabling new prosthetics that adapt to different environmental
conditions commonly found in daily life. The proposed ankle-foot mechanism
significantly enhances the customizability of lower leg-powered prostheses by
introducing a new design approach. This project will study how the human ankle
stiffness changes during different walking scenarios. The research team will use
this information to design a powered ankle-foot prosthesis with properties more
similar to the human ankle. In order to do so, a lightweight and modular
prosthesis that uses programmable material will be developed. The modular
mechanical design and control approach generates human-like characteristics and
enables a larger set of users with different lengths of amputated legs to use
this prosthesis. Moreover, the prosthesis' performance will be evaluated during
real-world activities in dynamic environments. The focus of this project is on
amputees' well-being. The resulting agile ankle foot prosthesis will help
amputees improve their physical function, ability to work, and recreation, thus
helping individuals return to the activities and quality of life they had prior
to injury. The research findings from this project can also be applied to
advance functions of exoskeletons, orthotics, and rehabilitation robots. In
addition to advancing research, undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in research activities and will receive interdisciplinary
education/innovation/outreach experiences. Outreach activities will allow the
project team to engage diverse middle and high school students in science and
engineering, especially those from underrepresented groups and low-income
families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans a new class of customizable
agile ankle-foot prosthesis that is modular in design and has its impedance
modulation decoupled from its torque control. This will be achieved by equipping
a novel and recently developed powered 2-degrees of freedom (DOF) ankle-foot
prosthesis with an augmented mechanism built from soft programmable material.
The primary outcomes of this project will be a comprehensive understanding of
how to 1) reduce the complexity of the control of ankle-foot prostheses, as
observed in clinical trials, and 2) enhance prosthesis performance in real-world
activities, such as walking and running on surfaces with different profiles,
stiffness, and lateral inclinations. The planned work aims to address
customizability issues of robotic ankle foot prostheses and address societal
impact by improving amputees' quality of life and work. The main goal of this
study is to consolidate the impedance control of the ankle to a mechanical
module comprised of programmable material to follow the 2-D human ankle
impedance. The effort will further integrate the impedance modulation with 2-DOF
torque control of the ankle to provide the customizability required for
tailoring an agile prosthesis to each user's need in parallel to the torque
control tuning. The project researchers hypothesize that real-time control of
the two-dimensional ankle impedance in a robotic ankle-foot prosthesis can
improve the performance and the agility of the user during walking on surfaces
with different profiles, stiffness, and inclinations. The interconnected
research thrusts will provide the opportunity to offer a new solution through 1)
modeling the ankle dynamics in different gait scenarios, 2) equipping a 2-DOF
robotic ankle-foot prosthesis with a programmable material module, and 3)
performing extensive evaluation experiments with amputees. Understanding the
effect of the control and adaptation of the 2-D ankle impedance during walking
with a lower extremity prosthesis will be significantly beneficial for the field
of assistive robotics because it can provide guidelines for the design and
control of powered prostheses, exoskeletons, and rehabilitation devices. In
addition to advancing research, undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in research activities and will receive interdisciplinary
education/innovation/outreach experiences. Outreach activities will allow the
project team to engage diverse middle and high school students, especially those
from underrepresented groups and low-income families. The findings from this
project will be disseminated through publications, software sharing, and
technology commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.