* 2025349
* BCSER Building Capacity for A Longitudinal Mixed-Methods Explanation of Women’s Achievement and Attrition in Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Danyelle Ireland, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 232,866.00

In this capacity building project, the investigator proposes to develop a model
for inquiry in engineering education research that accommodates a range of
complementary data types, data sources, points of time, and conceptual lenses
while concurrently acquiring skills in explanatory sequential mixed-methods STEM
education research. The research project aims to model patterns of major
behavior data among undergraduate women entering and exiting an engineering
program prior to graduation, elucidate the cultural ecosystem of undergraduate
engineering education and its relationship to women’s achievement motivation,
and examine the structural modes of power, privilege, and socialization within
the discipline. Concurrently, the investigator proposes to implement a
professional development plan that will expand the investigator’s skills in
mixed-methods, longitudinal design, and analysis of large-scale institutional
datasets, advanced statistical modeling techniques, and expertise in
undergraduate engineering education curriculum development. The project will add
significantly to the understanding of women’s experiences and decisions about
engineering on a broad scale and generate information to improve practice in
social science research, engineering education research, and higher education
administration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be guided by input-
environment models, ecological and ecosystems studies, and theories of identity-
based motivation. The investigator will leverage the three approaches to
investigate two research questions: (1) What patterns of engineering major-
switching and course-taking behavior are related to retention and graduation
among undergraduate women from 2006 to 2016?, (2a) How do perceptions of the
undergraduate engineering education ecosystem compare among women who persist in
the major and those who do not?, and (2b) Which experiences in this context are
most meaningful to their achievement motivation in the field? A mixed-methods
research design will be used to examine diversity among women as well as
hierarchies of privilege and power that structure academic life. The research
focuses not only on the person but also on the interactions of individuals with
their surroundings. The study also will address changes in embedded educational
contexts over time and analyze the dynamic between retrospective accounts of
alumni and recent reflections of current students. The findings will provide
valuable insights about how to provide transformative experiences in engineering
education for undergraduate women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by the Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the
EHR Core Research Program (ECR). ECR funds fundamental research that focuses on
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.