* 2025118
* Collaborative Research: MTM 2: Searching for General Rules Governing Microbiome Dynamics Using Anaerobic Digesters as Model Systems
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Mathew Leibold, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2025
* USD 503,148.00

Microorganisms inhabit almost every imaginable environment on Earth, playing
integral roles in various ecosystem processes. Microbiomes, collections of
microbes in specific habitats, change significantly from place to place and over
time. Although rapid advances in genetic technologies have revolutionized our
understanding of microbiomes, the rules governing microbiome function are yet to
be learned. Research to understand these mechanisms in natural ecosystems can be
difficult due to their open nature and extremely high diversity. Adequately
capturing this complexity results in a need for extremely large datasets over
long time scales. By contrast to open natural systems, engineered anaerobic
digesters (ADs) are enclosed systems with controlled environments. AD systems
are used globally for waste treatment and represent the largest engineering
application of microbial biotechnology. As such, AD systems provide an ideal
model system for understanding the rules governing microbiome function because
of their microbial diversity, environmental significance, and the ability to
control the environment. The goal of this research is to identify the rules
controlling microbiome dynamics in ADs that can be used for other microbial
ecosystems. This study will provide fundamental knowledge critical to predicting
microbiome behavior in engineered and natural microbial ecosystems. Benefits to
society resulting from this project will include improved science-based
management of microbial ecosystems in both engineered and natural systems.
Additional benefits include the training of the next generation of microbiome
professionals with broad interdisciplinary expertise and skills to understand
and control microbiome dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to identify general ecological rules governing microbiome dynamics in
different ecosystems with a focus on ADs as model microbial ecosystems. This
will be achieved by examining whether general rules exist for species-area
relationships as are known to exist in ecology. The four fundamental ecological
processes of selection, dispersal, diversification, and drift will serve as a
general theory to explain how microbial communities in microbiomes are assembled
across space and time. Specific research objectives to achieve this goal include
the following tasks: 1) Laboratory AD systems will be used to determine the
short- (&lt; 1 year) and long-term (&gt;15 years) stability of microbiome
biodiversity, structure, and function in responses to various environmental
changes; 2) Advanced statistical tools will be used to elucidate underlying
community assembly mechanisms in AD systems; 3) Novel mathematical approaches
will be developed to detect the transient dynamics of AD microbiomes in response
to environmental perturbations; and 4) Novel metagenomics-enabled anaerobic
digestion models will be developed to provide effective frameworks for
predicting and manipulating the dynamics of AD systems for desired functions.
Resulting rules describing AD microbiome dynamics will be tested for their
utility in describing other microbiomes from a variety of habitats including
soils, marine, lacustrine, groundwater, gut, and other engineered systems.
Cross-disciplinary training and workforce development will be achieved through
research, training, and workshops to meet future needs for microbiome
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.