* 2025088
* Research Initiation: Measuring mental demand of interactive textbooks using wearables and web analytics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Liberatore, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Interactive textbooks have created a new web-based form of active learning.
Students participating in these multi-sensory, interactive experiences may be
learning faster or easier compared to traditional static textbooks. In this
project, we will collect data on students' mental demand using non-invasive
wearable wristbands as they "read" interactive web-based textbooks called
zyBooks. Better understanding of students' mental demand in response to
different elements of the textbooks could then inform the design of future
instructional materials. The measurement platform developed for this study could
also be used outside classroom settings, including study groups and organized
events such as Hackathons. Therefore, the proposed research has the potential to
significantly advance our understanding about formation of engineers through the
acquisition of technical and professional skills and knowledge in both formal
and informal settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive textbooks, such as
zyBooks, have been found to have much higher reading rates than traditional
textbooks, and their reading rates have also been found to be correlated with
course grades. However, it is difficult to ascertain which components of an
interactive textbook are driving the increased reading rates. The proposed
research targets this problem by providing a platform for continuous measurement
of mental demand as students engage with an interactive textbook through
reading, watching animations, and interactive problem solving. This project will
collect physiological data on students using non-invasive wearable wristbands
and synchronize this data with web-based interaction data from zyBooks. The
research team will first collect data in a controlled laboratory setting where
students will partake in a set of reading and problem solving tasks, and then
they will self report their mental demand using the NASA Task Load Index. Using
features extracted from the two data streams, the research team will train a
machine learning algorithm to predict the student's self-reported mental demand.
In phase 2 of the study, the team will collect data on students studying in
their natural, everyday study settings and use the trained machine learning
algorithm to predict the students' mental demand, which will result in a
continuous measurement of students' mental demand as they progress through
different animations, activities, and exercises in the zyBook. The measurement
platform will provide a first step towards the use of wearables to transform
teaching and learning and can be used to explore additional pedagogical
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.