* 2025489
* NNCI: Northwest Nanotechnology Infrastructure (NNI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Lara Gamble, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The NNCI Northwest Nanotechnology
Infrastructure (NNI) site serves as the prime resource for nanotechnology
researchers and engineers in the Pacific Northwest region and beyond. The NNI
consists of world-class facilities at the University of Washington (UW) in
Seattle and Oregon State University (OSU) in Corvallis, complemented by unique
capabilities available at the Department of Energy’s Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory (PNNL), and through the newly established Northwest Nanotechnology
Laboratory Alliance. Anchored at the UW and located in the midst of a vibrant
biotech and startup scene, the NNI offers state-of-the-art tools and specialized
training to a diverse user base with particular attention to the photonics,
quantum, clean energy and biomedical fields. The mission of NNI consists of core
services that can be summarized by the pillars Make - Measure - Mentor. Make and
Measure form the site’s physical foundation and Mentor reflects the coordination
of educational efforts, including those with broad impact beyond the scientific
community. The NNI’s physical infrastructure consists of the Washington
Nanofabrication Facility (WNF, Seattle), the Materials Synthesis &amp;
Characterization Facility (MaSC, Corvallis) and the Advanced Technology and
Manufacturing Institute (ATAMI, Corvallis) for making, and the Molecular
Analysis Facility (MAF, Seattle), the Oregon Process Innovation Center (OPIC,
Corvallis) and the Ambient Pressure Surface Characterization Laboratory (APSCL,
Corvallis) for measuring. Whether novice or seasoned engineer or scientist,
whether undergraduate, graduate, postdoc or community college student or
teacher, all users are offered flexible access to NNI facilities, from
comprehensive training of local users to operator-assisted tool access to remote
execution of projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The NNI serves as a broad-based nanotechnology resource,
though three principal research focus areas highlighted in which the site will
provide leadership: (i) Photonic and Quantum Devices, which aims at enabling
large-scale integrated photonic networks and quantum information systems that
are expected to overcome current limits in speed and bandwidth of electronic
circuits. Beyond information processing, the miniaturization and integration of
photonics in medical devices is facilitating the development of new, minimally
invasive health diagnostics; (ii) Advanced Energy Materials and Devices, which
aims at providing the scientific and engineering basis for clean energy
solutions, including the creation of better batteries or scalable and
environmentally benign materials for solar power; and (iii) Bio-Nano Interfaces
and Systems, which provides the infrastructure and expertise for inventing and
demonstrating new devices for biomedical applications, enabling advances in
protein modeling, drug delivery, sensors, bio-scaffolds and bioelectronics. NNI
educational activities are geared towards a broad audience and designed to have
a multiplier effect. Three signature residence programs are offered: (i)
Educators-in-residence from local tribal schools gain hands-on laboratory skills
for use in teaching their K-12 classes; (ii) Summer Experiences in Science and
Engineering for Youth (SESEY) expose students from groups underrepresented in
STEM to careers in engineering; and (iii) on-campus and in-person learning
experiences encourage college-going paths for students from local and regional
K-12 school districts. In addition, the NNI engages the broader public through
exhibits at high-profile events such as Engineering Discovery Days at UW and
National Nanotechnology Day at the Seattle Pacific Science
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.