* 2025085
* Do tolerant hosts amplify the threat of invasive parasites? Darwin’s finches, mockingbirds, and nest flies.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Bush, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 774,474.00

One of the greatest threats to island birds and other animals is invasive
parasites that are not native. One of the best examples is the nest fly
Philornis downsi, which parasitizes Darwin’s finches in the Galápagos Islands.
The fly, which is native to mainland South America, feeds on blood of nestling
finches, which often die as a result. P. downsi is a major cause of rapid
declines in several species of finches, including the Mangrove Finch, which is
in imminent risk of extinction, with fewer than 100 individuals remaining. The
threat posed by the flies may be exacerbated by other species of birds that are
tolerant hosts of the fly. Tolerant hosts, such as Galápagos mockingbirds, which
are larger in size than finches and breed earlier in the season, survive blood
loss to flies and still leave the nest successfully. Thus, tolerant hosts have
the potential to amplify the threat of flies to finches if they are a source of
the flies that parasitize finches. The goal of this study is to test this
amplification hypothesis. As part of the broader impacts of this work, the
researchers will create a smartphone app (FlyTracker) that will allow
biologists, Galápagos National Park rangers, and others to track data on the
abundance of flies from year to year. Documentation of the indirect effects of
mockingbirds on finches, together with long term monitoring of fly abundance,
will contribute in a fundamental way to conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersal of parasitic flies will be measured
using a fine-scale population genetic and kinship approach based on SNPs from
whole genome sequences of flies (Aim 1). Next, an experiment will test whether
parasitized mockingbird nests increase the number of P. downsi in nearby finch
nests (Aim 2), and whether flies decrease the reproductive success of finches
(Aim 3). Mockingbird nests will be GPS located and randomly assigned to
experimental or control treatments. Experimental mockingbird nests will be
fumigated with permethrin, which kills flies in nests. Finch nests within 35m of
each mockingbird nest will also be GPS located, and the number of flies and
reproductive success of finches will be quantified. Data from the experiment
will be used to expand and parameterize a published population viability model
for medium ground finches (Aim 4). The new model will test the degree to which
proximity to tolerant mockingbirds, as well as other environmental factors,
amplifies the threat of P. downsi to Darwin's finches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.