* 2025459
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Modernizing Cities via Smart Garden Alleys with Application in Makassar City
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Zhiqiang Zhai, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 209,998.00

This activity is in response to the NSF Dear Colleague Letter: Supporting
Transition of Research into Cities through the US ASEAN (Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Cities) Smart Cities Partnership (NSF 20-024), in
collaboration with the US Department of State. This research seeks to integrate
innovations in smart and connected communities with creative gardens within the
city alleys of Makassar City, Indonesia via a synergistic collaboration between
US and Indonesian teams and a close partnership with Makassar City. Makassar is
striving to become a livable world class city for a fast-growing, diverse
population of 1.7 million people. The ongoing “Garden Alley” project in the city
aims to improve the “livability” of the city, measured by factors including air-
quality, heat index, food security, and social interactions. To date, Makassar
has implemented 40 gardens within 15 of the city’s sub-districts, covering a
sizable portion of the city’s alleys. The goal of this research is to catalyze
the transformation of Makassar City’s garden alleys into smart environments by
deploying a sensor network at representative green allies and conventional
allies to collect data related to air quality, microclimates, and other factors,
to analyze the heterogeneous data using machine learning techniques, and to then
share the data and its insights with city representatives and specific
communities within the city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transformative research
will provide the foundational science and knowledge that are needed to design,
optimize, and deploy S&amp;CC technologies within the ASEAN region and beyond.
This interdisciplinary research will yield several major innovations: 1) New
low-cost, durable, and mobile sensor networks will be designed for air quality
and microclimate monitoring in the hot and humid climate in southeast Asian
cities. 2) Suitable machine learning techniques will be employed to exploit the
multi-dimensional and heterogeneous data collected from both existing
infrastructures and new mobile test platforms in Makassar and create intelligent
spatio-temporal operational maps of Makassar’s alleys that can be used for
various design, planning, and operational decisions by the city. 3) Data-driven
city-scale smart operating schemes involving feedback loops will be explored
through close engagement with the Indonesian partners. The developed solutions
will be highly dynamic yet robust and have the potential to be scaled, as well
as transferred to other cities. Additionally, this project will initiate a new
collaboration between the US and Indonesia, improving the quality of life in an
emerging southeast Asian city, but with potentially broad applicability, and
provide a broad range of dissemination activities, involvement of students in
international activities, as well as active engagement with local communities
and researchers in Indonesia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.