* 2025449
* An Uplift Friction Damper for Seismically Resilient Mass-Timber Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Daniel Dowden, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,995.00

This award will investigate a low-damage solution for cross-laminated timber
(CLT) seismic force-resisting systems (SFRSs) using a novel uplift friction
damper (UFD) device for seismically resilient mass-timber buildings. The UFD
device will embrace the natural rocking wall behavior that is expected in tall
CLT buildings, provide stable energy dissipation, and exhibit self-centering
characteristics. Structural repair of buildings with these devices is expected
to be minimal after a design level earthquake. Although CLT has emerged as a
construction material that has revitalized the timber industry, there exists a
lack of CLT-specific seismic energy dissipation devices that can integrate
holistically with the natural kinematics of CLT-based SFRSs. CLT wall panels
themselves do not provide any measurable seismic energy dissipation. As a
payload to the large-scale, ten-story CLT building specimen to be tested on the
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) shake table at the
University of California, San Diego, as part of NSF award 1636164,
“Collaborative Research: A Resilience-based Seismic Design Methodology for Tall
Wood Buildings,” this project will conduct a series of tests with the UFD
devices installed on the CLT building specimen. These tests will bridge
analytical and numerical models with the high fidelity test data collected with
realistic boundary and earthquake loading conditions. The calibrated models will
be incorporated in a probabilistic numerical framework to establish a design
methodology for seismically resilient tall wood buildings, leading to a more
diverse and eco-sustainable urban landscape. This project will provide local
elementary school outreach activities, integrate participation of undergraduate
minorities and underrepresented groups into the research activities, and foster
graduate level curriculum innovations. Project data will be archived and made
available publicly in the NSF-supported NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org). This award contributes to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objectives of this payload project are to: 1) bridge the fundamental
mechanistic UFD models linking analytical and numerical models necessary for
seismic response prediction of seismically resilient CLT-based SFRSs, 2)
characterize the fundamental dynamic UFD behavior with validation and
calibration through large-scale tests with realistic boundary conditions and
earthquake loadings, and 3) integrate low-damage, friction-based damping system
alternatives within a resilience-based seismic design methodology for tall wood
buildings. To achieve these objectives, the test data collected will provide a
critical pathway to reliably establish numerical and analytical models that
extend the shake table test results to a broad range of archetype buildings. The
seismic performance of mass-timber archetype building systems will be
established through collapse risk assessment using incremental dynamic analyses.
This will provide a first step in the longer term goal of establishing code-
based seismic performance factors for CLT-based SFRSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.