* 2025856
* SBIR Phase I:  OPTIMUS - An Innovative Modular Turbomachinery System for Small Satellite Launch Propulsion Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Ryan Rollon, UPSHOT VENTURES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2021
* USD 275,944.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I Project is to improve new pumps for the satellite launch
industry. Small satellites support many applications such as global Internet and
communication coverage, as well as earth and environmental imaging. The proposed
technology will support propulsion systems with higher efficiency. This project
will explore high-performing design and manufacturing techniques required to
create a 3D printed, high-efficiency propulsion sub-system. The system is
designed to be modular, scalable, and adaptable by leveraging many advanced
design and manufacturing techniques such as additive manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will support the research and development of the launch industryâ€™s first
commercially available turbine-driven pump system for the satellite launch
industry. The innovation reduces typical turbopump cost and part count by a
factor of 10, and can be rapidly configured to meet requirements for thrust,
engine cycle, and propellant combinations. The proposed project will explore the
cost-performance trade space for a novel rocket engine turbopump
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.