* 2025836
* SBIR Phase I:  Building a Novel, Interactive Artificial Intelligence Software Platform to Improve Communication in Autism
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Lois Brady, iTherapy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 04/30/2021
* USD 255,367.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the creation of a tool for caregivers
and educators of children with speech impairments, particularly those with
autism spectrum disorder. Left untreated, these impairments have lasting impacts
on quality of life but remain difficult and expensive to treat; the market for
autism treatment is estimated at $3.2 B worldwide. This project will expand the
capabilities to provide treatment in non-clinical settings. The technology to be
developed will include automated evaluation of speech development levels in the
absence of a speech pathologist. In addition, technology will be pioneered that
allows activities and lessons to be individually customized and continuously
updated for each learner. These two advances will form the technological core of
a new product designed specifically to meet the needs of caretakers, teachers
and families of children with autism.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves research
and development of advanced technologies for the treatment of speech impairment
associated with autism spectrum disorder. Artificial intelligence will be
applied to two fundamental challenges, the automated determination of speech
development levels in the absence of a speech pathologist; and the assignment of
activities and lessons in response to user input. This project will collect
labeled text from language learners at various stages of development to form a
training corpus. Machine learning will then be used to build algorithms for
scoring engines to make learning assessments independent of a clinician. In
parallel, the development and application of a business rules management system
will allow the platform to accept user input such as an image, word, or phrase;
and it will output new words and phrases for the learner to attempt. The system
will follow a decision logic that considers the both the user input and the
previously assigned language development level. The goal of this research is to
produce algorithms that closely match the labeled assessments of language
development and decision logic that assigns activities appropriate for each
level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.