* 2025402
* Island mass effects on planktonic communities in the open ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Emmanuel Boss, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,343.00

This study is using existing data to characterize the Island Mass Effect (IME)
at 20 locations across the Pacific Ocean. The Island Mass Effect occurs when
islands and atolls alter atmospheric and oceanic circulation, resulting in local
enrichment of surface waters with nutrients. Local fertilization, in turn,
promotes phytoplankton blooms and high plankton biomass that can be advected
into the surrounding open ocean and enhance regions of low nutrient availability
and low plankton biomass. The Island Mass Effect (IME) is thought to be
sufficiently important to affect regional fisheries and biogeochemical
processes, but most of our current understanding of this phenomenon comes from
satellite remote sensing observations of elevated chlorophyll concentrations
that serve as a proxy for phytoplankton biomass. This project entails a
systematic, basin-scale evaluation of changes in phytoplankton and zooplankton
biomass and composition along environmental gradients from the lagoons and
coastal water of islands into the open ocean. The study is making use of a large
dataset collected during the TARA Pacific expedition (2016-2018), and results
are providing new information about marine ecological responses to IME and the
plankton inventories needed to improve ecosystem models for under sampled
regions of the worldâ€™s oceans. In addition to supporting graduate and
undergraduate students, this project offers a training workshop for early career
scientists on best practices for the collection and processing of ship-based
underway data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Islands in the oligotrophic gyres of the
Pacific Oceans alter oceanic and atmospheric circulation and provide sources of
fertilization to promote local phytoplankton blooms. This so-called Island Mass
Effect (IME) is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the Pacific Ocean where vast areas
are known to be limited by the availability of macro- and micro-nutrients, yet
it is mostly understood from satellite remote sensing observations of elevated
chlorophyll concentrations. Beyond remote sensing of chlorophyll, concurrent
changes in plankton community composition and structure have been examined for
only a small number of islands, limiting our understanding of the biological
responses to IME. In this project, the investigators are examining the IME at 20
locations by evaluating phytoplankton community composition, mesozooplankton
biomass, and plankton diversity. The investigators are making use of a
comprehensive data set collected during the TARA Pacific expedition (2016-2018)
that includes: environmental measurements (temperature, salinity, nutrients and
trace metals), plankton samples (flow cytometry, plankton imaging, pigments, and
genomics), high resolution measurements of optical properties from which
biogeochemical proxies are derived, satellite remote sensing data (chlorophyll,
temperature, sea surface height), and currents from an ocean circulation model
(Mercator Oceans).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.