* 2025181
* Cultivating sustainable citizenship among 8th and 9th grade girls through informal STEM workshops
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Simi Hoque, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 349,998.00

This two-year project will analyze how adolescent girls develop as sustainable
citizens as they take part in a college-based STEM summer program that offers
hands-on workshops in sustainability science. As a Building Capacity in STEM
Educational Research (BCSER) project, a key goal is to build the principal
investigator's knowledge base and analytical expertise in STEM education
research. This project aims to position the investigator to conduct longer-term
research on broadening participation in sustainability science and ways to
prepare the next generation of STEM educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Situated in
the context of a Philadelphia-based partnership between Drexel University and
the girls-only Eureka STEM program, the project has potential to broaden
participation among underrepresented girls from low-income, minority communities
and advance understanding of sustainable literacy among middle school girls.
Moreover, by examining the structure and impact of continuous and intentional
learning pathways through girls’ middle school years, the project can advance
understanding of how informal learning environments support girls’ interest and
confidence in STEM. In this way, the project offers a roadmap for how to foster
effective informal education interventions to create more inclusive and diverse
learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research question driving this
project is: Can STEM content that is focused on inquiry-based activities that
build towards a community organized sustainability project offer a means to
cultivate a sense of sustainable citizenship and environmental civic action? It
uses ethnographic methods to identify and evaluate the informal STEM learning
environment and to infer the contexts and frameworks in which girls develop
their interest and confidence. During the two years, middle school girls will
enroll in the Eureka STEM program for four weeks during the summer and one day
every month during the academic year. The girls will be introduced to socially
relevant real-world problems through multidisciplinary engineering and science
hands-on active-learning workshops that can be iteratively solved using
fundamental engineering and science methods and tools. Through a series of
interactive augmented exercises, the girls will engage in sustainability
exercises, facilitated by students and faculty from Drexel STEM departments.
Drexel graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in STEM
pedagogy and teaching strategies through coursework and participation in the
Eureka program. The goal is to support girls’ creation of environmental civic
action plans that engage the communities in which the girls live and that offer
a means to operationalize their sustainability interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported through the EHR Core Research:
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is
designed to build individuals’ capacity to carry out high quality fundamental
STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.