* 2025826
* INFEWS: U.S.-China: Managing agricultural nitrogen to achieve sustainable Food-Energy-Water Nexus in China and the U.S.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Eric Davidson, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

China and the U.S. account for 40% of the global nitrogen (N) inputs to crop and
livestock production systems and have crop nitrogen use efficiencies (NUE) of
only 26% and 50% respectively. Despite many technological developments, these
rates have not significantly improved in recent decades. Meanwhile only about
one-third of manure is recycled in both countries. These losses of nutrients
from fertilizers and manures to the environment have led to serious water
pollution, waste of resources and energy, and possibly unrealized crop yield
potential. These inefficiencies highlight the need to identify the socioeconomic
and technological barriers for improving the efficiency of N use in crop and
livestock production, as well as the sustainability of the food-energy-water
(FEW) nexus. The main goal of this project is to investigate and identify viable
approaches to improve the sustainability of the FEW nexus through N management
in crop and livestock production in China and U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing differences between U.S. and Chinese
agricultural systems and their socioeconomic contexts, a systems approach will
facilitate a better understanding of the varying socioeconomic and technological
barriers for NUE improvement, especially the factors beyond farm operations, and
will help to unpack the N management challenges of each country. Specifically,
this project will: 1) Characterize NUE and FEW sustainability in China and the
U.S. on a county scale for crop and livestock production systems and their
subsystems; 2) Investigate diverse socioeconomic and ecological drivers for NUE,
manure recycling, and FEW sustainability, comparing key drivers in the two
countries to inform NUE improvement; 3) Develop a policy-analysis tool to
optimize the crop and livestock production systems for different FEW
sustainability goals on spatial scale within each country; and 4) Assess the
challenges and opportunities for 1-3 under different trade relationship
scenarios. This project will advance knowledge of the dynamics in the FEW nexus
by assessing the complex interactions between N management and the FEW nexus
throughout the processes of crop and livestock production. The project will
employ state-of-art models and recently available datasets and information,
using consistent methodologies in both countries. Taking a comprehensive view of
N flows across spatial, temporal, and system scales, this project will inform
understanding of potential innovative policies, technology developments,
impediments to adoption of improved management, and potential changes in
production structure and trade for improving FEW
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.