* 2025547
* Design of Nanostructures for Light-Mediated Propulsion for Molecular Delivery into Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Cha, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 569,467.00

This goal of this project is to synthesize nanoparticles that can convert
incident near infrared (NIR) light energy into mechanical motion to propel
themselves through viscous fluids and soft gels. The mechanical motion of the
nanoparticles is the result of nanoparticle heating which causes the formation
and collapse of bubbles, known as cavitation. When the bubble collapses, the
nanoparticle is propelled forward with great energy and velocity. This project
will study the effects of particle structure on the efficiency of converting
light energy into mechanical motion. Next, the nanoparticles will be synthesized
with an asymmetric structure, which will allow them to be aimed in specific
directions. The effects of the surrounding medium properties on nanoparticle
propulsion will be examined. The results of this series of experiments will used
to assess the system as a drug delivery technology in which drug-laden
nanocarriers are propelled directly into tissue structures, which would help
overcome a major barrier in disease treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to design nanostructures that can convert light into
cavitation for high energy and velocity propulsion into tissue and other
biological fluids. Rather than simply allowing the particles to accumulate near
a boundary of a target that contains a mass-transfer barrier, cavitation-
mediated propulsion will cause the nanoparticles to rapidly move into the
interior of a target. This propulsion will produce two very important effects
that will benefit molecular delivery: (a) the nanoparticle itself will be able
to penetrate deeply into otherwise-inaccessible tissue, and (b) the path cleared
by the nanoparticles will allow the perfusion of small molecules (e.g. drugs)
and macromolecules (e.g. antibodies) whose transport would be restricted by the
presence of viscous fluids, overgrowth matrix, or high interstitial pressure. In
this project, core-shell nanostructures capable of converting light into
mechanical motion will be designed by growth of mesoporous silica shells around
gold nanorods (AuNRs). Because the ability of the oxide shell to stabilize the
cavitation process is mediated by the lipophilic ligands on the oxide surface,
it should be possible for the AuNR to convert near infrared (NIR) light to
thermal energy, which in turn will be converted to mechanical energy by the
formation and collapse of a cavitation bubble. Next, asymmetry will be imparted
to the AuNR-shell structure so that the nanostructures can be spatially oriented
to penetrate into specific regions. The structure-property relationships
underpinning the conversion of light energy into mechanical motion will be
examined, as well as validated in viscous and viscoelastic media. This project
will also advance several broader impacts to meet the mission of NSF. First,
this project will address how to facilitate drug delivery through major
transport barriers in the body, such as solid tumors and mucosal membranes.
Second, the PIs will make a commitment to recruit trainees that promote
diversity. Third, the PIs will develop a course in advanced technical
communication that will teach skills that students will utilize over their
graduate career and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.