* 2025971
* SBIR Phase I:  Horse Visual Identification System
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Jonathan West, WILDLIFE PROTECTION MANAGEMENT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,732.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from creating a unique identification system using
artificial intelligence (AI)-based facial recognition for horses and other
animals that require vaccinations for birth control and disease inoculation.
Wild horses and other wildlife that require remote vaccinations need to be
identified so that populations are not over/under vaccinated. The means to
vaccinate either manually or using remote technology exists, but most current
methods are expensive, inhumane, or inefficient and identification is limited to
photographs, sketches, memory, or RFID microchips. Federal agencies currently
spend well over one hundred million dollars to deal with the problem. The
commercial opportunity for a facial recognition system along with remote
vaccination in this country and abroad is substantial. Wildlife managers will be
able to relieve unhealthy overcrowding and allow livestock and domestic animals
to co-exist with other species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will remotely and autonomously
control the explosion of the wild horse populations on the open range. There are
approximately 90,000 wild horses on the open range, which is 60,000 over the
allowed maximum level. This is the level which is safe for horses and other
animals which share the land. The need to vaccinate horses with contraceptive
birth control is necessary to control the population. This project will develop
an artificial intelligence (AI) identification system for horses using facial
recognition technology and couple this with remote automated vaccination at
feeding stations to ensure wild horses are correctly vaccinated for birth
control and inoculated against disease. A comprehensive identification system
based on facial recognition has commercial and societal impact beyond
vaccinations for wild horses, extending to other wild species such as deer, and
also to livestock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.