* 2025726
* An analysis of the impact of historical spatial patterns of forest harvesting practices for carbon management.
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Scheller, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 06/30/2024
* USD 476,254.00

This project examines the influence of patterns of historical management of
forests on current carbon-management actions, and what these limits mean for
carbon management more broadly. The forestry industry is increasingly looking
towards carbon management and markets to both create income, and to sustainably
manage its lands. Regenerating historical harvests are prime opportunities for
carbon management, similar to selling carbon offsets to other industries.
However, the legacy of historical management patterns that were governed by a
different set of objectives can limit where carbon-focused future management
occurs. The impact of this mismatch between historical objectives and current
and future goals is presently unknown. This project couples satellite imagery
and ground data with an integrated ecological management model that quantifies
how historical management, environmental variability, and natural disturbance
influences the spatial variation, vulnerabilities, and valuation of carbon.
Graduate students will work with local, private industry partners to receive
business-level knowledge of carbon markets as well as be mentored in STEM
research. The PIs will also develop teaching modules for K-12
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientist’s understanding of the role of
historical spatial patterns of forest management and disturbance in limiting or
enhancing future carbon management is inadequate. This lack of understanding
severely constrains the ability to plan forestry management at both the private
and public sectors as spatial variability in exposure to both natural and human-
caused disturbances is significant. This project uses a high-resolution computer
model to quantify how historical management, environmental variability, and
disturbance constrains and influences the spatial variation, vulnerabilities,
and valuation of carbon. The researchers will construct a broad-scale
quantification of disturbance patterning and incorporate that into the open-
source, LANDIS-II framework. From this work scientists will develop scenarios of
future carbon sequestration and valuation that are more or less constrained by
the footprint of past management. The overarching goal of this project is to
determine to what extent the ability to manage for carbon is limited, or
improved, by the spatial legacy of past actions. Understanding how historical
patterns of management constrain those opportunities is critical to assessing
future carbon potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.