* 2025515
* MTM 2: The rules of microbiota colonization of the mammalian gut
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Georg Gerber, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,900,000.00

Microbiomes, or the collections of trillions of bacteria and other micro-
organisms living on, within and around us, have enormous impact on human life.
For example, they help people digest food, promote the growth of farm animals
and crops, and degrade pollutants in the environment. Despite the importance of
microbiomes, the processes governing their formation and maintenance remain
poorly understood. The mammalian gut is a particularly intriguing system for
microbiome studies, since a diverse collection of microbes has evolved that
specifically colonizes and functions in that environment. The goal of the
project is to derive fundamental rules that describe and predict the dynamic
process of microbial colonization of the mammalian gut. To achieve this goal,
the team of investigators will develop new computer-based methods to
automatically extract predictive and explanatory rules from large microbiome
data sets. The team will also develop new experimental tools and generate data
sets in mouse measuring how microbiomes change over time and across space in the
mammalian gut. Overall, the project will further the understanding of the
formation of microbiomes in mammals and can provide broader insights into the
emergence of other microbial ecosystems, such as those in soil and marine
environments. These insights could ultimately help scientists to rationally
alter or maintain microbiomes in different environments to benefit human
activities. The project will also generate practical resources for the
scientific community (computer-based tools and datasets) and provide education
on the microbiome to college and elementary school students through courses and
hands-on labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wealth of genomic data provides
information as to which microbes are present in environments, but little insight
into underlying factors that explain or predict complex assemblages of microbial
consortia. This project aims to elucidate mechanistic factors that drive the
dynamic process of microbial colonization of the mammalian gut. These
determinants will be investigated at multiple systems scales, from the level of
microbial communities down to the level of individual genes. The project will
leverage high-throughput experimental methods developed by the investigators, to
generate data characterizing functional genetic selection and spatial
organization of microbiota in the mammalian gut. From the Computer Science
perspective, the project will develop new computational methods to infer human-
interpretable rules and other structured outputs from complex and noisy high-
throughput microbiome datasets, using Bayesian and neural-style approaches that
incorporate prior biological knowledge while scaling to massive datasets. This
project has three main thrusts: 1) Learn microbial community-level rules that
quantitatively predict population dynamics of mouse gut colonization and assess
these rules across differing ranges of microbial diversity and composition, 2)
Elucidate microbial gene-level mechanisms that predict mouse gut colonization
dynamics, and 3) Profile microbial spatiotemporal organization and dynamics
during gut colonization at the species and gene level to predict microbial
community dynamics. The project is expected to establish a set of new
computational and experimental tools and principles for understanding the rules
of microbial colonization of the gut, with potential applications to other
ecosystems including gut microbiota of non-mammalian species as well as complex
environmental microbiota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.