* 2025391
* NNCI: Montana Nanotechnology Facility (MONT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Recep Avci, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

Proposal ID: 2025391&lt;br/&gt;PI: David Dickensheets&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Montana State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: NNCI: The Montana Nanotechnology
(MONT) Facility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology, which gives us the ability to manipulate
and interrogate physical systems on a length scale of nanometers to microns, has
become pervasive in many fields of scientific inquiry and engineering. Access to
basic nanotechnology tools has therefore become increasingly important for
scientists and engineers from many academic disciplines and from industry. The
Montana Nanotechnology Facility (MONT), an NNCI site at Montana State
University, promotes discovery, education and outreach related to nanotechnology
by providing access to shared-use instruments, expert training on their safe and
effective use, and broad-based education about nanoscale science and technology
for learners from diverse communities. The MONT site serves both regional users
in the northern Rocky Mountains and Great Plains and users from across the U.S.
who need the specific expertise and equipment found at Montana State University.
Those users are pursuing diverse objectives that include advances in health care
diagnostics and surgical solutions, sources of clean energy, remediation
strategies for contaminated soils, and technologies related to optical
telecommunications, imaging systems and advanced computing. Many users are
developing technologies at the forefront where traditional disciplines such as
life or earth sciences are converging with physics and engineering. By enhancing
our service to external users and building on our unique fabrication and
characterization strengths, MONT will help to meet a national need for access to
nanotechnology, training the workforce that will develop the nanotechnology of
the future, and education and outreach that engages and informs students and
teachers from kindergarten to graduate school, facility users and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;MONT helps meet
the growing need faced by regional and national researchers for access to
nanofabrication tools and processes at the interdisciplinary frontiers, with
local expertise in functional nanostructured materials, optical MEMS,
microfluidics, quantum materials and biological and geological nanostructures
and systems. The goals of the MONT site are: (i) to increase the number of
external users served; (ii) to grow the local, regional and national impact of
MONT and NNCI; (iii) to enhance MONT facility capabilities; (iv) to integrate
local and NNCI best practices to offer “best in class” educational opportunities
to users, STEM educators and the public; and (v) to increase the diversity of
our enterprise. These goals are accomplished through specific initiatives that
enhance training, assistance and advocacy for external users; offer a research
initiation user grant program; invest in new tools and capabilities; expand on-
site and web-based instructional and outreach activities; connect our users to
others across the NNCI network through topical research communities; create a
regional network for nano-facilities in the northwest; and create a new research
engagement program for students who are underrepresented in STEM. The project
specifically improves access to nanotechnology infrastructure in the northern
Rockies/Great Plains region, and it promotes discovery, education and outreach
in emerging fields where nanotechnology is impacting the life sciences, health
care, energy, earth sciences, the environment, and emerging technology sectors
such as quantum science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.