* 2025310
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Resilient societies through smart-city technology; Assessing earthquake risk in ultra-high resolution
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Ertugrul Taciroglu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries to address the
growing need for assessment and reduction of disaster risk, collaborative co-
design of resilience strategies with a breadth of stakeholders, and
scientifically and technologically enhanced responses to disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to help create more earthquake
resilient societies through smart-city technology. The project will focus on
case studies from the United States, Taiwan, Japan and New Zealand to create a
framework that combines frontier science with high-density ground and building
measurements to provide innovative and visualized earthquake hazard and risk
assessments. The project will integrate current and future technologies to make
smart cities and their citizens more resilient by helping disaster workers and
managers use their resources more efficiently through high-level, detailed
information. This project develops and integrates new scientific advancements to
directly provide benefits to society and support all involved stakeholders in
increasing resilience. The framework will consist of a network of massively
distributed sensors for earthquake and structural measurements to quantify
seismic risk at an ultra-dense level. The state-of-the-art hazard and risk
assessments will help provide critical information to strengthen risk governance
and disaster reduction measures for stronger resilience. The project will
produce impact visualizations such as sophisticated earthquake hazard scenario
simulations to better communicate risk information to targeted end-users. The
results and scenarios will guide enhanced disaster preparedness for effective
response and matches the goal to build-back-better in recovery, rehabilitation
and reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.