* 2025954
* LTER: Coastal Oligotrophic Ecosystem Research
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2025
* James Fourqurean, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,760,981.00

Coastal ecosystems like the Florida Everglades provide many benefits and
services to society including protection from storms, habitat and food for
important fisheries, support of tourism and local economies, filtration of fresh
water, and burial and storage of carbon that offsets greenhouse gas emissions.
The Florida Coastal Everglades Long Term Ecological Research (FCE LTER) program
addresses how and why coastal ecosystems and their services are changing. Like
many coastal ecosystems, the Florida Everglades has been threatened by diversion
of fresh water to support urban and agricultural expansion. At the same time,
sea-level rise has caused saltwater intrusion of coastal ecosystems which
stresses freshwater species, causes elevation loss, and contaminates municipal
water resources. However, restoration of seasonal pulses of fresh water may
counteract these threats. Researchers in the FCE LTER are continuing long-term
studies and experiments to understand how changes in freshwater supply, sea-
level rise, and disturbances like tropical storms interact to influence
ecosystems and their services. The science team is guided by a diversity and
inclusion plan to attract diverse scientists at all career stages. The team
includes resource managers – who use discoveries and knowledge from the FCE LTER
to guide effective freshwater restoration – and an active community of academic
and agency scientists, teachers and other educators, graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students. The project has a robust education and outreach
program that engages the research team with the general public to advance
science discoveries and protection of coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FCE LTER research program addresses how
increased pulses of fresh and marine water will influence coastal ecosystem
dynamics through: (i) continued long-term assessment of changes in
biogeochemistry, primary production, organic matter, and trophic dynamics in
ecosystems along freshwater-to-marine gradients with a focus on how these affect
accumulation of carbon and related elevation change, (ii) meteorological studies
that evaluate how the climate drivers of hydrologic presses and pulses are
changing, (iii) social-ecological studies of how governance of freshwater
restoration reflects the changing values of ecosystem services, and (iv) use of
high-resolution remote sensing, coupled with models to forecast landscape-scale
changes. A new experimental manipulation will determine drivers and mechanisms
of resilience to saltwater intrusion. Data syntheses integrate month-to-annual
and inter-annual data into models of water, nutrients, carbon, and species
patterns and interactions throughout the Everglades landscape to compare how
ecosystems with different productivities and carbon stores respond (maintain,
increase, or decline) to short- (pulses) and long-term changes (presses) in
hydrologic connectivity. Synthesis efforts will use data from national and
international research networks aimed at understanding how chronic presses and
increasing pulses determine ecosystem trajectories, addressing one of the most
pressing challenges in contemporary ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.