* 2025720
* Collaborative Research: Rapid Biosensing of Protein-Bound Drug Concentrations in the Body for Improved Drug Efficacy and Safety
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Jason Heikenfeld, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 307,573.00

Abstract: Precision medicine aims to optimize drug dosages for each individual
in a manner that maximizes efficacy while minimizing side effects. In practice,
however, the cumbersome and invasive nature of blood draws, and the labor-
intensive nature of their subsequent laboratory analysis has precluded the
personalization of dosing. In the face of this, clinicians base dosing decisions
on indirect, and thus often highly inaccurate estimators of drug concentrations
in the body, leading to undesired side effects and &gt;$500 billion in
additional annual cost to the health-care system. Given this, there exists a
major need for technologies supporting convenient and accurate measurement of
drug concentrations at the point of care, with even greater value if such
technology could be used by patients at home or work. Performing rapid
measurement of drug concentrations can be complex, however, because a
significant fraction of most drugs is bound to blood proteins. The project
proposes an aptamer based biochemical sensor capable of performing rapid, point-
of-care measurements of both protein-bound and unbound drug concentrations for
personalized medicine. The work includes an integrated education plan that
involves the participation of undergraduate research co-ops with a focus on
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this
proposal is design and fabrication of biochemical sensor device that can rapidly
measure both the active (unbound) and the total (unbound+protein bound)
concentrations of drugs in blood circulation. The proposed research is based on
the hypothesis that microfluidic devices can quickly sample biofluids such as
blood and interstitial fluid, and efficiently denature the binding-protein for
the drug such that both the unbound and total (unbound+protein-bound) drug
concentrations can be measured by quantitative electrochemical aptamer sensors.
This will be accomplished by implementing a novel membrane that protects the
drug-detecting sensor from the harsh conditions necessary to liberate protein-
bound drugs. Specifically, the membrane will be permeable to drugs but will be
impermeable to acids and bases needed to release drug from proteins and which
would otherwise harm the sensor. The proposal aims to advance knowledge spanning
the physics of membranes, the influence of acid, base, and salt conditions on
sensors, and shed new light on the percentage of drugs that are bound to
proteins in the body. The understanding of how much drug is bound to proteins
will lead to fundamental knowledge of the unbound portion of drug in blood that
provides a therapeutic effect, as well as causes toxicity or unwanted side-
effects. The technique will provide information on drug bioavailability,
toxicity, interference, metabolism, clearance, and absorption rates. In general,
the proposed devices will result in improved patient health and will reduce the
complexity of workflow in healthcare delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.