* 2025860
* Triggered functional dynamics of proteins in biomimetic environments by time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance at very high magnetic fields
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Proteins are the nano-scopic molecular machines that power life as we know it.
Thanks to a revolution in structural biology, we now know the three-dimensional
shapes of more than 150,000 proteins. However, to fully understand the operation
of proteins as machines, one must understand how they move after being triggered
by an external event such as attaching to a particular molecule, movement of a
neighboring protein, or a change in voltage or light intensity. A particularly
exciting class of proteins called photo responsive proteins can move to control
the behaviors of cells when exposed to light. This research will develop an
advanced form of magnetic resonance—of which the most familiar application is
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—to make “movies” of the motion of photo
responsive proteins in response to a flash of light. The ability to “film”
protein motion will provide critical tools to guide widespread efforts to
engineer and optimize proteins for important applications ranging from
sustainable manufacturing to controlling nerves with light. This project will
engage next generation of scientists by public outreach activities through the
“Questboard” developed by the PI’s group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are the molecular machines that power life as we know it.
The rapidly-growing protein data bank now holds more than 150,000 protein
structures. However, to fully understand the operation of proteins as machines,
one must understand their triggered functional dynamics--how protein structures
evolve in time after being triggered by an external event such as ligand
docking, movement of a neighboring protein, or a change in voltage or light
intensity. Photo responsive proteins are a particularly exciting class of
proteins that, after absorbing a photon, generate mechanical energy to modulate
biochemical processes and cellular behavior. This project will support
convergent research to measure the time-resolved conformational changes
triggered by a pulse of light in two photo responsive proteins: a microbial
rhodopsin proton pump, and optogenetic proteins called Light, Oxygen, and
Voltage (LOV) sensing domains. The measurements are enabled by a unique
methodology, under development over the last decade by the PI and co-PI, which
combines electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) at very high magnetic fields (8.6
Tesla) and frequencies (240 GHz) with site-directed mutagenesis and spin
labeling using compounds based on Gd (III) paramagnetic metal centers. This
project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.