* 2025759
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Scalable, Reproducible Manufacturing Process for Lightweight, High-Temperature Neutron Shield
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Danielle Castley, Neutroelectric, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,191,506.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the improved safety and reduced cost of
commercial nuclear power. The annual, global lightweight, high-temperature
neutron shield market is approximately $100 million. Better materials can
increase the safety of nuclear plant operations by reducing radiation damage to
both in-containment components and radiation exposure to power plant workers.
This project develops a high-temperature, lightweight neutron shield material
for reactor design, power plant operations, and spent fuel management. This
material platform's competitive advantages are the following: 1) it can operate
at temperatures 50% higher (degrees C) than current materials 2) it is castable,
instead of requiring extrusion molding or machining and 3) it is cost
competitive with current low-temperature neutron shielding materials. The
primary objective is to develop a reproducible, full-scale manufacturing process
for this new material. This new material platform will reduce overall plant life
cycle costs by reducing the expenses associated with spent fuel management and
decommissioning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project advances a high-temperature, lightweight neutron
shielding material for the nuclear industry. Specific objectives for the
proposed research to scale the production process for industrial volumes by the
following: 1) determine a blending procedure for mixing nanoparticles into the
liquid resin prior to curing, 2) establish a mixing process for evenly
incorporating the catalyst into the base resin for large volume parts, 3)
determine a product formation process by designing molds and the mold extraction
process for the large volume parts, 4) determine quality control check points
for production and 5) characterize samples to confirm material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.