* 2025080
* Research Initiation:Exploring the Role of Story-Driven Learning to Foster Empathy in the Professional Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Joseph Le Doux, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Engineers solve challenging problems to help other people and better society. In
order to design effective solutions engineers must employ empathy not only in
their design process but also in their collaborative approach to problems.
Fostering empathy in engineering students is critical for the continuing
tradition of technical excellence and service to society that has characterized
the professional formation of engineers in the past. Although difficult to
quantify financially, empathy is an economic necessity that goes beyond
responsible product design or innovation. Leadership, negotiating contracts,
resolving workplace conflicts, and even marketing products successfully require
seeing and experiencing the world through the eyes of others. Today’s
engineering students will be asked to solve some of the world’s toughest
problems. They will need to be equipped with deep technical expertise but also
an empathic mindset to design solutions and facilitate authentic engagement with
others. Preparing engineers equipped with an empathic mindset will result in the
betterment of not only the engineering profession but society as a whole. The
recognition and promotion of empathy within engineering will increase the
likelihood that broader audiences will perceive engineering as a relevant,
inclusive, and impactful profession. Raising awareness of empathy as an
important engineering skill will contribute to a more holistic engineering
profession that will attract and retain a more diverse group of students. This
project seeks to advance the understanding of the development of empathy in
engineering education and contribute to the further development of teaching
methods proven to foster much needed empathy as part of the professional
formation of engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward this end, the proposed work
will explore the landscape of learning activities used to develop empathy within
the Biomedical Engineering (BME) curriculum at the Georgia Institute of
Technology. The BME department at Georgia Tech makes use of a wide variety of
diverse learning activities within the core curriculum. Using this department as
the context of our study and a multi-dimensional model of empathy as our
theoretical framework, this project will employ an exploratory, embedded case
study approach to explore (1) what learning activities faculty are using to
foster empathy in BME courses at Georgia Tech and why, (2) how students are
experiencing these learning activities, and (3) what components of empathy as a
multidimensional construct are most influenced through these learning activities
as compared to those components of empathy developed through story-driven
learning. The project will rely on the methods of survey sampling, analysis of
student work, and student interviews as multiple sources of evidence. The data
from all methods of inquiry will be used to draw conclusions and compare and
contrast the learning activities, faculty intentions, student experiences, and
empathy development across all of these learning activities within our case
study. By looking at the impact of a wide variety of learning activities on the
development of empathy over the course of an undergraduate engineering program,
this study will advance the understanding of the development of empathy as a
multi-dimensional construct in engineering education as a whole. The project
will also contribute to the further development of research-based pedagogies
proven to foster empathy. Finally, this work will serve as a foundation that
will provide a better understanding of the differential impact of pedagogical
approaches on the development of empathy as well as inform future work towards
understanding the role of story-driven learning as an innovative approach for
the development of empathy as part of the professional formation of
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.