* 2025105
* GeoPRISMS Synthesis Workshop: The Geological Fingerprints of Slow Earthquakes
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* David Schmidt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 38,152.00

Slow earthquakes are a family of events similar to regular earthquakes, but
which occur more slowly. They typically do not cause the ground shaking that we
associate with regular earthquakes, and are otherwise innocuous. However, these
events do have important implications for earthquake hazards. The discovery of
slow earthquakes nearly two decades ago has revolutionized our understanding of
how plate motions are accommodated at major tectonic boundaries because they can
be as large as regular earthquakes. Yet a physical understanding of slow
earthquakes remains out of reach. The understanding of slow earthquakes is
critical to better constraining regional seismic hazards, can inform us of the
physical conditions and fault loading rates at depth, and is therefore central
to our understanding of plate boundary fault and shear zone mechanics. This
grant will support a synthesis workshop for a multi-disciplinary group of
geoscientists to discuss and debate how geological observations may be used to
test competing hypotheses for slow earthquake occurrence and characteristics.
This workshop will allow scientific progress to advance in new directions, and
allow for a better understanding of these enigmatic fault processes. The
participation of early career researchers and those from underrepresented groups
within the geosciences will be emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this workshop are to: (1) Provide a field-based and academic forum for cross-
disciplinary discussions of the geological expressions of slow slip and tremor,
and their mechanisms. (2) Use field-based examples to develop a common
understanding amongst different disciplines of what we currently know about the
structures of subduction plate boundaries at slow earthquake conditions. (3)
Determine the structural data needed to test different models for slow slip
using an exhumed subduction plate boundary to guide discussions. (4) Discuss
multiple potential underlying geological processes and formulate future research
strategies by identifying what new observations and constraints are needed. (5)
Promote better communication between disciplines and forge new multidisciplinary
collaborations. The multi-day conference will include a field trip to examine
and debate different hypotheses using processes recorded in the rock
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.