* 2025227
* NNCI: Texas Nanofabrication Facility (TNF)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,970,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Texas Nanofabrication Facility (TNF)
will enable research and development in nanoscience and technology, with
applications in nanoelectronics/photonics, green energy and healthcare. TNF will
provide state-of-the-art capability in nanodevice prototyping, metrology, and
nanomanufacturing. This will include, for example, research in nanosensors for
the Internet-of-Things, high efficiency solar cells for green energy, and nano
drug delivery systems. TNF is the only NNCI node in the southwest region of the
US, encompassing Texas and the neighboring states of Oklahoma, Arkansas and
Louisiana. The efforts in prototyping of nanoelectronic devices in the cleanroom
will be enabled by training of users by NNCI staff, as well as by staff
providing remote services for external users who are unable to travel to TNF.
Coupled with device fabrication, TNF will provide cutting-edge tools in
nanoscale imaging and metrology at the atomic scale. Located in a vibrant US
technology hub in central Texas, TNF will have tremendous impact in
nanotechnology education and entrepreneurship, particularly among under-
represented minorities such as Hispanics, a sizeable minority in Texas, and
Native Americans in Oklahoma. Furthermore, TNF will perform social scientific
research to explore the ethical implications of nanotechnology. We will
regularly host tours of our cleanroom, research facilities and nanotech labs,
and host popular lectures on nanotechnology for K-gray members of the public
because education and outreach are critical to creating an informed public, and
securing the economic and environmental future of the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Texas
Nanofabrication Facility (TNF) at the University of Texas at Austin (UT-Austin)
is composed of the Microelectronics Research Center (MRC), the Texas Materials
Institute (TMI), and nanomanufacturing fab (nm-Fab) which collectively house
over 130 major tools in 22,000 sq.ft. of labs, staffed by 25 professionals. The
MRC cleanroom provides extensive nanofabrication capabilities, TMI provides
state-of-the-art metrology tools, while the nm-Fab developes and provides novel
nanomanufacturing tools in the areas of roll-to-roll manufacturing, and high
speed, large area nanoimprinting. Our vision is to continue to enable and foster
breakthrough nano-innovation in the areas of electronics and energy, which have
significant presence in the South West. TNF will partner with the new Dell
Medical Hospital at UT in the area of healthcare electronics and nanomedicine.
Specifically, TNF will focus on science-to-scalability, where one integrates
nanodevice prototyping with nanodevice manufacturing for industry. TNF will
foster an innovation ecosystem by connecting our industrial users to the
Longhorn Startup undergraduate entrepreneurship course at UT-Austin, the Austin
Technology Incubator, and NSF I-Corps program. TNF will establish educational
activities in nanotechnology directed at engaging underrepresented minorities,
particularly Hispanics, who are a sizable minority in Texas, and women. Under
the REU initiative, the facility will partner with Austin Community College to
provide year-round research and training experience in nanotechnology for two-
year college students. Furthermore, TNF will explore the social and ethical
implications of nanotechnology, and start a new effort on Education/Outreach
focused on Computation and NSF Quantum Leap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.