* 2025372
* EAGER: Microgrid-Supported Hydroponic Crop Cultivation for A Resilient Fresh Food Supply in Island Communities
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Manuel Lerdau, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 34,104.00

Hurricanes severely disrupt the food supply for island communities by destroying
domestic agricultural production capacity and crippling the infrastructure for
food importation, transportation, and cold storage. This can decimate the
livelihood of local farmers and greatly complicate the logistics and expense of
providing fresh produce to residents in the immediate aftermath of the crisis,
and to the important tourism industry in the longer term. Microgrid-supported
hydroponic crop cultivation (MSHCC) may be able to mitigate this threat to food
security for island communities. The investigators for this proposal have built
an MSHCC prototype and seek to show proof-in-principle of efficacy in the
Bahamas in response to Hurricane Dorian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are: i) to determine how MSHCC can foster climate resilience through
sustainable agriculture and energy solutions in small island communities, and
ii) determine how these social enterprises can build economic opportunity by
equipping residents with the tools they need to supply emergency food providers
and the tourism industry with locally grown food. This project brings rigorous
scholarship to the humanitarian engineering application of HCC in the case of
hurricane resilient food supplies and livelihoods in small island communities,
using the hurricane-damaged country of the Bahamas as a case
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.