* 2025020
* I-Corps:  High purity metal additive manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Gregory Denbeaux, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
translation for novel metal additive manufacturing (AM) for applications such as
antennas, filters, biomedical devices, and aerospace devices. While the current
prototype has focused on and shown successful results with copper, the process
can be expanded to other highly pure metals, such as aluminum. The proposed
technology is a new method of additive manufacturing enabling deposition of
highly pure metals in an energy-efficient process with less waste. The largest
AM adopter thus far, the aerospace industry, utilizes many 3D printed parts. The
proposed project will investigate translational opportunities in aerospace
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a novel
metal additive manufacturing method, where the material is deposited/printed
into the prototype, design, or technology. Existing additive manufacturing
technologies have limitations in which alloys can be printed, limiting the
product's purity. The proposed technology is a new AM method enabling pure metal
printing. It can be used to deposit in any direction (i.e. at any orientation
onto a wafer or substrate), beneficial for specific prototype strengths. Each
nozzle deposits around a rate of 1 cc/hour. This method also allows for control
of porosity at the nanoscale level, allowing for new applications and benefits
in areas such as biomedical implants and filtration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.