* 2025166
* LTER: Long –Term Research at the Jornada Basin (LTER VII)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Debra Peters, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2024
* USD 3,381,000.00

Dryland ecosystems occupy nearly half of the Earth’s land surface and provide
goods and services for more than 1 billion people. The goal of the Jornada Basin
Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) program is to understand what factors are
most important to the ecology of drylands – what they look like and how they
function. Jornada Basin is in the Chihuahuan Desert, which is typical of many
other drylands around the world. The project builds on studies started in 1915
by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. That early research has revealed
“desertification” -- a change in habitat from grasslands to scattered shrubs and
bare ground. More recently, researchers have explored how differences in wind
and water cause dryland habitats to undergo other changes in vegetation A new
way of looking at data will enable results of this ongoing study to be applied
to other drylands. Training opportunities will be provided for graduate and
undergraduate students at four Hispanic-serving institutions in New Mexico,
Arizona, and Texas. Findings will be distributed to K-12 students and teachers,
scientists, land managers, and the public through a multi-faceted program that
includes inquiry-based curricula, workshops, internet- and mobile-phone-based
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will quantify the key processes that
generate alternative states in drylands, enabling prediction of future states
and their consequences for the provisioning of ecosystem services. Based on
long-term databases, new studies will include four types of dynamics: (1) a
shift from perennial grasslands to desertified shrublands, (2) a reversal from
shrubland to savanna states, (3) transitions among states dominated by different
shrub species, and (4) invasion by non-native grasses. These transitions have
profound implications for the processes reflected in the 5 core LTER research
themes (primary production, trophic interactions, carbon and nutrient cycles,
and susceptibility to disturbance). In the next six years, Principal
Investigators will employ a "trigger-feedback-heterogeneity" framework for
understanding and predicting the dynamics of state changes in dryland
landscapes. The work will contribute to emerging ecological theory on: (a)
alternative states and resilience, (b) ecosystem sensitivity to global change,
and (c) cross-scale interactions. The framework will integrate knowledge and
long-term data on: (1) biological processes, (2) spatial heterogeneity in the
soil-geomorphic template, and (3) variability in environmental drivers drawn
from multiple lines of evidence (i.e., observations, experimental manipulations,
analytical and numerical models, products from imagery, conceptual model
reasoning, and theory). Researchers will develop a Data Science Integrated
System that will allow Jornada results to be translated to other locations in
the Chihuahuan Desert and to drylands globally. Five major products are
envisioned: (1) a new understanding of state changes that will lead to theory
development, testable hypotheses, and new experiments; (2) accessible data,
derived data products, and visualization tools applicable at multiple scales;
(3) explanatory and predictive relationships among drivers, patterns, and
processes that can be used to (4) predict future alternative states; and (5)
training, outreach and information transfer to a broad audience locally,
nationally, and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.