* 2025853
* Exploring light-dependent manganese oxide formation in a meromictic metal-rich pond
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Colleen Hansel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 606,265.00

The metal manganese (Mn) is found widely throughout the environment where it is
closely tied to the health and function of living organisms. Within some
environments, in the presence of oxygen, Mn can form Mn oxide minerals. These
minerals are extremely reactive, and they have an important role in controlling
the fate of nutrients, contaminants, and carbon at the Earth’s surface. Despite
their environmental importance, the controls on natural Mn oxide formation
remain poorly understood; recent discoveries by the PI and others have put forth
evidence that new pathways for light promoted Mn oxide formation exist. The goal
of this project is to determine the processes controlling Mn oxide mineral
formation in surface sun-lit environments. The research team will study a local
pond on Cape Cod where Mn oxides have been found to form and persist in the
presence of light. Waters from the pond will be collected at various sites and
depths and reacted in the laboratory under different environmental and light
conditions to identify the chemical and biological pathways allowing Mn oxides
to form. Mn oxides formed via different light and environmental conditions will
be characterized to determine their formation pathways and reactivity. These
findings will improve our understanding of the Mn cycle and associated elements
on Earth and other planets, such as Mars. This project will also contribute to
the training of several undergraduate and graduate students. Further, outreach
efforts associated with this research will involve lectures each year at a local
high school and mentoring of high school science fair projects that will
introduce students to Earth science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent lab
and field investigations point to light-mediated reactions as underappreciated
components of the manganese (Mn) cycle within some water bodies. Further, the
PI’s preliminary data from a local meromictic metal-rich pond (Siders Pond, Cape
Cod, USA) suggest that light plays a key role in the formation of Mn oxides in
the surface waters, despite presumed photoreductive processes occurring.
Accordingly, here the PIs propose a systematic field and laboratory
interrogation of the rates, products, and mechanisms of Mn oxidation and Mn
oxide formation within Siders Pond. The overall goal of the research is to
determine the conditions allowing for light-induced formation of Mn oxides
within the site, which has broad implications for understanding and predicting
light-driven Mn oxide formation on Earth at present and in the past. Objectives
guiding this research are (1) to quantify the distribution of Mn species and
rates of Mn(II) and Mn(III)-L oxidation and Mn(III)-L and Mn oxide reduction
along the redoxcline over space and time, (2) to identify the underlying
(a)biotic mechanisms of Mn(II) oxidation and Mn oxide formation within the
photic zone, and (3) to characterize the composition, structure, and reactivity
of Mn oxides as a function of depth and transition across the redoxcline. The
objectives will be addressed via a combination of field measurements, laboratory
incubations, and microbial culturing. Waters from the pond will be collected at
various sites and depths and reacted in the laboratory under different
environmental and light conditions to identify the chemical and biological
pathways allowing Mn oxides to form. Mn oxides formed via different light and
environmental conditions will be characterized to determine their formation
pathways and reactivity. Identification of the underlying biogeochemical
processes allowing for light dependent Mn oxide formation will improve modern
biogeochemical models and paleorecord interpretations. These light-mediated
reactions may also help explain previous observations of particulate Mn and Mn
oxides in surface sun-lit waters. As part of this project, the PI and PhD
student will contribute to high school education, mentor students in middle/high
school science fair projects, and support research experiences for summer
undergraduate fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.