* 2025224
* SG: A revised classification of the flowering plant family Cleomaceae as a tool to understand drivers of diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Eric Roalson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,072.00

This project creates a reorganized classification of the flowering plant family
Cleomaceae based on new genomic data and a new assessment of physical
characteristics of the plants. The classification and associated hypotheses of
relationships among lineages will provide a critical and foundational framework
for studies of physiology, development, and genome structure in the family. It
will also contribute to the evaluation of fossil seeds that are thought to
belong to this plant group, enabling improved estimates of the ages of lineages
in the family. The advancement of knowledge inherent to this project
particularly contributes to society by providing a standardized classification
for organizing our understanding of these plants. This is foundational knowledge
for horticultural use, identification manuals, conservation studies, and many
other applications by scientists and the general public. It will also provide
training for one graduate student researcher at Washington State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses DNA sequence data and
morphology to create revised hypotheses of the major lineages in the family and
will complete the ongoing revision of the classification of these lineages. One
specific goal of this project is to create a robust phylogenetic hypothesis of
the relationships among major lineages of Cleomaceae. The goal of the project is
to use near-complete species-level sampling and new genomic data to place all or
nearly all species in currently recognized or newly identified lineages.
Researchers will sequence about 290 species, or ~90% of the taxonomic diversity
of the family. The second major goal of the project is to use the phylogeny to
revise the classification of Cleomaceae. Once lineages are resolved, it will be
necessary to identify structural characteristics that can be used to define
these lineages and assign valid names to the groups. New micromorphological
characters from seeds and pollen will be investigated, and these as well as
additional macromorphological characters will be evaluated for potential to
define lineages. The goal is to create a classification of Cleomaceae that is
predictive, practical, and robust. This revised classification will provide an
invaluable framework for comparative studies of physiology, floral development,
and genome structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.