* 2025234
* EAGER: Crowd-AI Sensing Based Traffic Analysis for Ho Chi Minh City Planning Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Phu Phung, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 314,005.00

This activity is in response to NSF Dear Colleague Letter Supporting Transition
of Research into Cities through the US ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Cities) Smart Cities Partnership in collaboration with NSF and the US
State Department. Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC), an ASEAN city in Vietnam, is well-
known for its traffic congestion and high density of vehicles, cars, buses,
trucks, and a swarm of motorbikes (7.3 million motorbikes for more than 8.4
million residents) that overwhelm city streets. Large-scale development projects
have exacerbated urban conditions, making traffic congestion more severe.
Additionally, traffic congestion is one of the leading contributors to noise and
dust pollution in the city. Altogether, traffic congestion poses major barriers
to urban quality of life, but the solutions are complex. There are two main
problems with traffic in HCMC. First, HCMC, like other dense urban areas, needs
significant financial and technical resources to solve its traffic and
infrastructure problems. Second, given that traffic monitoring is carried out by
a limited number of staff who watch traffic activities from thousands of camera
feeds on multiple screens, there are limits to the number and effectiveness of
responses that personnel are able to offer in response to real-time traffic
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use visual crowd
AI sensing for the HCMC planning simulator. The project will make use of the
city camera system (crowd-AI sensing) for traffic analysis in real-time. It
seeks to detect “anomaly events” such as traffic violations, traffic jams, and
accidents, with reduced intervention from monitoring staff, allowing staff, in
turn, to better respond to traffic problems as they arise. A city planning
simulator will be developed upon the analyzed traffic data. The simulator will
be used to support metropolitan transportation planning. Project findings will
not only address specific urban challenges and the innovative technical
solutions needed to solve them in HCMC, but also will provide models use in
other contexts, including U.S. cities where traffic, congestion, and urban
infrastructure challenges can benefit from AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be validated by professionals in HCMC who can evaluate its effectiveness
for detecting anomaly events with reduced human observation, who are better able
to respond to traffic problems as a result of implementing aspects of the
project, and who can make use of the project data for traffic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.