* 2025124
* NNCI: Midwest Nano Infrastructure Corridor (MINIC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Theresa Reineke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in technology have enabled
new physical and chemical understanding (nanoscience) as well as new structures
and devices (nanotechnology) that have great potential to positively impact the
world. The Midwest Nano Infrastructure Corridor (MiNIC) will accelerate these
advances by providing access to leading edge micro and nano fabrication and
material characterization capabilities for the research and development of both
nanoscience and nanotechnology. MiNIC facilities represent more than $80M in
labs and equipment as well as more than 500 person-years of staff expertise.
Academic and industry researchers can use these capabilities on an equal basis
with University of Minnesota faculty. Students will gain valuable hands-on
experience. Entrepreneurs and companies will enjoy low-cost access to try new
ideas without long-term capital equipment commitments. While MiNIC will support
a broad spectrum of nano R&amp;D, it will target researchers in two areas. The
first is the development of materials and devices for quantum sensing and
computing, a field with the potential to revolutionize information technology.
The second area is the application of these technologies to biology and
medicine. Extreme miniaturization will enable sensing approaches that will
change our understanding of biology and will also provide the ability to create
intelligent devices for use inside the human body. MINIC will also reach out to
underserved communities to increase their participation in this rapidly growing
field. It will also support micro and nano laboratories at smaller schools
throughout the Midwest to enable the development of nanotechnology over a broad
geographic area.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The
Midwest Nano Infrastructure Corridor (MiNIC) provides access to state of the art
facilities in both micro and nano fabrication and materials characterization.
Among its hundreds of tools, designed to support a broad range of needs, MiNIC
has highly advanced capabilities such as ultrahigh purity thin film deposition,
nanoscale lithography, ultrahigh resolution electron microscopy for both hard
and soft materials, and ion beam materials analysis. These capabilities are
essential to the research and development of novel materials, structures, and
devices. Applications include computation, information storage, sensors, light
emitters, and micro-mechanical actuators. These devices will have dramatic
impacts in the fields of communication, information science, renewable energy
and environmental remediation, biosensing, defense, transportation, and
agriculture. The site is supported by a staff of more than 20 experts with 500
person-years of experience in the field. In addition to supporting traditional
users, the staff provides remote access to the facility. MiNIC will emphasize
two technical areas that correspond to two of the NSF Big Ideas: Quantum
Information Science (QIS) and Understanding the Rules of Life, also called
Bionano. QIS will support work in superconducting and/or 2D materials to create
high-performance high-stability nanoscale quantum devices. Bionano will support
work on technologies that combine top-down and bottom-up processes to create
revolutionary answers to bio-system sensing and the development of complex
tissue-models including organic/inorganic hybrids. MiNIC anticipates serving at
least 300 external and 600 internal users annually by the end of the funding
period. In addition to these technical users, MiNIC will support the broader
community with outreach programs to underrepresented populations, filling the
STEM pipeline, and increasing emphasis on building a diverse user
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.