* 2025280
* Maryland Collaborative for Research in Urban STEM Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marc Stein, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,023.00

Morgan State University proposes to implement an Institute in Research Methods
that will build capacity in mixed-methods, with an emphasis on K-12 STEM
education in an urban setting. The institute will be managed by the Maryland
Collaborative for Research in Urban STEM Education (MD-CRUSE), a partnership
involving the Baltimore Education Research Consortium and Baltimore Public
Schools. The goal is to enhance participantsâ€™ STEM education research skills and
competencies, stimulate research projects that will build knowledge in K-12
urban STEM education, and inform STEM education practice and policy. The
institute responds to the need cultivate expertise that can analyze large
administrative data sets to understand the unique STEM learning needs of the
urban student population in Baltimore and to inform future research to improve
the quality of STEM education among diverse students. In addition to expanding
the pool of STEM education researchers, the institute will build
transdisciplinary communities of practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MD-CRUSE will
foster inter-institutional convergence research and alignment between K-12
practitioners and STEM education researchers. The institute curriculum will
include professional development seminars on research team building; STEM
education theoretical frameworks such as social cognitive career theory, self-
efficacy theory, and sociocultural theory of cognitive development;
methodological training using quantitative and qualitative research designs; and
research proposal development. Participants will be provided access to large
administrative data sets through the Baltimore Education Research Consortium to
formulate investigations of K-12 STEM education topics. The data can be used to
document early education program exposure, longitudinal trajectories of
students, college going behaviors, and other factors such as attendance,
discipline trends, and stability in school leadership. In addition to the
seminars and workshops, participants will receive mentoring and support in
developing research dissemination strategies. An intensive session will focus on
the landscape of dissemination, translational and publishing opportunities in
STEM education research, research outlets, and sustainability of research
collaborations. The institute will provide an opportunity for participants to
acquire expertise in STEM education research in an authentic setting that
addresses immediate needs. The participants will be positioned to develop
exploratory research projects that will have strong potential for translation to
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the ECR: Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program. ECR funds fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM professional
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.