* 2025728
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-pharmaceutical, light and ultrasound combination therapy to prevent SSI's and HAI's
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Vipula Tailor, SONIX MEDICAL DEVICES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 253,670.00

The broader impact/commercial the potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is significant reduction in suffering and
healthcare costs from the incidence of Surgical Site Infections (SSIs), Hospital
Acquired Infections (HAIs), and Superbugs. This project will provide many
societal benefits: improved disaster care prior to hospitalization; better in-
field military injury outcomes; improved infection care in underdeveloped
nations with limited access to hospitals and clinics, and others. Costs of HAIs
and SSIs currently exceed $41B worldwide. A recent estimate indicates that
failing to tackle antibiotic resistance could lead to over 10M deaths annually,
and millions in cumulative economic damage. The proposed technology is an
infection treatment that does not use antibiotics. As an alternative, this
project will offer a non-pharmaceutical solution providing cost-effective
treatments that reduce the clinical use of antibiotics. This project will
provide a reduction in patient suffering, improved medical outcomes, and reduced
overall healthcare costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a non-pharmaceutical therapy that
selectively kills bacteria and viruses and prevents SSI’s and HAI’s and does not
induce further antimicrobial resistance. The project focuses on combining and
simultaneous applying specific wavelengths of light and sound frequency
resulting in a novel therapeutic dose to kill bacteria, including Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). The technology can be used pre-surgery
to disinfect body areas where the surgery will be performed, and post-surgery to
prevent infections at surgical sites. The innovative combination of specific
wavelengths of light and sound frequency activates a unique biochemical
mechanism to kill bacteria from within. The research will identify ideal
materials that will transmit both light and sound energies efficiently whilst
meeting safety, efficacy, and ergonomic configurations for proposed
applications. The aim is to also find optimal treatment times to treat different
areas of the body for specific bacterial infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.