* 2025156
* Workshop: The Role of Geoscience In Environmental Health Through Food Sovereignty
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Wendy Todd, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2022
* USD 48,260.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this workshop is to bring together Native
American/Alaska Native (NA/AN) tribal communities, leaders, elders, and cultural
practitioners, faculty, students, geoscience and health professionals who engage
in various aspects of geoscience, food sovereignty, and human health to
emphasize both the importance geoscience plays in environmental sustainability
and monitoring and the interconnectedness of geoscience in food sovereignty and
thus human health. The workshop will contribute to empirical knowledge through
the creation of a cross cultural geoscience learning community dedicated to
respectfully and ethically coupling Traditional Knowledge and geoscience
practices thereby expanding both knowledge systems. This workshop will add to
the knowledge of collaboratively building upon best practices for engaging in
geoscience research with tribal nations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;The workshop, which will weave together geoscience research with
sustaining traditional nutritional methodologies will address the following
questions 1) how does geoscience research impact Indigenous food sovereignty
(implications from changing weather patterns)?, 2) what geoscience research is
being conducted with tribal nations to monitor environmental health and
sustainability? 3) why is geoscience research important for tribal nations? 4)
what knowledge needs to be generated or shared regarding the coupling of tribal
knowledge (TK) with geoscience? and 5) why is food sovereignty important?
Throughout the workshop participants will be prompted to consider these
questions to expand interdisciplinary partnerships, promote ethical and
culturally aligned geoscience research, and highlight the importance of
geoscience in environmental health and the role of geoscience research around
issues of food sovereignty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.