* 2025693
* Ecology of MERS-CoV in camels, humans, and wildlife in Ethiopia
* BIO,DEB
* 08/25/2019,08/31/2024
* Amira Roess, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,308,746.00

Zoonotic diseases are diseases that exist in animals and can be transmitted to
humans. Zoonoses currently account for approximately 75 percent of all emerging
infections worldwide. However, the factors that trigger zoonotic disease
emergence and spread remain poorly understood, in part because they involve
multiple species, complex inter-species and intra-species relationships, and
many interacting environmental, behavioral, social, and economic factors. Middle
Eastern Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) presents a case in point.
MERS-CoV was first identified in human beings in 2012 and has killed 36 percent
of those infected, but little is known about what has led to its emergence. For
example, several human cases have been traced to contact with camels imported
from Africa; studies also have detected MERS-CoV in African wildlife; and while
camels are a known reservoir host for MERS-CoV, it is not known if there are
additional reservoirs or intermediate hosts, or how frequently and under what
conditions MERS-CoV spillover occurs. This project will investigate the natural
ecology of MERS-CoV in relation to broader social, economic, and environmental
changes; its potential wildlife reservoirs in close contact with camels; and the
potential for spillover to humans who consume, herd, and trade camels and camel
products. This work is of direct importance to national security with respect to
disease threats; MERS-CoV is currently on the World Health Organization's
priority shortlist of diseases in urgent need of accelerated research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand when and under what conditions
MERS-CoV emerges and spreads from animals to humans, the researchers ask, (1)
How do social, cultural and behavioral characteristics of camel economics shape
virus ecologies? (2) Which intra- and inter-species interactions increase MERS-
CoV emergence and transmission? and (3) What climatic and environmental
variables are associated with transmission? Researchers will conduct field
studies of wild and domestic (camel) reservoirs, collecting roughly 800 samples
from targeted wildlife (ungulates and eulipotyphlads) over two years at four
locations. They will carry out socio-behavioral studies across the camel value
chain and follow individual camels longitudinally to determine when the same
individuals seroconvert to MERS-CoV positive status. They will conduct
laboratory analyses and do viral sequencing. The researchers will integrate the
data into mathematical models using the 'Method of Plausible Parameter Sets'
(MPPS), which will determine which mechanistic scenarios are consistent with
observed patterns of MERS-CoV in camels and humans. This broadly inclusive
approach expands upon traditional studies of zoonotic disease emergence. The
transmission models will be applicable to other zoonotic diseases linked to
livestock production and will help to identify interventions to reduce disease
emergence and transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.