* 2025013
* Vibrational Structure and Thermal Transport in Statically and Dynamically Disordered Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Alan McGaughey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
educational activities with an aim to advance our fundamental understanding of
thermal transport in solid materials. Thermal transport is a critical
consideration in applications ranging from energy-efficient buildings to cooling
electronics to converting waste heat into electricity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal conductivity is a property that describes how heat
moves through a material. Standard approaches for predicting the thermal
conductivity of a solid are based on an assumption that its atoms are either
perfectly ordered or fully disordered. The atomic structure of many solids,
however, has elements of both order and disorder. For example, a class of
materials, known as metal halide perovskites which can convert sunlight into
electricity, contain molecules at regularly ordered positions, but the molecules
rotate, which creates disorder. Their thermal conductivities, which must be
known to determine device operating temperatures, cannot be predicted using
standard approaches. This project first seeks to build theoretical tools and a
computational framework for performing such calculations. The framework will
then be applied to understand how thermal conductivity is impacted by co-
existing order and disorder in metal halide perovskites and sodium superoxide,
which is an important component of sodium-air batteries. The tools and framework
will be suitable for studying thermal transport in any solid that contains
elements of order and disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating graduate
and undergraduate students will carry out cutting-edge, interdisciplinary
research that spans materials science, physics, and mechanical engineering. A
modular, open-access molecular simulation course will be developed and
distributed to the scientific community. An outreach activity that explores the
order-disorder spectrum will be developed and presented to middle-school and
high-school students in the Pittsburgh area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and educational
activities with an aim to advance our fundamental understanding of thermal
transport in statically and dynamically disordered crystals. Such materials have
a well-defined lattice and basis, with elements of disorder emerging at higher
temperatures. In a crystal with static disorder, a multi-well potential energy
surface leads to differences between unit cells (e.g., the oxygen dimer
orientations in sodium superoxide). In a crystal with dynamic disorder, some
atoms do not vibrate around an equilibrium position (e.g., the rotating
methylammonium ion in a halide perovskite).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis is that thermal transport in statically and dynamically disordered
crystals can be described through an integrated treatment of phonons, diffusons
(delocalized, non-propagating vibrational modes), and defects. A computational
framework will be built that integrates finite-temperature force constants,
lattice dynamics, the Boltzmann transport equation, Allen-Feldman theory, and
perturbation theory to predict mode-dependent properties and thermal
conductivities. Novel contributions will include the first-ever implementation
of rotational lattice dynamics for thermal conductivity prediction, the
formulation of a virtual crystal approximation approach for modeling scattering
by static disorder, and the use of unstable equilibrium structures to include
scattering by dynamic disorder. The framework will then be applied to understand
how thermal conductivity is impacted by static and dynamic disorder in sodium
superoxide and halide perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating
graduate and undergraduate students will carry out cutting-edge,
interdisciplinary research that spans materials science, physics, and mechanical
engineering. A modular, open-access molecular simulation course will be
developed and distributed through nanoHUB. An outreach activity that explores
the order-disorder spectrum will be developed and presented to middle-school and
high-school students in the Pittsburgh area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.