* 2025800
* STTR Phase I:  Monolithic Aerogel Designs for Daylighting Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Ann Anderson, Sunthru LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 292,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is in the use of aerogels in daylighting applications to efficiently
incorporate natural lighting in building design, benefitting society by
significantly decreasing energy consumption and simultaneously improving
environments. Natural light is linked to health and productivity The daylighting
market ascribes high value to natural light transmission, optical clarity, and
thermal insulation; however, existing products generally fail to achieve all
three. The proposed technology decouples thermal performance from window
clarity, allowing end users to experience the benefits of increased natural
light without being resigned to low translucency or high heat or cooling loss.
This solution will provide the benefits of natural lighting while improving
overall energy efficiency in buildings. As a direct result, architects and
glazing contractors will not be limited by thermal considerations when adding
windows to structures. Further, it addresses a need for windows that are
acoustically insulating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
STTR Phase I project lies in the combination of a proprietary design with a
licensed aerogel fabrication method to yield a transformative, elegant window
product that promotes natural lighting and reduces energy waste. Silica aerogel
monoliths have outstanding insulating ability and superior optical properties to
materials currently used in daylighting products; however, traditional methods
for making monolithic aerogels are time- and labor-intensive. The patented
fabrication method employed in this project is advantageous for several reasons,
including ease of automation, speed of processing and production of consistent
monolithic aerogels, and offers an alternative to existing daylighting solutions
with the potential to transform a generally stagnant industry. To mitigate the
risks associated with bringing an aerogel window product to market, this project
focuses on: (1) improving aerogel molding technology; (2) developing a
proprietary innovation to build larger systems; (3) experimenting with dye-doped
and etched aerogels for tailored aesthetic effects; (4) fabricating aerogels for
two prototype windows (one colorless, one aesthetically enhanced); (5)
developing a simplified window assembly method to fabricate two prototype
windows; and (6) studying the aerogel precursor supply chain and use of
alternative chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.