* 2025152
* Collaborative Research: Learning for Faster Computations to Enhance Efficiency and Security of Power System Operations
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Yue Zhao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,096.00

The electric grid is a complex critical infrastructure system that underpins all
economic and social activities in the US. It is thus of utmost importance to
maintain its efficient, reliable and secure operation at all times. The system,
however, is undergoing an unprecedented period of transformation with rapid
growths in renewable energy and electric vehicles, as well as increasing
concerns of cyber security. Consequently, not only there is a higher requirement
for efficient and secure operation of the grid, but also achieving it becomes
much more challenging. The issue is especially acute from a computational
perspective, as problems of much greater complexity need to be solved more
frequently. As such, conventional approaches for solving secure power system
operation problems face major and pressing challenges in maintaining their
efficacy in the rapidly evolving power grids. To overcome these challenges, this
project will develop novel machine-learning-based methods to greatly accelerate
solving key and large-scale secure power system operation problems. Notably, the
developed methods will integrate data-driven methods with the physical models of
power systems. The impact of the project extends to machine learning algorithm
design in all engineering systems where knowledge from physical system models
and conventional wisdom in algorithm design can be incorporated. The developed
algorithms will lead to greatly enhanced efficiency, reliability and security of
power systems in the presence of high penetration of renewable energy and
without the need of building more transmission lines or procuring much higher
reserve capacity, resulting in tremendous economic savings for consumers. The
project will also contribute to the much-demanded educational needs in the
industry by training the next generation workforce to master interdisciplinary
expertise of machine learning and power systems. The PIs are committed to
promote diversity in research and education through the project by engaging
students of minorities and from under-privileged backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new machine learning algorithms,
both leveraging and integrated with existing computational tools, to greatly
improve the computational efficiency of solving challenging power system
operation problems. We accomplish this by designing algorithms that use data to
replace some of the existing heuristics based on human experience. We use a
bottom-up approach by carefully formulating the problems to determine the best
interface between the physical system and machine learning. This allows us to
design algorithms that are aware of the physics of the problems and complement
existing tools in the field. Specifically, we pursue three research thrusts: i)
solving for optimal generator dispatch levels by introducing a data-driven
component to the existing algorithms; ii) enabling fast identification and
quantification of problematic contingencies using reinforcement learning; and
iii) finding the most secure and efficient generation unit commitment schedule
utilizing the results from the previous thrusts. These algorithms can be
directly integrated into current solvers and have the potential of providing
orders of magnitude speedup over existing methods. As such, this project offers
a) new machine learning paradigms and algorithms, b) innovative ways of
integrating machine learning methods with physical model-based optimization
algorithms, and c) potentially transformative tools that solve key power system
operation problems in a holistic framework with much faster
speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.