* 2025709
* Understanding the Role of Activated Oxygen Species in the Room Temperature Conversion of Methane to Methanol
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* William Mustain, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Among fossil resources, natural gas - especially methane (its chief component) –
is the most attractive feedstock for producing a wide range of hydrocarbon-based
commodity chemicals. As the world’s leading methane producer, and with vast
reservoirs of shale methane, as well as the future availability of a significant
amount of biogas methane, the U.S. is in position to lead the world in a
methane-to-chemicals revolution. Unfortunately, existing methane conversion
processes are energetically inefficient, resulting in significant carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions. One promising alternative to existing processes for methane
activation is low temperature, aqueous electrochemical conversion as promoted by
catalysts. When paired with renewable energy sources, like wind and solar,
electrocatalytic processes can theoretically achieve completely CO2-free
production of chemicals and fuels from methane. To that end, the project
investigates various electrocatalytic methane reaction pathways, with the
eventual goal of enabling the development of inexpensive, efficient, and
economical fuels and chemicals, such as
methanol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will combine two high-
level scientific aims to investigate five known pathways to create the surface-
active oxygen species needed to enable the methane-to-methanol reaction. The
first aim focuses on identifying the types of activated oxygen species and the
effects of electrochemical potential on reaction selectivity and activity. For
each active oxygen pathway, the second aim focuses on identifying the rate
determining step by combining in-situ characterization of the surface species
during reaction with electrochemical data. Together the two aims combine
standard electrochemical techniques with surface enhanced infrared spectroscopy,
isotope labeling and GC/MS product characterization to uncover the rate,
selectivity, and reaction order for each pathway. To enable the five pathways,
only 3 different catalysts are needed: oxidized polycrystalline Pt, RuO2 and
NiO:ZrO2. The number of catalyst chemistries and form factors are purposely
limited, to promote a depth of understanding that can inform further development
of additional catalysts that have even greater activity towards methane
activation and selectivity for methanol formation. The fundamental understanding
generated through the scientific aims will be fed directly to two undergraduate-
led engineering activities, allowing for strong integration of research and
education. Laboratory-based undergraduate research will focus on integrating
down-selected catalysts into new reactor schemes. Additionally, undergraduate
senior design teams will focus on designing the supporting balance-of-plant
around the new reactors, and performing preliminary techno-economic assessments
of various configurations. Finally, the project will be balanced by several
hands-on outreach programs to under-represented high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.