* 2025257
* Investigating the Combination of Design Thinking and Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences on Student Persistence and Retention in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Philip Vieira, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 228,379.00

In this capacity building project, the investigator proposes to investigate the
impact of design thinking training combined with established pedagogical
strategies in increasing student recruitment, persistence, and retention in STEM
at a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) and a predominantly urban undergraduate
institution. In this context, design thinking focuses on the iterative process
by which solutions are derived, taking multiple perspectives from various
disciplines, and encouraging collaboration, prototyping, and feedback-driven
problem solving. The investigator will conduct the research project and build
capacity in STEM education research by implementing a professional development
plan through formal courses, mentoring, and an advisory board that will focus on
mixed-methods design and methods, theoretical frameworks, STEM education
pedagogy, assessment of integrated STEM competencies, and grantsmanship in STEM
education research. The project will establish a novel and sustainable STEM
education research program to investigate factors that contribute to student
success in STEM at the institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The working hypothesis
for the research project is that incorporating design thinking (DT) training in
an introductory course will increase rates of persistence and retention in STEM.
The investigator will use an evaluation design and persistence framework to (a)
examine the impact of DT training on undergraduate student persistence and
retention in STEM and (b) examine the impact of combining DT training with
course-based undergraduate research experiences on undergraduate student
persistence and retention in STEM. The testbed for the bulk of the research will
be the first-year seminar program where entering freshmen are required to take a
university general education seminar course. Classes are comprised of STEM and
non-STEM majors, allowing the investigator to test the potential for STEM
recruitment. The course curriculum will merge instructions in foundations of
neuroscience with demonstrations and activities that train students to use a
variety of tools to measure electrical activity from the nervous system.
Students will them work in groups on pre-defined projects to study novel aspects
of neuroscience. Pre- and post-surveys will be conducted to collect data that
will compare outcomes that are theoretically correlated with long-term success.
The project will produce evidence of effective educational practices that
promote student success in STEM and contribute to greater diversity in STEM
education and the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the ECR Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR funds fundamental STEM education research projects
that focus on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM fields, and STEM professional workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.