* 2025848
* STTR Phase II:  Versatile Low-Noise Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier for Quantum Information Processing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Christopher Koh, MILLIMETER WAVE SYSTEMS, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 965,773.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to advance quantum technologies. Currently, the construction of
larger quantum computers, measured by the number of quantum bits or qubits, is
hampered by the many wired connections that must connect between the
cryogenically-cooled circuits and room-temperature electronics. This project
will advance a method to simultaneously boost the weak signals from many quantum
bits (qubits) at the same time, and therefore reduce hardware complexity and
size. This product will help increase the density of hardware, enabling more
powerful quantum computers that will drive new breakthroughs in science, drug
development, materials, machine learning capabilities for disease diagnostics,
weather predictions, and algorithms for the efficient direction of resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will advance the development of amplifiers for quantum computers.
Quantum computers require quantum noise-limited amplifiers for efficient
operation, but such devices are not commercially available due to the difficulty
in fabrication and lack of universal solutions. This project will develop
specialized amplifiers that can be fabricated in commercial foundries for
deployment at scale. The technology uses an innovative arrangement of
superconducting elements to form a novel amplifier. This process will be
tolerant to manufacturing variations to enable production at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.