* 2025374
* Interfacially Engineered Membranes for Simultaneous Microwave Catalysis and Liquid Filtration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Wen Zhang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 409,999.00

Membrane-based filtration is widely used by industry for separating distinct
components (ions, molecules, and particles) within mixtures. Membranes find use
in applications ranging from wastewater treatment and desalination to chemical
and biological product manufacturing. The performance of conventional membrane
technology generally decreases over time as undesirable substances or solutes
accumulate at the membrane's surface and within its pores, which is a process
called "fouling." Membrane fouling eventually prevents the desired fluid from
passing through the membrane, eventually requiring the membrane to be cleaned or
replaced. Separate from the issue of fouling, membrane technology is currently
inadequate for eliminating trace-level, low molecular weight organic pollutants
from fluids. This project will develop a microwave-assisted membrane filtration
process designed to improve filtration performance, enhance pollutant
degradation, and mitigate membrane fouling. The research will support
manufacturing of smart functional membrane systems for sustainable water and
chemical treatment or purification via microwave-catalytic membrane filtration.
Research activities will inform the creation of new teaching modules, laboratory
manuals, innovative learning experiences, and professional development programs
on catalytic and reactive membrane systems. Leveraging partnerships with
professional societies and the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation,
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM will be recruited to
conduct summer research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop a microwave-assisted membrane filtration process that introduces
microwave-initiated catalysis directly within the membrane-based separation
process. Microwaves are expected to penetrate the membrane matrix and energize
the microwave-responsive catalysts to produce reactive radicals degrade
pollutants and mitigate fouling. The irradiation of the membrane is further
expected to cause rapid water vaporization and interfacial nanobubbling,
minimizing fouling via a chemical-free process. Functionalized membrane
fabrication processes will be developed, and the stability and reactivity of the
membranes will be assessed. Fundamental understanding of formation kinetics of
nanobubbles and radicals, pollutant degradation efficiency, and antifouling
performance will also be developed for a suite of candidate catalysts and
membrane materials and types. The study will also apply innovative techniques
for in situ electrochemical assessment of catalyst activity and radical
formation under microwave irradiation and evaluation of microwave penetration.
The expected outcomes of this research are: (1) optimized fabrication processes
for catalyst-coated ceramic membranes with tunable catalyst coating structures;
(2) quantification of antifouling efficacy and degradation performance of the
microwave-assisted filtration system; (3) understanding of the mechanisms of
microwave-assisted Fenton-like reactions and nanobubbles/radical formation the
role these processes play in pollutant degradation and fouling resistance; and
(4) development of tunable, microwave-enabled reactive membrane systems that
combine catalytic reactions and membrane filtration. The ultimate vision of the
project is the transformation of passive membrane filtration processes into
next-generation reactive membranes that proactively degrade water contaminants
and prevent surface fouling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.