* 2025195
* Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research: Fluid and Magma Transport at Plate Boundaries
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 438,431.00

Advances in disciplinary tools and major infrastructure efforts have fueled
impressive progress in our ability to understand the dynamics of plate
boundaries and the associated hazards to life and infrastructure. New data sets
and new methodologies offer valuable insights, yet many aspects of plate
boundary evolution are still poorly understood. Part of the impediment to
progress is due to the disciplinary nature of research. A more integrated
approach that leverages the knowledge and latest achievements in each of the
relevant disciplines is needed to generate new ideas and to identify new
observations that distinguish between competing hypotheses. This award supports
a summer program for the Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research
(CIDER) on the GeoPRISMS-driven theme of fluid and magma transport. CIDER seeks
to lower barriers to integrated research by promoting cross-disciplinary
education of researchers at all career levels. The team also intend to develop a
workforce that can more effectively engage in interdisciplinary research with
the goal of enabling more rapid progress on an important and unsolved research
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed four-week summer program brings
together a cohort of senior graduate students and postdocs from institutions
across the country to tackle the fundamental questions about the evolution of
plate boundaries. This topic is central to the basic paradigm of plate tectonics
and understanding the role of fluids and magma has been a long-standing
challenge. Senior participants from various US institutions, and representing a
range of disciplines, serve as instructors and mentors for group research
projects. The first two weeks of the program are devoted to lectures and
tutorials, covering the basic tools and approaches of the various disciplines.
The second two weeks are used to develop research projects in groups with a good
mix of disciplinary expertise. The outcome will be a better understanding of
plate boundaries, including key questions about the cycling of water and carbon
through the Earth system, which regulates the long-term stability of
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.