* 2025309
* WORKSHOP: Interaction Design and Children (IDC) 2020 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jerry Fails, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 22,636.00

This is funding to partially support participation by approximately 6 graduate
students, along with 5 distinguished faculty mentors, in a Doctoral Consortium
(workshop) that will take place in conjunction with the 19th Annual Interaction
Design and Children conference (IDC 2020), and which is sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). IDC is the premier international
conference for researchers, educators, and practitioners to share the latest
research findings, innovative methodologies, and new technologies in the areas
of inclusive child-centered design, learning, and interaction. The theme of this
year's conference is "Designing for the Future." The IDC doctoral consortium is
a forum where students and mentors create a safe space for constructive
refinement of the research endeavors of the doctoral students within this
important research area. Effort will be made to recruit participants from
underrepresented groups and from smaller schools or with smaller research
programs. Participants in the workshop create a network that strengthens the
overall research community while at the same time advancing their own research
through valuable interactions with peers and mentors with diverse perspectives.
Additional broad impacts will derive from planting the seeds to a better
understanding of how children interact with technology, the impact that
technology has on children, and how to design, develop, evaluate, and improve
technology for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IDC doctoral consortium is a
full-day event that will take place the day before the main conference. Workshop
participants will present their research questions, approach and agenda, and
receive constructive yet critical feedback from faculty mentors and peers, which
will enrich their research by enabling them to better articulate their focus and
to refine their research methods and approach. Participants will also present a
poster about their research during the main conference, in order to give them
further opportunities to connect to a larger scholarly network. Abstracts of the
students' doctoral work and progress will be included in the IDC conference
proceedings, which are published in the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) Digital Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.