* 2025606
* Cascade21: A workshop to catalyze and synthesize understanding of the role of magmatism in an archetype continental arc
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2024
* USD 99,099.00

The volcanoes of the Cascade Range represent significant hazards to the
population of the Pacific Northwest region. These same volcanoes have also
played an important role for geologists that seek to understand how subduction –
the pushing of one tectonic plate beneath another – produces magma and volcanic
activity. To promote greater understanding of volcanism and related processes in
the Cascade Range, we plan to hold Cascade22, a workshop synthesizing recent
data and discoveries of the important role of magmatism in subduction zones,
with a specific focus on the Cascadia Subduction zone. The conference is planned
to be held over five days in summer 2022, in the city of Bend, Oregon, and will
include an early career scientist day and a field trip. The conference will
provide students and early career researchers with a range of training,
mentoring and research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be a multidisciplinary examination of critical aspects of
magmatism in subduction zones from the perspective of the canonical Cascade Arc
system, from the deep mantle to the surface, and will serve as a forum for
synthesizing a broad range of geophysical, geochemical, volcanological,
geological, cultural and other observations relative to understanding the
complex roles played by magmatic processes in subduction zone systems. In some
sense the conference will reprise the 1968 Andesite conference, famously
organized by Alexander McBirney and others (McBirney, 1969) in Eugene and Bend,
Oregon. However, we will also highlight the scientific and cultural changes of
the last five decades, as well as focusing attention on challenges that lie
ahead. The conference is also designed to have a field component, and Bend
provides unsurpassed access to volcanic areas, and is an excellent stepping off
point for further exploration of the Cascade arc and other nearby regions. The
workshop will be small to medium-sized (~80 people) and be held over five days –
with the first being focused on early career attendees and one day dedicated to
a mid-conference field trip. There will be three days of oral and poster
sessions. Rather than focus sessions on individual research disciplines, the
sessions will be designed around issues that require a multidisciplinary
approach and that directly promote synthesis. Keynote speakers will be assigned
to provide input from different disciplinary perspectives, and there will be
ample time for group discussions and shorter presentations, as well as separate
poster sessions. Each of these topics will then become the basis for a synthesis
paper in subsequent journal special issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.