* 2025787
* Collaborative Research: Local Time Extent of Dayside Magnetopause Reconnection and Controlling Factors
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Brian Walsh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 146,894.00

Reconnection of magnetic fields is a fundamental physical process that can
accelerate particles and inject energy into systems. In the geospace
environment, there are many unanswered questions about how such processes work
and impact the space around Earth. This project will investigate the process on
the dayside of the Earth in the outer regions of the magnetosphere.
Understanding this process is important for predicting and preparing for space
weather impacts, particularly to satellites that can be damaged by accelerated
particles in the harsh radiation environment in space. The project will support
an early career scientist, graduate students, and provide mentorship for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize the
local time extent of dayside active magnetopause reconnection and investigate
what controls dayside reconnection. Specifically, it will address: (1) What is
the local time extent of active reconnection?; (2) How is the extent related to
local magnetopause current sheet conditions?; and (3) How is the extent related
to upstream solar wind conditions? Conjunctions of in-situ and remote-sensing
observations will be used. Specifically, NASA’s Time History of Events and
Macroscale Interactions during Substorms mission and Magnetospheric Multiscale
Mission will be used to identify reconnection events and NSF’s Super Dual
Auroral Radar Network will be used to measure the extent of reconnection. Local
magnetopause conditions will be obtained from space-ground conjunctions. The
solar wind conditions will be provided by spacecraft including NASA's Advanced
Composition Explorer, Global Geospace Science Wind satellite, and Geotail, and
NOAA's Deep Space Climate Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.