* 2025237
* BCSER: IID: Using Social Network Analysis to Evaluate the Impact of Communities on Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Geraldine Cochran, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 217,218.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving retention among
first-year engineering majors. Research shows that many students who plan to
major in engineering leave the field after their first year in college. This
attrition is particularly true for women students and students from ethnic or
racial groups that are underrepresented in STEM. The low retention rates are
disturbing, since the nation has a growing need to increase its engineering
workforce. Strategies known to support retention of engineering students include
student engagement in a learning community and access to strong social networks.
This research project will investigate how students participate in and
experience engineering communities in their first year of college. Specifically,
the study will use Social Network Analysis to quantify the relationship between
engagement in engineering communities and retention for first year engineering
students. Potential implications of this research include a better understanding
of how to design the first-year experience of engineering majors to promote the
development of community and, thus, promote greater persistence in the
major.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this study is to address
the performance inequities in introductory STEM courses by creating more
inclusive spaces that support students’ academic development. Previous research
indicates a connection among learning communities, student engagement, social
networks, and academic performance. Social Network Analysis provides a method
for quantitatively describing these relationships. The goals of this project are
to a) assess equity and inclusion in learning spaces for engineering students,
including classrooms, b) quantify engineering students' access to social capital
through peer networks in introductory courses, c) determine if access to social
capital is a predictor for engineering students' academic success, and d)
understand the relationships between student connection to the engineering
community and their first-year experience in the engineering program. More
specifically, the research focuses on students from marginalized or minoritized
groups, including ethnic/racial minorities, women, first generation college
students, and transfer students. The research objective is to determine if
students from these groups have the same centrality within the community as
other students. Centrality is a measure of connectedness, or how well the
student is positioned within the community to give and receive information. The
project will also determine if centrality in a community is a predictor of
engineering students' academic success as determined by performance on concept
inventories, overall course performance, and declaration of an engineering
subdiscipline. This project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to
build individuals’ capacity to carry out high-quality, fundamental STEM
education research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.