* 2025920
* SBIR Phase I:  Plant Photomorphogenesis using Adaptive Multispectral LED Arrays in a Rotary Aeroponic Cultivation Chamber (RACC)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Ivan Ball, HELIPONIX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a sustainable method to grow
healthy produce for individuals at a residential consumer level independent of
location, climate, or season of the year. This project will develop new systems
to grow produce in spaces with a small footprint, reducing food waste and
consumption of potable water and energy. This can provide the capability to
enhance cost-effective production in a small space with limited resources.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is a
new plant cultivation technology, called rotary aeroponics. coupled with a
tunable irradiance growth efficiency research light designed to examine how
light wavelength and timing can impact plant photomorphogenesis. Rotary
aeroponic cultivation is the method of growing plants on a rotating cylindrical
tower that is affixed vertically within a controlled environmental chamber. The
tower design provides a larger surface area for growing plants in comparison to
traditional vertical farming methods, thereby increasing the number of plants
grown in a smaller space with less power consumption. The goal of this project
is to successfully grow a healthy polyculture assortment of leafy green
vegetables in a food-safe environment. The multi-spectra light will be used to
learn how to maximize plant yields, minimize food safety risks, and enhance the
taste profiles of different plant types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.