* 2025894
* SBIR Phase II:  Instance Segmentation in Support of Sustainable Development
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,12/31/2023
* George Azzari, ATLAS AI P.B.C.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,805.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be to improve the efficiency of food production and supply chains
for small-scale farming systems. This project advances high-resolution, in-
season crop yield forecasts, focusing on maize yields in Sub-Saharan Africa with
technologies that can be extended to global small-holder agriculture. The
project will address three needs: 1) the design of financial products and
services for small-holder farmers, including credit and crop insurance models;
2) the planning of harvest operations and efficient linkage of produce to
markets; and 3) the detection of lower than average yields, and the mitigation
of resulting threats to food security. This can help service providers, producer
groups, traders and aggregators, and government policy-makers. In addition to
commercial and societal impacts, this innovation will advance the state of the
science in yield forecasting, by adapting methods used in large-scale commercial
production for the smaller-scale, heterogeneous farm plots typical of the
developing world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will develop a novel method for forecasting plot-level
maize yields, using high resolution satellite imagery and other remotely sensed
data as inputs. The method is calibrated and tested using field data from four
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. A first research objective is to implement and
evaluate a variety of computationally efficient modeling approaches for in-
season crop area classification, at the level of the small-holder plot (for
which no method is currently established). A second objective is to design and
calibrate a pixel-level yield forecasting model that generates estimates at
multiple timepoints across the growing season. Various calibration approaches
will be tested, using both public and proprietary data on historical yield
anomalies. The project addresses several persistent challenges in yield
forecasting, including the needs for: flexible fusion of remote sensing data
that span multiple spatial resolutions, temporal frequencies, and sensing
modalities; model architectures that can handle sparse data (given limited
access to field-level ground-truth data for calibration and validation); and
scalable approaches that can perform in different geographies and agro-
ecologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.