* 2025451
* MTM 1: An explainable AI system for microbiome characterization and microbiome-based host-phenotype prediction
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Thomas Doak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Microbiome research is going through a revolutionary transition from
characterizing reference microbiomes associated with different
environments/hosts to translational applications, including using microbiome for
disease diagnosis, improving the efficacy of cancer treatments, and prevention
of diseases. The success of these translational applications relies on the
identification of differential microbiome markers (e.g., species, genes and
pathways) that can distinguish different groups of microbiome data (e.g.,
healthy individuals versus patients). It is also important to understand factors
influencing the gut microbiome and strategies to manipulate the microbiome to
augment therapeutic responses and disease prevention. Existing approaches for
microbiome-based human host phenotype prediction typically lack explainability
and they treat different diseases individually (even though it has been shown
that some diseases share similar microbiome characteristics). This project aims
to address these issues and develop an explainable AI system for microbiome-
based phenotype predictions. The investigators will use the discoveries from
this project in undergraduate and graduate teaching, and for outreach education
through summer camps for high school students, providing them the opportunity to
experience the entire process from sample collection to building microbiome
classifiers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop an
explainable AI system for microbiome characterization and host phenotype
prediction based on microbiome data. The proposed microbiome AI system relies on
a network of human associated bacteria, to be inferred by integrating genome-
scale metabolic modeling (of metabolic competition and complementarity between
bacterial species) and co-occurrence profiling of microbial organisms across a
large number of microbiome datasets. The AI system uses a conditional
variational autoencoder guided by the inferred bacterial network to model the
microbial abundances under various host conditions. The autoencoder is used to
achieve efficient representation learning of a set of data in an unsupervised
manner, and multitask learning is used to leverage the microbiome datasets
associated with different diseases to alleviate the problem caused by limited
training samples. Further the AI model will incorporate prediction of auxiliary
phenotypes to regularize the representation learning. The AI system once trained
can be used for microbiome-based host phenotype prediction, and provide
explanations to the prediction through the model’s latent variables. It can also
be used for predicting the impact of phenotypic alternation, an important
problem to address in microbiome modulation and microbiome
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.