* 2025577
* GeoPRISMS synthesis workshop: Extensional Processes Across Tectonic Settings and Time Scales
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Dennis Harry, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 103,907.00

A workshop will be held to develop a community driven vision for NSF-funded
research that focuses on extensional deformation of the Earth. Stretching of
Earth’s strong upper layer is a fundamental aspect of Plate Tectonics. Zones of
stretching are ubiquitous features of tectonic plate boundaries, and include
mid-ocean ridges where two-thirds of our planet’s surface is created; narrow
continental rifts where plates break apart such as the East African Rift; broad
continental extensional provinces such as the North American Basin and Range,
and rift basins that form near collisional and transform plate boundaries.
Extension has occurred throughout Earth’s history, resulting in deformation,
magmatism, and fluid cycling that has produced economic mineral deposits of all
ages, fossil fuel and geothermal energy resources, shaped modern riverways and
their surrounding ecosystems, and accounts for many of Earth’s groundwater
resources and volcanic, earthquake, and landslide hazards. Previous initiatives
(RIDGE 2000, MARGINS, GeoPRISMS) produced new understandings of extensional
systems that were derived from focused studies of processes occurring at a
relatively few specific study sites. The proposed workshop will provide a forum
for synthesis and consolidation of lessons learned from these site-specific
programs, and will use that to establish a springboard for the next generation
of research. The workshop will gather representatives from a range of Earth
science disciplines. The workshop will seek to identify research pathways that
maximize contributions to hazard mitigation, resource assessment, science
literacy, and demographic diversity in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 3.5 day workshop will be held on the broad
theme of extensional deformation of the Earth’s lithosphere. Extension is a
fundamental tectonic process. Zones of divergence are ubiquitous features of
tectonic plate boundaries, including the mid-ocean ridges where two-thirds of
our planet’s surface is created, narrow continental rifts such as the East
African Rift, broad continental extensional provinces such as the North American
Basin and Range, and even adjacent to compressional and strike-slip plate
boundaries where extensional back-arc basins and pull-apart basins form.
Extension is a primary driver of chemical and thermal disequilibrium and
establishes gradients in composition, temperature, and gravitational potential
that drive volatile cycling and mass transport on both global and extremely
localized scales, with profound consequences for material and geothermal
resources, as well as hazards. Previous NSF programs (RIDGE 2000, MARGINS,
GeoPRISMS) have produced new data, models, experimental work, and understandings
derived from focused studies of extensional processes within specific tectonic
settings and study sites. The proposed workshop will provide a forum for
synthesis and consolidation of lessons learned from these previous programs, and
will establish a springboard for the next generation of research. The workshop’s
purpose is to reposition the research community for an integrative investigative
approach that leverages geographically disparate observations to illuminate
common processes within extensional systems and their shared underlying
mechanisms. As such, a key component of the workshop is to make explicit the
commonalities between continental, marginal, and mid-ocean rift and ridge
environments. The workshop provides a forum to link these hitherto mostly
separate research communities and develop a common language to help explore
common underlying dynamics through new collaborations. The workshop will gather
representatives from multiple Earth science communities to synthesize the most
recent generation of research results, and to develop a vision for more
integrative process-oriented research in the coming decade. The workshop will
emphasize participation of early career scientists and will prioritize the
societal relevance of scientific research by seeking to identify pathways that
maximize contributions to hazard mitigation, resource assessment, and science
literacy, and to demographic diversity in STEM disciplines. The community-driven
vision for future NSF-funded cross-disciplinary research into lithospheric
extensional systems will be captured in a “white paper” written at the
conclusion of the workshop that is intended to serve as a catalyst for future
NSF-funded research into extensional systems and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.