* 2025692
* Collaborative Research: GLACIOME: Developing a comprehensive model of the coupled glacier-ocean-melange system
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Alexander Robel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 283,923.00

A limited understanding of how glacier-ocean interactions lead to iceberg
calving and melting at the ice-ocean boundary contributes to uncertainty in
predictions of sea level rise. Dense packs of icebergs and sea ice, known as ice
mélange, occur in many Greenland fjords, and may occur near many Antarctic
glaciers in the future. Observations suggest that ice mélange may directly
affect iceberg calving by pressing against the glacier front and indirectly
affect glacier melting by controlling where and when icebergs melt which can
impact ocean circulation and ocean heat transport towards glaciers. However, the
interactions between ice mélange, ocean circulation, and iceberg calving have
not been systematically investigated due to the difficulty of conducting field
work in Greenland fjords. The GLACIOME project will investigate the complex
interactions between glaciers, ice mélange and the ocean using laboratory
experiments and models to provide the first comprehensive model of the co-
evolution of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GLACIOME project will use
detailed process models and laboratory experiments to investigate thermodynamic
and mechanical couplings between ice mélange and fjord waters. A stand-alone,
numerical model of ice mélange granular flow will be developed using state-of-
the-art continuum approaches from granular physics. This standalone model will
be used to test the sensitivity of ice mélange flow and stress to external
forcings. Results from experiments and simulations will be used in the
development of a fully coupled glacier-ocean-mélange model (GLACIOME), which
includes the new standalone mélange model, the Ice-Sheet and Sea-Level System
Model (ISSM) and the MITgcm ocean model. The coupled GLACIOME model will be used
to test the impact of ice mélange on glacier stability over decadal time scales.
In addition to the scientific advances, the GLACIOME project will provide
opportunities for career development and outreach. The project will support two
early career PIs, two graduate students, and one postdoctoral fellow. The
students and postdoc will receive interdisciplinary training that is essential
for addressing scientific issues with major societal impacts, such as climate
change and sea level rise. The PIs will communicate results to the public
through lectures and organizing events for the Atlanta Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.