* 2025982
* LTER: Comparative Study of a Suite of Lakes in Wisconsin
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2027
* Monica Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/28/2027
* USD 3,840,000.00

Lakes are extraordinary ecosystems that provide societal benefits from
recreation to food to clean and plentiful drinking water. But the same
characteristics that draw us in leave lakes vulnerable to human activities that
can damage these environments, and in some cases, cause large, abrupt, and
undesirable ecological changes. The goal of the North Temperate Lakes Long-Term
Ecological Research Program (NTL-LTER) is to understand how and why lakes change
over time and determine the consequences of these changes. For 40 years, the
NTL-LTER has studied two sets of Wisconsin lakes and their surrounding
landscapes. One group of lakes is located in the rural, forested, and tourist-
dominated Northern Highland Lake District in northern Wisconsin and the other is
situated in the agricultural and urban landscape around Madison, Wisconsin’s
state capitol. Studying these two distinct groups of lakes and being able to
document changes occurring over several decades provides essential information
about how different types of lakes in different settings are affected by
phenomena such as shifting climate conditions, urban expansion, the arrival of
invasive species, harmful algal blooms, or changes in environmental policies.
These research activities, in turn, improve current understanding and management
of lakes, benefitting anyone concerned with the future of the region, its
freshwater resources, and the welfare of its residents. Results are also
integrated into multiple K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education
activities. The NTL-LTER program is committed to supporting diversity in
science, and to outreach efforts that communicate scientific findings to
interested individuals, non-governmental organizations, academics, and local,
state, tribal and federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;New research
activities will build on NTL-LTER’s strong foundation of long-term observations
and deep ecological understanding of north temperate lakes to address the
overarching question: What are the causes and consequences of abrupt ecological
change in lakes and their surrounding landscapes? Research activities are
organized around a central framework of abrupt ecological change intended to
reveal mechanisms that lead to abrupt ecological changes in lakes, and involve
studies inspired by four focal questions: (1) What are lake phenological
responses to a warmer and more variable climate that may lead to abrupt
ecological change? (2) How do interactions of land use and long-term climate
change affect urban aquatic ecosystems? (3) How do external drivers interact
with aquatic invasive species to regulate water quality? And (4) What causes
intentional ecosystem manipulations to persist, revert, or lead to novel states?
These questions consider ecological changes from organisms to ecosystems and
provide potent opportunities to test, modify, and expand hypotheses regarding
the causes and consequences of abrupt ecological change that are broadly
relevant across diverse ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.