* 2025352
* SBIR Phase II:  Antibiotic-Dispensing Spacer for Improved Periprosthetic Joint Infection (PJI) Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeff Castleberry, FORCAST ORTHOPEDICS INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,194,923.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will help total knee replacement patients who
have a joint infection. Periprosthetic Joint Infection (PJI) is a potentially
life-threatening bacterial infection of a total joint replacement. Beyond
immediate treatment, infections can develop years later from unrelated injuries,
increasing PJI incidence as older patients opt for replacement joints. Roughly
15.6 million people in the US currently use a replacement joint, and without
improved treatment, PJI will represent an estimated $2.2 billion annual US
healthcare burden by 2023. The current standard of care treatment cannot
generate sufficiently high antibiotic concentrations within the joint over
enough time to eradicate bacterial biofilms on the implant and tissue, the known
cause of persistent infection. This project will advance a proprietary
implantable drug delivery system to easily generate and maintain an antibiotic
concentration in the joint sufficient to eradicate biofilm and resolve an
infection with less surgical trauma, easier patient recovery and lower
healthcare cost than the current standard of care
provides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will advance translation of a novel implantable drug delivery
system with an externally worn controller that communicates through skin to a
simple implant comprising a pump and reservoir. When therapy is complete the
pump can be left in place with no requirement to remove it, avoiding additional
surgery common with current implantable pump technology. This project advances
the development of the implant and controller to generate prototypes for
thorough testing, including efficacy evaluation for biofilm eradication within a
simulated environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.