* 2025075
* NNCI: KY Multiscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Keng Hsu, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,100,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The NSF NNCI Kentucky Multiscale Site is a
collaboration between the University of Louisville and the University of
Kentucky focused on integrating nanotechnology with the latest advances in
additive manufacturing to enable scientific discovery, create new products,
explore new application spaces, and train our next generation of scientists and
engineers. With nanotechnology now integral to scientific discovery and applied
engineering, there is a pressing need for state-of-the-art infrastructure that
supports the rapid and effective prototyping of nano-scale devices in macro-
scale systems. The goal of KY Multiscale is to combine micro/nano fabrication
processes with emerging advanced manufacturing technologies, such as additive
manufacturing, aerosol jetting, and two photon 3D printing, to provide
researchers with the complete toolset needed to explore nanotechnology solutions
to real-life problems in critical areas such as healthcare, energy, the
environment, communication, and security. KY Multiscale is the first open-access
user facility nationwide with a focus on three-dimensional micro/nano
fabrication and true multi-scale integration. Users of KY Multiscale have access
to design, simulation, and fabrication resources that span the nanometer to
meter scales, and the expertise to effectively integrate these processes. KY
Multiscale also provides a wide variety of educational training and outreach
activities to engage current students and inspire our nation’s next generation
of budding scientists and engineers with an emphasis on increasing participation
from under-represented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The three goals of KY Multiscale are: 1) To expand our
site’s capabilities for and utilization by researchers in both traditional and
emerging fields that require nano-to-macro integration. This expansion will
occur through new capabilities (e.g. unique facilities for multiscale rapid
prototyping), and a multipronged approach to user support (e.g. seed programs
for users from non-traditional backgrounds, broad-based promotional efforts,
etc), 2) To provide intellectual leadership in nanotechnology and advanced
manufacturing integration across various length scales. This will be
accomplished through a range of activities both within the NNCI network (e.g.
leadership in network organizations, conferences, and research communities) and
outside the network (e.g. new Ohio Valley Network and expansion of our popular
KY Nano+AM Symposium), and 3) To provide opportunities for lifelong learning to
build an engaged diverse community and trained workforce ready to address
society’s challenges with multiscale solutions. To accomplish this, we will
implement a range of new programs involving diverse communities across several
educational levels (e.g. new HBCU collaboration with FAMU-FSU, supporting
undergraduate research in nano+AM manufacturing, and a new professional
development program for URM middle school teachers called NanoEducate). Success
in these efforts will be carefully assessed by a nanotechnology education
collaborator using both established metrics and careful monitoring of immediate
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.