* 2025298
* NNCI: Nebraska Nanoscale Facility (NNF)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Rebecca Lai, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,100,000.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The Nebraska Nanoscale Facility (NNF) will
continue to function as an NNCI regional user facility serving the
nanotechnology and materials characterization needs of small colleges,
universities, small and large companies in the western region of the US Midwest.
Users have access to state-of-the-art advanced instrumentation facilities and
expertise at the NNF. It facilitates cutting-edge research in nanomaterials
science and nanotechnology with increasing emphasis on emerging quantum
materials and technologies and fabrication of nanotechnology enabled devices,
which can lead to new consumer products. The renewed NNF continues its
contribution to the United States research and educational infrastructure for
transformative advances in the fabrication, characterization, understanding and
utilization of novel nanostructures, materials and devices. These structures and
devices play an increasingly critical role in contemporary technologies
including information technology, digital communication, energy processing,
sensors for threat detection, and biomedicine. The strong education-outreach
(E/O) program at NNF is focused on increasing diversity and inclusiveness
through summer research experiences for students, after school middle-school
programs, community-college programs, minicourses, and others. NNF’s E/O
activities include programs with Native Americans and tribal colleges in
Nebraska associated with the Winnebago, Santee Dakota, and Omaha tribes and help
attracting students to engineering and science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;As an integral
part of the NNCI the Nebraska Nanoscale Facility (NNF) provides open and
affordable access to advanced instrumentation facilities, expertise, training,
and services in nanoscience, nanotechnology, materials science, and engineering
to users from academia, industries, and government labs in the western region of
the US Midwest. The NNF provides a single door access to eight core facilities
and two shared facilities associated with it. NNF is the only facility in the
western region of the US Midwest that houses an advanced array of state-of-the-
art research instrumentation with a combination of cutting-edge technologies,
intellectual capabilities and expertise that are open to all users in the
region. The renewed NNF provides external users easy access to systems dedicated
for advanced nanofabrication, nanomaterials characterization, chemical analysis,
and additive manufacturing. NNF is equipped to support the investigation of
nanomaterials, quantum materials, and metamaterials as well as nanomagnetic and
nano-biodevice fabrication and testing. Research at NNF is bolstered by strong
research groups in nanoscale electronics, nanomagnetism, nanophotonics and
materials and structures for energy. The NNF also supports major sponsored
research programs at the Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, UNL and
neighboring universities. Hundreds of graduate and undergraduate students,
postdoctoral associates, visiting scientists and engineers continue to benefit
from the state-of-the-art facilities in NNF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.