* 2025655
* ISS: Dynamic Manipulation of Multi-Phase Flow Using Light-Responsive Surfactants for Phase-Change Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Javier Read de Alaniz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Boiling heat transfer plays a key role in a wide range of terrestrial
applications, including power plants that produce the majority of electricity in
the US, heating and cooling of buildings, desalination and distillation. The
boiling heat transfer performance is directly related to the removal rate of
bubbles generated during boiling. However, in most terrestrial applications,
bubble departure is naturally driven by buoyancy; it is difficult to control the
bubble departure size and frequency. A simple method that can actively control
bubble motion with large tuning range is highly desirable, since it would
significantly expand the range of achievable boiling heat transfer rate, with
the potential to improve the efficiency of power plants and reduce energy
consumption in building thermal management. This project aims to develop a new
method to control bubbles and droplets, by exploiting liquids whose surface
tension can be changed with light. The microgravity environment eliminates the
interference of buoyancy, which allows us to purely observe and understand this
light-driven fluid motion. This method can be generalized to manipulate multi-
phase fluid for condensation processes and applications including precision
control in 3D printing, lab-on-a-chip microfluidics for biomedical and optical
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
achieve dynamic manipulation of multi-phase fluid motion using light and photo-
responsive surfactants, and apply it to enhance boiling heat transfer. Photo-
responsive surfactants can reversibly switch their molecular conformation when
illuminated with light, resulting in a dynamically tunable and spatially
reconfigurable surface tension that can drive multi-phase fluid motion (the
photo-Marangoni effect). The project tasks include: (i) experimentally test the
depinning criteria and migration velocity of droplets and bubbles controlled by
light, (ii) develop the first modeling framework for the photo-Marangoni effect,
and ultimately (iii) promote bubble departures during boiling to enhance thermal
transport by optically “pinching off” bubbles with control. The use of
microgravity is essential to enable large length scales exceeding the typical
capillary lengths on earth, as well as long time scales for bubble/droplet
departure, which greatly reduces the requirements of microscopic and high-speed
visualization. Microgravity will also allow direct experimental observation of
the proposed light-controlled motion without buoyancy and natural convection,
which ensures accurate fundamental understanding and comparison to theory. This
light-tuning method will serve as an effective yet simple new platform for
dynamic fluid and heat transfer manipulation. This platform will significantly
contribute to developing new research capabilities and inspiring new
applications beyond heat transfer, such as novel approaches to droplet-based
biochemical assays, dynamic patterning and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.