* 2025162
* BCSER: Understanding how student identities shape STEM retention: exploring perceptions of in-class interpersonal relationships and institutional and discipline inclusivity
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jeremiah Henning, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 348,866.00

This capacity building project includes a study to measure a suite of social
identities salient in STEM classrooms to understand how identities shape
perceptions of in-class, interpersonal relationships with peers and instructors
and perceptions of institutional and disciplinary inclusivity and how these
factors impact retention of marginalized identities in STEM majors and careers.
The project will simultaneously explore multiple student identities and
interactions among identities and explore how marginalized identities shape
perceptions of in-class dynamics, institutional inclusivity, STEM inclusivity,
and retention across STEM majors at the University of South Alabama. The study
will allow the investigator to assess which aspects of student-student
interactions and student-instructor interactions are most challenging to
multiple marginalized identities in STEM courses. Additionally, the investigator
will explore how perceptions of institutional inclusivity are shaped by multiple
identities and determine how multiple identities and interactions among them
shape existing stereotypes of who scientists are, have been, and can be. The
investigator proposes to implement a professional development plan that
leverages expertise in community ecology to conduct STEM education research by
strengthening quantitative data methodology skills. The plan includes
interaction with advisors and collaboration with the Equity and Diversity in
Undergraduate STEM (EDU-STEM) network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will investigate four research questions: (1) How do multiple identities shape
in-class student-student dynamics, student-faculty dynamics, perceptions of
group work, and overall comfort within STEM classrooms?, (2) How do multiple
identities shape institutional sense of belonging and perceptions of
institutional inclusivity? , (3) How do multiple identities shape disciplinary
sense of belonging, confidence in conducting science, and knowledge of core
scientific principles?, and (4) How do the interactions among in-class dynamics,
institutional inclusivity, and discipline inclusivity impact the retention of
underrepresented groups in STEM majors and careers? Data will be collected
through surveys across STEM courses to measure the research variables. The data
will be used to quantify how in-class interpersonal relationships, institutional
inclusivity, and discipline inclusivity determine retention rates of students
identifying with multiple marginalized identities. The project will inform
targeted interventions for inclusive pedagogies that can be implemented through
faculty workshops aimed at improving faculty consciousness of student identities
to focus on inclusive pedagogies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by
the Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the ECR Core
Research program. ECR supports fundamental research that focuses on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.