* 2025905
* SBIR Phase I:  Machine Learning Enhanced Hardware for Optimization and Self-tuning of High-Finesse Optical Cavities
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Michelle Fritz, QUNNECT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,556.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to demonstrate the utility of powerful computational techniques,
like machine learning, for auto-alignment of sophisticated optical instruments.
This is particularly important for instruments deployed in the field, where
environmental fluctuations continuously perturb components in unpredictable
ways. Successful implementation of such technologies would allow complex lasers
and instruments to transition from the laboratory to commercial use. This could
be particularly impactful in the growing quantum communication industry. This
project will advance the development of machine learning to align these
sensitive instruments autonomously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the use of machine learning
to maintain alignment of exquisite filters made from optical cavities. To date,
no commercial solution exists for auto-alignment of these cavities, which are
common components in complex optical instruments. This is due to the complexity
of the parameter sets governing alignment, and the challenge to train the system
to choose the optimal path to restore alignment. The primary deliverables of
this project will be a set of modular machine learning-based optimization
algorithms and a commercial off-the-shelf &lt;30MHz-bandwidth self-tuning
optical filter hardware module. Since the proposed adaptive control strategy
does not rely on a single underlying model, the developed framework will be
modular and easily transferable to other nonlinear systems, which depend on
photonic arrangements with varying parameters and control
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.