* 2025744
* Collaborative Research: Ethical Considerations in Three-Dimensional Digitization of Indigenous Heritage
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Lori Collins, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 43,681.00

Three-dimensional digital models are increasingly prevalent in preserving
tangible and intangible aspects of Indigenous material heritage. Yet, there are
no comprehensive, clearly laid-out best practices that can guide researchers,
Indigenous communities, and museum personnel in designing ethically sound and
socially engaged 3D heritage preservation projects. The use of 3D technologies
for heritage preservation and providing public access to digital 3D collections
is well-established in the European context. While there have been several
robust efforts on digitizing European national heritage, in the U.S. context,
the focus often involves work with Indigenous heritage, instantly placing 3D
projects into a post-colonial research paradigm with a complex set of ethical
ramifications. This research examines emerging thoughts from the European
context and connects them with best practices in digital Indigenous data
management to identify practices that contribute to cultures of academic
integrity that are inclusive of all stakeholder voices. This work fosters
ethical cultures of STEM through the development of a comprehensive Responsible
Conduct of Research guiding document that can be adapted to address culture-
specific Indigenous perspectives as well as project-specific challenges in
future 3D heritage preservation endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals
are accomplished through workshops and virtual collaborations that bring
together researchers, Indigenous community members, and heritage preservation
professionals with previous experience in the responsible management,
protection, and sharing of Indigenous digital data and the use of 3D technology
for heritage preservation. The collaboratively produced guidelines outline
ethical considerations that can be used in developing: 1) partnerships with
origin/descendant communities, 2) institution- and collection-specific museum
policies on using 3D technology, 3) Tribal policies for culturally appropriate
use of 3D technologies, and 4) training material and curriculum that integrates
with other research compliance regulations pertaining to heritage preservation.
The project explores the questions that have emerged through previous
experiences using 3D technologies to preserve Indigenous ancestral heritage.
These questions include the factors contributing to developing ethically sound
3D heritage preservation projects; the practices useful in 3D projects to foster
a culture of integrity that equally engages academic and Indigenous
perspectives; consideration for what constitutes Responsible Conduct of Research
in using 3D technologies to preserve Indigenous cultural heritage; and
addressing practice-based questions that contribute to understanding ethical
challenges in digitally preserving and presenting Indigenous heritage. The
project situates 3D modeling and heritage representation as part of the larger
discourse on decolonizing core methodologies in museum management and
anthropological collection practices. Results from this work can be adapted to
training future researchers and digital heritage management professionals and
creating meaningful partnerships in heritage documentation. This research
cultivates cultures of academic integrity by informing heritage management
policy on the critical importance of heritage ethics for the creation and
management of 3D digitization projects involving Indigenous collections. This
award is funded by the Directorate of Geosciences and the Directorate of
Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.