* 2025307
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Exploiting Upper Layer Spectrum Sensing and Directionality to Access the Hidden Available Spectrum
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Xingya Liu, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Cognitive radio has recently emerged as a promising technology to overcome the
imbalance between the increase in spectrum access demand and the inefficiency in
spectrum usage by allowing dynamic spectrum access. However, existing cognitive
radio network research work is based on a number of conventional spectrum
sensing and access mechanisms that suffer several drawbacks and are unable to
exploit additional available spectrum opportunities. These conventional spectrum
sensing mechanisms cannot differentiate primary user and secondary user signals
effectively. They also cannot distinguish a primary user transmitter and
receiver. In addition, conventional omnidirectional antenna-based spectrum
access schemes cannot exploit the spatial spectrum availability to optimize the
secondary user spectrum access capability. These drawbacks lead to spectrum
resource waste and cannot be solved by physical-layer spectrum sensing and
access techniques alone. Therefore, upper layer networking techniques are
incorporated to solve these challenging problems. This research is potentially
transformative as it will help generate innovative techniques to numerous
applications of the cognitive radio technology, e.g., public safety networks,
emergency networks, and health monitoring. It will also have significant impacts
on research in emerging technologies with dynamic spectrum access, such as
vehicular networks, mobile health, and opportunistic interconnections of
heterogeneous wireless networks. The proposed designs can be applied to
Internet-of-Things (IoT) with IoT devices efficiently accessing the wide
spectrum. This project also integrates research findings into related
graduate/undergraduate courses and diversity support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have a significant impact on enhancing radio spectrum access. It
aims at systematically investigating a novel spectrum sensing and access
framework to discover and access additional available spectrum hidden from
conventional spectrum sensing and access techniques in cognitive radio networks.
In particular, this project consists of three major research tasks to achieve
the goals of enhancing radio spectrum access: 1) network layer spectrum sensing
scheduling to differentiate primary user and secondary user signals; 2) data
link layer spectrum sensing to distinguish between a primary user transmitter
and receiver; and (3) directional antenna-based spectrum access to proactively
utilize the spatial spectrum opportunities, exploit the temporal and spatial
channel availability, and obtain the optimal directional antenna sector
angle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.