* 2025704
* IRES Track I: Exploring Adaptive Responses to Dynamic Island Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Uy, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 211,960.00

Human activities have dramatically altered natural ecosystems, causing the sixth
mass extinction event of our planet's history. To curb this unprecedented loss
of biological diversity, it is critical to understand how organisms respond to
and persist in such rapidly-changing environments. This International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) project will explore how natural populations
survive the challenges of their natural environment, and then leverage this
understanding to determine how the same populations respond to novel human-
mediated changes. This IRES project, therefore, will provide insights needed to
slow the current, unprecedented loss of biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
IRES project will train cohorts of 10 undergraduate students, targeting those
underrepresented in STEM (i.e., women and minorities), for a period of six weeks
each year in field research and conservation science in the remote Solomon
Islands. The Solomon Islands serve as an ideal setting for this IRES project, as
the archipelago is composed of dynamic ecosystems where organisms face
constantly-changing conditions caused by both natural and anthropogenic
processes. An international team from the University of Miami and local non-
government organizations will lead the program, offering diverse perspectives
and unique expertise to create a thriving environment for student mentorship.
The major goal is for students to first leverage natural systems by executing
group experiments that explore how populations meet the challenges of their
natural environment. Students will then expand on this understanding of natural
systems by developing independent projects to test how the same populations
respond to human-mediated disturbances. A follow-up course in the US will
provide additional training and career development, with the goal of publishing
the student projects. The result is an IRES program where a diverse,
international team will equip the next generation of scientists with a more
global perspective to tackle our planet's most pressing
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project has two major broader
impacts. First, this project will train undergraduate students in international
research and conservation, targeting those underrepresented in STEM (i.e., women
and minorities). This IRES project will therefore tackle the lack of diversity
in STEM, and provide international experience that is critical for preparing
students to compete in a global market. Second, this IRES project will help
establish conservation initiatives in a biodiversity hotspot. The conservation
initiative includes students working with local stakeholders in collecting field
data and conducting outreach to empower local communities in establishing
sustainable practices. By collecting baseline data, students involved in this
IRES project will help in the establishment of an ambitious conservation area.
This IRES project, therefore, addresses a fundamental question in Biology, while
providing students with experience in initiating impactful conservation
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.