* 2025871
* SBIR Phase II:  Intelligent Drone Ignitions To Manage Fires
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Carrick Detweiler, Drone Amplified, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,180,410.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to transform how firefighters battle
wildfires by improving safety, decreasing costs, and increasing effectiveness.
Wildfires are increasing in number and severity, costing billions of dollars and
resulting in thousands of lost homes and numerous deaths. Today, firefighters
are unable to perform the backburns needed to contain wildfires without putting
firefighters at risk. This project will result in technologies that directly
address the critical pain points of firefighters by improving the intelligence
and capabilities of drone systems. The research will develop algorithms for
coordinating groups of robots, deep learning approaches and the development of
novel datasets, algorithms that can predict fire activity and plan missions, and
autonomous health monitoring approaches. This project will lead to safe, fast,
affordable fire management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable the development of the critical
pieces of the technology that will transform fire management. More specifically,
the proposed work focuses on the following key technical challenges and
activities to incorporate intelligence into fire management: 1) Scaling to
multiple drones intelligently operating in tandem and larger drones to cover
complex, large terrain faster; 2) Transformation of pre- and post-fire mapping,
currently a manual process taking more time than actual firefighting; 3)
Creation of intelligent ignition planning and automated sensing capabilities
that predict and take into account fire activity to increase safety and
efficiency; and 4) Beta tests with customers to collect data for learning
algorithms and to validate the research under field conditions. These challenges
are especially difficult given the harsh fire environment, the weight and power
constraints of commercial drones preferred for these activities, and the
integration of two distinct domains, drone aerial navigation and fire
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.