* 2026242
* In-situ Diagnostics of Supercritical Flows and Combustions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Zhili Zhang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,935.00

High-pressure flow dynamics and combustion have many applications in major
industrial, transportation, and aviation sectors. A number of fundamental
challenges stand as barriers to continued technical progress, including lack of
understanding of real-fluid effects, turbulence, optical dense flow and
combustion under various high-pressure conditions, and efficient system
integration and analysis. Motivated by the lack of high-pressure flow and
combustion research, the proposed project aims to develop and utilize novel
diagnostic tools and to obtain benchmark data of the reactive flow and
combustions at elevated pressure condition. The new insights gained from
experimental data can be used to develop, calibrate, and validate combustion
models at high-pressure conditions, with significant reduction in computation
effort. Such models can be building blocks for designs of future propulsion
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to conduct systematic
experiments to build a bridge between flows from atmospheric pressure to
subcritical/transcritical/supercritical conditions with the help of novel high-
spatial and -temporal resolution imaging techniques. Specifically, neutron and
2D optical (Raman) imaging techniques will be used, coupled with a variable-
pressure combustion chamber. Overall, the project aims to obtain comprehensive
characterization of the nozzle geometry, internal (in-nozzle) flow, near-field
dense flows, and gas-phase properties in reacting flows up to supercritical
pressures. Additionally, the proposed work will obtain (i) quantitative
measurements of local fuel/air concentrations by 2D Raman, (ii) flow velocities
by optical flow analysis of 2D Raman signal, and (iii) local temperature by
ratios of Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy. The new understanding
gained from proposed experiments and future modeling efforts will lead to
improvement in performance of next generation propulsion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.