* 2026951
* EarthCube Capabilities: Cloud-Based Accessible and Reproducible Modeling for Water and Sediment Research
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 189,733.00

Natural processes influence the United States’ population, economy, and
infrastructure. Many of these processes center around water and soil. Examples
include flooding, groundwater movement, soil erosion, landsliding, permafrost
thaw, and coastline change. In managing the risks and maximizing the resource
potential associated with these types of process, computer simulation modeling
and digital data analysis provide vital technologies. Researchers use computer
simulations together with digital data to perform a variety of functions,
ranging from fundamental research and discovery, to forecasting and “what if”
scenario planning. However, certain technical barriers inhibit finding,
accessing, and operating modeling software and related tools and data sets. This
project seeks to enhance research capabilities by combining the strengths of two
complementary technologies: an existing web-based platform for finding and
sharing water-related data, HydroShare, and an existing suite of computer
simulation tools for water- and soil-related processes, the tool suite,
developed by the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS). Integrating
the CSDMS Workbench simulation modeling tools with the HydroShare platform will
increase research productivity by simplifying the processes of finding,
learning, and running appropriate models; by bringing models and data together
on the same computer system; and by making it easier to package, share, and re-
use the digital data files and software that result from published
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in understanding and predicting
processes near the Earth's surface requires an ongoing integration of data and
numerical models. Advances are currently hampered by technical barriers that
inhibit finding, accessing, and operating modeling software and related tools
and data sets. This project tests the feasibility of a cloud-based platform for
accessing and running models, developing model-data workflows, and sharing
reproducible results. The project brings together cyberinfrastructure developed
by two important community facilities: HydroShare, which is the online
collaboration environment for the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement
of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI), and the Community Surface Dynamics
Modeling System (CSDMS), which represents a community of about 1800 Earth
surface process scientists. Hosting CSDMS models and tools on the HydroShare
platform will foster open, accessible, and reproducible model-data integration
for the sciences that deal with water, soil, and sediment at and near Earth's
surface. In addition to its direct impact on research in these domains, the
project will promote teaching, training, and learning by providing a series of
community workshops on the prototype CSDMS@HydroShare Workbench. These outreach
and training opportunities will include national meetings that represent the two
primary communities involved, as well as a geoscience-oriented “hack week”
event. The Workbench will also be tested in two graduate-level computing-
oriented courses. In addition, an introductory webinar about the new platform
will be presented, recorded, and shared online for later access, and the
tutorials developed for this pilot project will be published openly on
HydroShare. The project will also provide professional development opportunities
for two postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.