* 2026815
* EAGER: LINKING MICROBIAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION FOR IMPROVED UNDERSTANDING OF ECOSYSTEM PROCESSES
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kusum Naithani, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

A fundamental challenge of microbial ecology is to discover unifying links
between microbial communities and ecosystem processes that hold across biomes.
This EAGER project will develop a procedure to analyze soil microbial data
collected by the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), which has the
advantage of generating high-quality, comparable data through standardized and
quality-controlled collection and processing methods at field sites across the
continent. The high-risk, high-payoff aspect of this project will involve
development and testing of a 'DNA barcoding' technique for characterizing soil
microbiomes in the field. Improved understanding of the links between microbial
community structure and ecosystem processes will enable scientists to better
predict how environmental changes impact biogeochemical cycles and stewardship
of natural resources. This project will include training opportunities at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project
integrates soil microbiology with ecosystem ecology to improve understanding of
ecosystem processes, and will chart new ground using a new method, based on a
MinION genomics platform, for characterizing soil microbes in the field.
Specific research objectives are to (1) develop a data analysis pipeline for the
NEON soil microbiota data; (2) identify unifying links between microbial
structure (species richness, abundance, diversity, composition) and ecosystem
processes (soil respiration and nitrogen mineralization) through analyses of
publicly available NEON data products; and (3) collect and analyze soil
microbial data in the field using MinION based DNA barcoding technique at NEON
domain sites (D10 – CPER, D10 – RMNP, D10 – STER, D13 – NIWO) near Boulder, CO
to develop and benchmark [using next generation sequencing and Phospholipid
Fatty Acid (PLFA) profiling] soil analysis methods by coordinating sampling with
NEON scientists. The results will reveal consistencies across biomes in
microbial community structure and ecosystem processes. The methods and pipeline
developed for these studies will facilitate improvements in ecosystem models
that are key to reducing uncertainty in predictions of carbon fluxes and stocks,
nitrification/denitrification, carbon decomposition, and overall land
management. The studies will include training of graduate students, development
of a course on using large data sets, and use of tutorials to engage
undergraduates in using and analyzing NEON data.. The data collected at the NEON
sites will be shared through GitHub and repositories like DRYAD &amp; PANGAEA.
Results from this work will be shared with scientific community via
presentations and workshops at scientific meetings, an "R" library, and peer-
reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.