* 2026134
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Immersive Virtual Reality For High-Quality Training to Caregivers Working With Seniors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* William Maddox, IKONA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 02/28/2022
* USD 275,901.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be significant for helping senior
caregivers optimally understand and respond to cognitive changes in older adults
through a new Virtual Reality (VR) The project will result in a high-quality,
effective training module for helping senior caregivers optimally understand and
respond to cognitive changes in older adults. This will enhance the competence,
confidence, and motivation of their nursing staff, and help reduce staff
turnover. The solution will empower caregivers to effectively attend to the
needs of the elderly in a way that enhances seniors’ quality-of-life and
facilitates ‘aging in place,’ hence contributing towards increasing well-being
among the elderly population and alleviating the societal costs of
aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project addresses the technical challenge of developing VR content that
effectively promotes caregiver knowledge acquisition, skill development, and
motivation increases, while keeping the training experience relatively brief and
efficient. Unlike simple memorization of information, positive psychological
outcomes like enhanced motivation are challenging to generate. This project will
strategically employ cinematic directing techniques at key points in the VR
training - a new approach to VR training. The solution leverages principles from
the cognitive neuroscience of learning to deliver innovations in VR content
design, analysis and delivery. Research objectives include: (1) building an
engaging VR training module centered around teaching empathy and communication
skills, which is enhanced with cinematic directing elements, (2) assessing the
usability and feasibility of the developed content for achieving the desired
outcomes in the short- and long-term, (3) building and assessing a VR training
module centered around teaching observation and behavioral skills to senior
caregivers, which includes embedded interactive testing
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.