* 2026658
* FW-HTF-P: Mitigating Risks in Future Police Work through Social Telerobotic Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Nader Jalili, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2022
* USD 150,000.00

In law enforcement, the stress of emergency-response scenarios can impede
understanding of spoken messages and interpretation of other's emotional states.
This can lead to potentially incorrect judgments with life or death consequences
that can resonate throughout families, communities, and societies for years. To
this end, robots have long provided safer alternatives to direct human
interaction in hazardous scenarios, such as explosive ordinance disposal and
surveillance. However, these are relatively special cases: A much greater share
of police work relies on interpersonal communication where the development of
mutual relationships, empathy, and trust are required. Unfortunately, modern
remote technologies impede the necessary development of these trust
relationships, reduce situational awareness, and disrupt communication between
citizens and law enforcement. To protect the welfare of both officers and
civilians in their mutual encounters, a transdisciplinary team of investigators
are developing a prototype teleoperated social robot for use in hazardous
operations involving public safety. The aim is to minimize dangers while
increasing the quality of remote interpersonal communication, enabled by
multimodal "presence" and communication through social
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities performed during these early
investigations will aim at developing stakeholder relations and performing
iterative prototyping and design studies with local law enforcement training
sites. The investigators will also address the research team composition, adding
additional experts in the social, behavioral, technical, ethical, and legal
domains. A central rationale of this research is that the use of force can be
caused by misinformation, miscommunication, stress and time pressures in high-
risk situations. It is expected that this initial research on a highly
immersive, inexpensive, teleoperated social robots will generate knowledge on
the risks, challenges, and requirements of human-robot partnerships and can
facilitate transparent communication between law enforcement officers and the
public in hazardous situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.