* 2026741
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Artificial Semiconductor Nanocrystal Molecules for Charge Carrier Separation
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Eran Rabani, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2023
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research with an aim to develop a fundamental understanding of the
electronic and optical properties in a newly developed family of semiconductor
nanocrystals using novel computational methods. Semiconductor nanocrystals are
nano-sized (of the order of one billionth of a meter) particles, each containing
hundreds to thousands of atoms arranged in a regular framework as in a solid
semiconductor such as silicon. These nanocrystals are often referred to as
artificial atoms. Remarkably, their chemical and physical properties, such as
the color they emit, are flexibly tunable merely by changing their size, unlike
real atoms. This has led to their widespread use as building blocks in diverse
devices, e.g. to enrich color and enhance energy saving characteristics of the
most advanced display screens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
research team will greatly extend the functionality of semiconductor
nanocrystals by taking advantage of their artificial atom character. Carefully
tailored semiconductor nanocrystals, serving as artificial atoms, will be
combined with others to create a new family of artificial molecules. The
particular focus of the project is the investigation of how positive and
negative charges, which are created upon light absorption, separate from each
other in such artificial molecules. Spatially separating the positive and
negative charges in a semiconductor is central for harvesting solar energy (e.g.
in solar cells) and transforming it into other, useful forms of energy in a
clean and sustainable manner. Working in collaboration with an experimental
group, the PI and his research team will focus their theoretical and
computational research on understanding the mechanisms of charge separation as a
function of the artificial molecules' atomic structure, composition and physical
dimensions, and help design new artificial molecules made of semiconductor
nanocrystals with desirable functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will generate computational tools and fundamental understanding whose utility
extends beyond the specific materials investigated. The research will serve as a
basis for understanding the basic mechanisms of charge transfer in
nanostructures and for designing new photocatalytic and photovoltaic devices
that involve light induced charge separation. The project will involve the
training of undergraduate and graduate students at the interdisciplinary
interface of materials chemistry and engineering. The PI will also organize a
summer school at the Telluride Science Research Center focused on modern
electronic structure techniques. The lectures given by national and
international experts in this school will be converted into online open-access
videos for further dissemination of the educational
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research with an aim to develop a fundamental understanding of the electronic
and optical properties in a newly developed family of colloidal quantum dot
heterodimers using state-of-the-art stochastic electronic structure techniques.
The research team will focus on questions regarding (i) the mechanism of charge
transfer at the nanometer scale, (ii) how to control the charge separation
efficiencies by changing the dimensions and composition of materials, and (iii)
how to model such complex quantum-dynamical models at the minimal model that
accounts for all necessary physical processes. Validation of the computational
approach will be based on quasiparticle excitations as well as neutral single-
and multi-particle excitations. The validated models will then be used to
explore the interplay of length scales and timescales on charge transfer
mechanisms. The project will also focus on the role of changing the size of the
donor/acceptor colloidal quantum dots and the neck connecting them and explore
the interplay of Auger- vs. Marcus-like charge transfer
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate computational tools
and fundamental understanding whose utility extends beyond the specific
materials investigated. The research will serve as a basis for understanding the
basic mechanisms of charge transfer in nanostructures and for designing new
photocatalytic and photovoltaic devices that involve light induced charge
separation. The project will involve the training of undergraduate and graduate
students at the interdisciplinary interface of materials chemistry and
engineering. The PI will also organize a summer school at the Telluride Science
Research Center focused on stochastic electronic structure techniques. The
lectures given by national and international experts in this school will be
converted into online open-access videos for further dissemination of the
educational material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.