* 2026985
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: The effects of evolutionary adaptations on the spreading of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Osman Yagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Started in December 2019, the novel coronavirus (known to cause a respiratory
disease known as COVID-19) has spread rapidly and broadly and is proving to be
one of the most devastating events that affect the health and well-being of
humans all around the world. A key scientific goal concerning COVID-19 is to
develop mathematical models that help in understanding and predicting its
spreading behavior, as well as supporting guidelines on what can be done to
limit its spread. In this project, the PIs aim to achieve these goals by
applying their recent findings on a new epidemic model to the spread of
COVID-19. The PIs will work on a model that considers the possibility of
COVID-19 mutating into different strains with different spreading
characteristics. By also considering changes in the spreading behavior of
COVID-19 due to environmental factors and changes in human behavior (seasonal
changes, travel bans, etc.), they aim to obtain results that will help assess
the effectiveness of countermeasures that can be taken against the spread of the
virus and to help better prepare for different mutation scenarios, including
worst-cases. &lt;br/&gt;Most existing models of epidemics assume that an
infectious individual passes the same pathogen strain that she was infected with
to a susceptible individual in her contact network. This assumption may not hold
in real-life as pathogens often evolve over time, and the ways a pathogen
evolves might lead to significant changes in its spreading dynamics. This
project aims to improve the state-of-the-art mathematical and computational
models for predicting the spread of COVID-19 to incorporate the effects of
evolution and mutations. This will be done by leveraging recent work of the PIs
in which they developed a mathematical model to predict the spreading dynamics
for multiple-strain epidemics models with mutations. By incorporating the
potential changes in the reproduction number R0 (due to countermeasures or
mutations), the PIs aim to obtain a better understanding of the future progress
of the COVID-19 spread; obtain different predictions of the spread of COVID-19
under different scenarios including extensive bans on travel, school/shop
closures, as well as potential evolution into different strains; and add to the
public discourse on the expected effectiveness of various countermeasures that
can be taken to slow down the spread of COVID-19. Project outcomes will be
disseminated broadly and incorporated into teaching curricula. The project will
also engage students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.