* 2026356
* EAGER: Exploration of evolutionary mechanisms across multiple scales
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Joseph Ryan, Swarthmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,600.00

The incredible diversity of life arose through evolutionary acquisition of novel
traits ranging from fundamental shifts in body plans to superficial changes in
fur color. Although research has revealed some causative genetic mutations, the
manner in which these mutations ripple through different scales of biological
organization to produce new traits remain poorly understood. Key questions
include – 1) How do mutations impact the networks of interacting genes that
control embryological development? 2) How do shifts in gene networks impact cell
behaviors in developing embryos? 3) How do shifts in cell behaviors during
development lead to anatomical or physiological changes in adult organisms? The
proposed research will address these questions through the comparative study of
two sea squirts (a group of marine organisms closely related to humans and other
vertebrates). In particular, this research will focus on a very poorly
characterized group of sea squirts called the doliolids. Doliolids have acquired
a number of highly divergent traits including the ability to produce three
distinct body types specifically designed for feeding, dispersal or
reproduction. The relative simplicity of sea squirt genomes and the low number
of cells in sea squirt embryos will facilitate rigorous analysis of the
evolutionary acquisition of new traits across multiple biological scales. This
project will also provide a diverse group of trainees, including those that
identify with groups underrepresented in the biological sciences, the
opportunity to participate in cutting-edge research spanning computational,
molecular, cellular, developmental, ecological and evolutionary biology.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of new traits encompasses changes across
multiple scales. Although numerous studies have identified causative mutations
in protein coding DNA or in non-coding regulatory elements associated with novel
traits, productively examining the impact of these mutations on intervening
scales including developmental gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and embryonic
cell lineages is extremely challenging. This project aims to overcome these
challenges through comparative analysis of a historically neglected chordate
taxa, the doliolids. These highly divergent, poorly characterized organisms are
uniquely suited for in-depth, multi-scale analyses of cell lineage re-deployment
and gene network rewiring. This research effort will focus specifically on
comparisons of heart development in the pelagic tunicate Dolioletta gegenbauri
and the primary tunicate model species, Ciona intestinalis. These organisms were
selected for comparative analysis because – 1) the Ciona heart progenitor
lineage and underlying gene network have been comprehensively mapped, 2)
comparative analysis indicates that tunicate heart lineages and associated GRNs
have been rigorously conserved across a range of tunicates spanning ~400 million
years of divergence, 3) the compactness and resulting lack of redundancy in
tunicate genomes will facilitate the identification of discrete shifts in
network architecture associated with changes in doliolid heart development. To
initiate this project, the researchers will pursue the following aims – 1)
establish stable cultures of D. gegenbauri, 2) develop basic embryological
techniques for characterization of D. gegenbauri heart development, 3) assemble
and annotate the D. gegenbauri genome and 4) establish essential techniques
(transgenesis, in situ hybridization and CRISPR) required for characterizing the
D. gegenbauri heart GRN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.