* 2026179
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Reaction Control System (RCS) for CubeSat and Microsatellite Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2021
* David Hobbs, MAVERICK SPACE SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 275,973.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to open new orbital flight regimes to CubeSat
and microsatellite vehicles. Vehicles of these size classes are currently
constrained by the lack of suitable propulsion options or additional regulatory
burdens that most propulsion systems levy on rideshare vehicles. Most small
satellites in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) would benefit from propulsion systems and
all missions beyond LEO require on-board propulsion. The proposed Reaction
Control System (RCS) architecture would enable new beyond-LEO missions for small
satellites and enhance the on-orbit lifetime and utility of LEO missions at
lower costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project ties satellite propulsion performance to the ever-
increasing capabilities of small satellite Electrical and Power Systems (EPS)
with a novel, miniaturized resistojet design and benign green propellant. While
other technologies (batteries, solar panels, power distribution systems) have
improved satellite EPS, propulsion systems have lagged. The use of a miniature
resistojet in the RCS design allows the performance of the propulsion system to
be decoupled from the chemical properties of propellant (largely fixed due to
chemistry limitations), and instead links performance to improved EPS systems.
Additionally, the proposed RCS uses a novel non-gaseous pressurization system
and a benign green propellant for improved safety on ridesharing
satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.