* 2026675
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Securing information systems with flexible hardware techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jean-Luc Gaudiot, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,999.00

Traditional software-based antivirus cannot keep up with the rapidly increasing
number of cyber-attacks. This project explores approaches to improve the
security of computer systems using flexible hardware techniques. It focuses on
defending cyber-attacks by building a flexible hardware-based malware detection
system and developing a level of immunity for computer systems against viruses
through novel hardware design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore
a viable path forward for developing future intrusion detection systems and
designing secure computer systems. The detection system leverages malware
features from both software and hardware and by applying advanced machine
learning techniques to enhance the detection accuracy. The system is implemented
with programmable hardware to achieve robust and adaptable hardware security
enabling mechanism with low performance overhead for the ever-changing malware
landscape. In addition, the project seeks ways to make the hardware itself more
secure by providing software and architecture support for stronger isolation
between applications from different security domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together research in the domains of security, computer
architecture and machine learning to create a secure and trustworthy cyberspace.
Additional broader impact includes the development of partnerships between our
team and industry, and others (e.g., national laboratories). Potential research
result transfer should help improve national security and result in increased
economic competitiveness for the United States. It will also play a major role
in education by integrating exploration with teaching and training, as well as
making the necessary efforts to attract and train minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be indefinitely
maintained at https://github.com/uci-pascal-satc/hardware-security/. All data
will also be stored in the laboratory where the simulation and experiments are
conducted. This will be done with standard backups using computers, external
disks, and various storage media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.