* 2026993
* Bidirectional Transport of Lysosome Related Organelles during Synapse Maintenance and Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Sathyanarayanan Puthanveettil, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,060,000.00

The human brain is extraordinarily complex consisting of about 86 billion
neurons and about the same number of non-neuronal cells. The neurons communicate
with each other through specialized junctions known as synapses. The non-
neuronal cells influence these communications. Importantly communications
between these cells mediate various brain functions including sensory
perception, memory storage, and intelligence. Furthermore, there is also
communication within neurons. Inside neurons, long tracks are traveling from one
end of the neuron to the other end. Microscopic structures move along these
tracks for mediating communication within neurons. Decades of research have
established the significance of brain cell communications. However, it is not
well understood precisely how these cells influence each otherâ€™s communications
for brain functions. In this study, the investigative team assesses how the
formation of connections between two neurons modifies each other for mediating
neuronal communications. To study this complex problem, the team studies neurons
of a sea slug that has a much simpler nervous system. Neurons of sea slug are
about 10-100 times larger than human neurons. Specifically, using the neurons of
sea slug, the team in this project studies communication within neurons and
between neurons by imaging the movement of microscopic structures in neurons and
its relation to neuronal communication during memory formation. The project also
offers high school and undergraduate students to participate in research using
cutting-edge techniques, and includes lessons on how the brain is wired for
middle school students in Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of
neuronal architecture such as the extensive dendritic branching and axonal
terminals necessitates active bidirectional transport of gene products between
the cell body and its terminals for synapse function. Several studies, including
our own, have indicated that anterograde transport (i.e., towards terminals)
facilitates synapse formation and activity-dependent remodeling of synapses,
while retrograde transport (i.e., from terminals) serves as signals to the
nucleus resulting in transcriptional changes. However, several aspects of this
bi-directional transport, such as the regulation, dynamics, and mechanisms of
transport during formation, and maintenance and remodeling of synapses are
poorly understood. In this project, exploring the advantages of the identified
neurons and synapses of the sea slug Aplysia californica, the investigative team
addresses these questions by studying the bidirectional transport of lysosome-
related organelles (LROs) in presynaptic sensory neurons of Aplysia gill
withdrawal reflex. LROs are membrane-bound acidic organelles transported
bidirectionally and are involved in degradative pathways. Specifically, the team
studies whether and how bidirectional transport of LROs in presynaptic sensory
neurons is regulated during formation and maintenance, and excitatory and
inhibitory forms of plasticity at sensory-motor neuron synapses of Aplysia gill
withdrawal reflex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.