* 2026703
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: III: Exploring Physics Guided Machine Learning for Accelerating Sensing and Physical Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Viktor Podolskiy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 40,187.00

As machine learning (ML) continues to revolutionize the commercial space
including vision, speech, and&lt;br/&gt;text recognition, there is a huge
anticipation in the scientific community to unlock the power of ML
for&lt;br/&gt;accelerating scientific discovery. However, black-box ML models,
which rely solely on training data and&lt;br/&gt;ignore existing scientific
knowledge have met with limited success in scientific problems,
particularly&lt;br/&gt;when labeled data is limited, sometimes even leading to
spectacular failures. This is because the black&lt;br/&gt;box ML models are
susceptible to learning spurious relationships that do not generalize well
outside the&lt;br/&gt;data they are trained for. The emerging paradigm of
physics-guided machine learning (PGML), which&lt;br/&gt;leverages the unique
ability of ML algorithms to automatically extract patterns and models from data
with&lt;br/&gt;guidance of the knowledge accumulated in physics (or scientific
theories), aims to address the challenges&lt;br/&gt;faced by black box ML in
scientific applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For data science, PGML has the
potential to transform ML beyond black-box applications by
enabling&lt;br/&gt;solutions that generalize well even on unseen input-output
distributions that are different from those&lt;br/&gt;encountered during
training, by anchoring ML methods with the scientific body of knowledge. PGML
makes a distinct&lt;br/&gt;departure from the conventional view that physics-
based models and ML models are developed in&lt;br/&gt;isolation but seldom mixed
together. The proposed project is fundamentally different from existing
body&lt;br/&gt;of research that attempts to combine ML and domain sciences,
e.g., by making use of domain-specific&lt;br/&gt;knowledge in ML algorithms in
simplistic ways, or making use of data in the physics-based
modeling&lt;br/&gt;process albeit without allowing data to change the functional
forms of existing physics-based models.&lt;br/&gt;The tight interplay between
data science and the domains of physics and sensing in the project lends
itself&lt;br/&gt;naturally to diverse education activities that complement the
research tasks outlined by our team. Over the&lt;br/&gt;duration of this one-
year project, the team will develop an integrative course at the graduate level
on "ML&lt;br/&gt;meets Physics", which explores topical, emerging themes in this
interdisciplinary area. Offerings of the&lt;br/&gt;course will draw upon course
modules shared between the four universities, such as shared guest
videos&lt;br/&gt;and case studies. The physics department at BU has a well-
developed "Physics Outreach Project" that&lt;br/&gt;annually performs science
exhibitions for elementary schools in Binghamton metropolitan area, for
which&lt;br/&gt;the team will create a new exhibition about neural networks and
ML. In follow-on work, similar outreach&lt;br/&gt;events will be replicated at
schools (Robinson Middle School in Lowell and Metro STEM Middle
School&lt;br/&gt;in Columbus). The PIs are committed to increasing the diversity
of involvement at various levels of the&lt;br/&gt;training ecosystem impacted by
this project, and have planned various coordinated broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;activities for inclusion of female and underrepresented
minority students as well as faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.