* 2026368
* Molecular mechanisms that boost systemic immunity in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mary Beth Mudgett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 974,951.00

Plants are sessile organisms that lack circulating immune cells. To fight
bacterial infections, plants use small, mobile metabolites that travel
throughout their vascular system to turn on defenses at sites of attack and
throughout the plant body. By activating defenses in uninfected tissues, plants
exist in a heightened immune state that limits new pathogen infections. This
immune response is known as defense priming or systemic acquired resistance.
Recent research identified an amino acid derivative called N-hydroxy-pipecolic
acid (NHP) that is the bioactive metabolite required to turn on defense priming.
There is sparse information for how NHP affects plant defense and development.
Notably, watering or injecting plants with NHP is sufficient to induce defense
priming and protect against bacterial and fungal infections. These findings
suggest that altering NHP levels in plants or providing NHP to plants to enhance
their defense responses may be effective strategies to enhance disease
resistance in plants used in agriculture and horticulture. This project will
study important aspects of NHP biology. Key questions include: (1) How long does
the NHP defense signal last? (2) How is the defense signal turned off? (3) How
does NHP signaling impact normal growth and development? (5) Do pathogens
manipulate NHP biology to turn off this plant defense system? These questions
will be answered by using chemical biology and functional genomic approaches
with tomato, an important crop plant. The long-term goal is to investigate
possible chemical applications and/or engineering efforts to enhance defense
priming in plants to improve plant health. This study will provide intensive
research training at the graduate, undergraduate and high school level with
special consideration of women, underrepresented minorities, and those from
under-resourced backgrounds. The research and outreach activities will also
provide hands-on teaching and mentorship training for Stanford graduate and
postgraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic acquired
resistance (SAR) is a global plant immune response induced at the site of
pathogen infection that triggers long-lasting and broad-spectrum disease
resistance throughout the plant. A single small metabolite, N-hydroxy-pipecolic
acid (NHP), is necessary and sufficient for initiation of this heightened immune
state, even in the absence of an initial infection. Interestingly, NHP and its
derivatives appear to be mobile metabolites, illuminating the chemical nature of
the signals that are required to initiate and amplify defense responses over
long distances within the plant body. Moreover, overexpression of the NHP
biosynthetic pathway in local tissues alone can protect distal tissues from
pathogen infection. These data thus highlight the intriguing possibility for
translating a chemical or metabolic engineering approach to prime and/or enhance
disease resistance under pathogen pressure. Currently, there is sparse
information available regarding the regulation of NHP biosynthesis, dynamics of
NHP signaling, and universal impact of this defense priming mechanism on plant
growth and health. The goal of this research is to elucidate the temporal
dynamics of NHP chemical defense and its effectiveness in protecting important
crop plants under native and engineered conditions. This study will test the
hypothesis that the regulation of NHP biosynthesis and the duration of the NHP
bioactive signal can be titrated to increase disease resistance without
compromising plant fitness. The model vegetable tomato, Solanum lycopersicum,
will be used to elucidate fundamental aspects of NHP. This research will provide
insight to the dynamics of NHP signaling and growth-defense associated with
altered NHP production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.