* 2026620
* FW-HTF-P: Supporting an Aging Workforce in Future Transportation and Delivery Work
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Eduardo Mercado, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2023
* USD 149,580.00

This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) planning project
will provide knowledge needed to understand and improve workforce performance of
older adults in transportation and delivery systems, which are heavily impacted
by recent advances in automated cars, trucks, and drones. While automation may
replace a large number of human drivers, new jobs may also arise involving novel
functions afforded by the new technology. An outstanding challenge is to help
existing workers transition into these new jobs. Aging workers—who may be
experiencing age-related cognitive and physical declines and who may find it
more difficult to learn and adopt new technologies—will require extra provisions
to successfully transition into new roles and remain productive within the
transportation and delivery industry. This project will perform fundamental
research to advance knowledge of neural and behavioral indices of cognitive
performance in elderly workers as they supervise the performance of autonomous
systems. Such knowledge is needed to design human-machine interfaces that will
enable real-time collaboration between an automated system and a human operator
of variable cognitive needs. This grant will also support planning activities in
fostering collaborations among experts in engineering, psychology,
neurosciences, learning sciences, sociology and economics to address the multi-
faceted challenge in labor training and re-training in this major work sector.
As an aging workforce continues to grow nationally in a dynamically changing
socio-economic environment, this project will both promote the progress of
science, and advance national prosperity and welfare. Broader impacts of the
project also include the engagement and support of under-represented STEM
researchers at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project aims to establish an
integrated framework for designing human-machine interactions customizable for
supporting aging workers in an increasingly automated work domain. The project
will build an interdisciplinary team to investigate methods for improving human-
machine interactions for the aging workforce, including controlling and
monitoring interfaces, training embedded in work technologies, and dynamic work
allocation and scheduling. Three tasks are planned. A preliminary study will
quantitatively characterize individual differences in physiological and
cognitive responses during multitasking scenarios in a driving simulator. This
will enable the design of adaptable human-machine interfaces that optimize real-
time collaboration between an human operator and an automated system based on
physiological profiles (to augment an elderly worker’s cognitive and
sensorimotor abilities) and work performance (to optimize the allocation of
resources and work activities). The project team will also investigate neural
and behavioral indices of cognitive performance in elderly workers to predict an
individual’s ability to learn and adapt to new technologies. This will aid the
development of training that can be embedded within the work system to speed
learning and adoption of new and challenging interactions with automated
systems. Finally, the project investigates socioeconomic and other individual
factors that impact aging workers’ trust and acceptance of future technologies
such as autonomous trucks and drones, which promises to inform technology
interventions facilitating job transitions and retraining. Additional planning
activities through local, national and international workshops and meetings will
contribute to the effective integration of knowledge and methods from multiple
disciplines in addressing the vision and research objectives of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.