* 2026854
* RAPID: Implications of Coronavirus for Prejudices, Cultural Change, and Health
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Michael Varnum, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 166,263.00

The threat of infectious disease changes how people think and act in a number of
ways. Some of these changes are obvious, such as hoarding and increased anxiety.
Other changes are less obvious, such as increased negative feelings toward
groups associated with disease and greater aversion to novelty. Both types of
changes have significant implications for societal well-being and health.
Infectious disease was once the leading source of mortality for humans. As a
result, humans evolved a number of behavioral and cultural responses to help
avoid infection. The spread of coronavirus provides a unique opportunity to
explore important theoretical questions to better understand the psychological
processes relating to perceptions of disease. This project investigates how
disease cues are perceived and how they influence behavior in the context of a
real-world threat (COVID-19). The research tests how local disease rates and
other contextual factors influence the perceptions of disease cues and how this
is influenced by various forms of bias. The research also tests the extent to
which the spread of the coronavirus shapes the health-related behaviors and
cognition of groups who are stigmatically associated with infectious disease.
Because of the associated stigma of disease, it is hypothesized that some groups
will avoid seeking treatment and will mask their disease symptoms, further
exacerbating a dire situation. Phenomena cued by infectious disease threat (such
as prejudice, stigma, or policy preferences) can have important consequences for
efforts to reduce and treat infectious disease during epidemics. Refining such
models will inform public health responses regarding the current outbreak and
policies pertaining to future outbreaks. The COVID-19 pandemic will have broad
economic and social impacts. Governments, institutions, and corporations will
benefit from further understanding and modeling as they seek to respond and
adapt to this crisis and future crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project
employs a mixed-methods approach (using big data and archival time-series data
analyses, large-scale longitudinal surveys, and a cross-national study) to
answer key questions regarding the social dynamics of how humans respond to
infectious disease threat. By studying the spread of coronavirus in concert with
changes in prejudices, social attitudes, and other social variables, the
research tests the hypothesis that the behavioral immune system produces
specific threat perceptions, cultural ideologies, behaviors, and practices
associated with disease avoidance and other adaptive responses to infectious
disease threat. The research assesses the extent to which prejudiced and
discriminatory reactions to a variety of targets (ethnic minorities, sexual
minorities, the obese, the elderly, immigrants) are specific to disease-related
targets or are generalized to all outgroups. It also assesses the experiences
and health-relevant decision making of groups who are sometimes stigmatized by
their association with infectious diseases, lending insight into how stigma and
prejudice influence health-related behaviors. The project aims to create new
theoretical bridges among a diverse range of disciplines including social
psychology, evolutionary psychology, epidemiology, public health, and
econometrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.