* 2026971
* NSF Support for the 16th International Circumpolar Remote Sensing Symposium
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Martha Raynolds, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 19,942.00

This award supports students and early career researchers to attend and
participate in the 16th International Circumpolar Remote Sensing Symposium
(ICRSS). ICRSS presents a significant and timely opportunity to demonstrate the
achievements of the US scientific community, while planning and engaging in the
coordination of future research efforts in dynamic polar regions with
international researchers. This is an unprecedented time to study the changes
occurring in the polar regions. The impacts of melting glaciers and ice sheets,
retreating sea ice, thawing permafrost, ecosystem reorganization, and associated
human interactions represent complex issues requiring international
collaboration. Due to the remoteness and limited field data sets available for
polar regions, remote sensing is critical in observing and understanding changes
that would otherwise go undetected. It is essential to gather researchers and
key stakeholders from around the world to share their observations to make
greater scientific advances and more informed decisions in polar regions. The
ICRSS series brings together scientists, resource managers, engineers, and
stakeholders from very different disciplines bound by the common goal of using
remote sensing techniques and derived information for advancing our knowledge
and understanding of the polar regions. The ICRSS addresses the need for
exchange of information among those in governments, universities, non-
governmental organizations, local communities, and the private sector interested
in remote sensing research and applications in the polar
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 16th ICRSS provides a platform for the
exchange of current applied research and best practices, the presentation of new
technology and further innovation, and the advancement of international
cooperation in the circumpolar regions of the world. The ICRSS brings together
scientists, resource managers, engineers, and end users from different
disciplines to address the following science questions: 1) How can rapid changes
occurring in the polar regions be better documented from local to regional
scales? 2) What are the critical processes driving polar region dynamics, and
are the current remote sensing tools sufficient to plan for future impacts? and
3) How can the remote sensing community better inform local communities,
regional stakeholders, and earth system models to improve polar predictions? The
direct benefits to the attendees and broader remote sensing community include:
establishing the current state of knowledge for polar remote sensing platforms
and techniques; identifying existing and potential knowledge gaps; discussing
future planned missions, platforms, remote sensing technologies, and operational
services; fostering national and international collaborations; and developing a
community that fosters and empowers the next generation of students and early
career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.