* 2026913
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: TTP: Medium: NextGenPQ: Post-quantum Schemes for Next Generation Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Berk Sunar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The proliferation of advances in quantum computing has put traditional
cryptography and our entire computing and communications infrastructure in
danger. The threat is so urgent that the US National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) started a standardization competition in 2018 to select one or
more so-called Post-Quantum (PQ) schemes. Traditional cryptographic techniques
are expected to be replaced by PQ-schemes in applications during the next
decade. Unfortunately, the upgrade comes at a cost since PQ-schemes require
significant increases in digital signature and public key sizes. The team of
researchers tackle this very problem. The project's novelties are new techniques
to enable aggregation of PQ signatures. The project's impacts are reduced energy
consumption and spectrum efficiency in applications such as sensor networks, 5G
systems, IoT devices, and Blockchains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation is
structured in two research modules. The first module focuses on developing
aggregation extensions to existing PQ signature algorithms. The work in this
module includes a thorough security analysis of the extensions, and selection of
parameters for secure and efficient construction. The second module investigates
new PQ signature schemes that allow more efficient aggregation. This module will
build on the recent works on homomorphic signature schemes. The security and
performance of the developed signature schemes will be scrutinized and compared
to existing schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.