* 2026071
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a generative framework to assess farmland resilience based on artificial intelligence, satellite data, and stochastic weather modeling
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Sibo Wang, ASPIRING UNIVERSE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2021
* USD 255,983.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to quantitatively assess farmland status and resilience. This project
studies varying agricultural productivity subject to weather and static soil and
landscape properties. This study will develop models using artificial
intelligence to make predictions. It will be based on data from the U.S. and
other agriculturally-intense regions of the world, allowing the generalization
of the framework into new geographical domains. The models will also be tested
on a variety of staple crops, such as corn, soybean, wheat, and rice.This system
will include an interface for untrained users, as well as important data for
quantitative financial analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
aims to develop an integrative machine-learning framework consisting of state-
of-the-art generative weather models, feature translation models, and crop yield
models to obtain a rich ensemble of simulated growing season environmental
conditions, and associated yield estimates. Supported by high-resolution
satellite imagery in the past 20 years, the model is not only capable of
capturing granular yield variability at the field scale, but also the
heterogeneity of productivity within a crop field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.