* 2026112
* SBIR Phase II:  Drug Free Noninvasive Occipital Nerve Block Device to Reduce Opiate Prescriptions
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Stephen Popielarski, THERMAQUIL, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a simple wearable device
to manage pain. Despite advances in new therapies, addictive narcotic
medications still remain a widely utilized method to control pain for many
conditions. The proposed technology represents a new noninvasive approach to
blocking nerve conduction without reliance on drugs. The device can be easily
adapted to treat any condition wherein pain is transmitted along nerves close to
the skin surface. This work will demonstrate feasibility of a novel therapeutic
approach to pain management without risk of drug dependence or
addiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will fully develop a human wearable thermal nerve block device
for treating severe head and neck pain by blocking nerves in the occipital
region. Occipital pain is driven by a number of physiological and pathological
causes, and many patients fail to find adequate pain relief solutions that allow
them to continue their daily activities, thus leading to poor quality of life
with reduced productivity and socialization. The device developed in this
project will thermally modulate the occipital region in such a way as to
initiate and then maintain a drug-free nerve block.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.