* 2026118
* SBIR Phase I:  High-performance Opto-plasmonic Technology for Next Generation Optoelectronic Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Pouya Dianat, NanoGrass Solar LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to streamline a low-cost, scalable, high performance manufacturing
technology for use in the Photonics Integrated Circuits market. In particular it
finds applications in optical communications beyond 5G, as well as in light
detection and ranging used in autonomous drones. This project addresses needs
for low latency, high bandwidth, long range, low power receiver modules used by
data centers and cloud service providers, as well as autonomous drone operators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project produces optical detectors, based on opto-plasmonic technology, with
significantly higher bandwidth and substantially lower noise current compared to
existing photodiodes. Specifically, OPDs replace legacy avalanche photodiodes
that need to be fabricated on expensive substrates, with opto-plasmonic devices
(OPDs) achieving superior performance. Importantly, these devices can
exclusively leverage the dilute Gallium Arsenide Nitride material system for
attaining operation in C-band and eye-safe optical wavelengths using the mature
Gallium Arsenide manufacturing supply-chain. These opto-plasmonic devices (OPDs)
circumvent fundamental limitations imposed by conventional electronic charge
transport by utilizing charge density waves. This project will demonstrate
photodetectors that meet or exceed the performance of current avalanche
photodiodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.