* 2026747
* Collaborative Research: Bacteria surface sensing and biofilm development
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alison Patteson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 710,638.00

Bacterial biofilms are multicellular communities that display coordinated
collective behaviors and emergent pattern formations. They present an important
and outstanding challenge in daily life in view of their prevalence in health
and industrial problems such as antimicrobial resistance, infection and
biofouling of water pipes and ship hulls, which pose severe economic burdens.
Many functions of the cell, including adhesion, migration, and multicellular
organization, can be altered by changes in the physical properties of the
cellular environment. The physical and molecular mechanisms by which cells sense
and respond to physical stimuli are poorly understood. The aim of this proposal
is to develop a synthetic hydrogel system and use it for assessing the effects
of substrate mechanics on biofilm development. The results of this project will
provide insight into mechanisms of biofilm growth and how to control its
behavior. Furthermore, this project trains a diverse set of undergraduate and
graduate students as well as provides research opportunities for high school
teacher interns. Teacher-interns participate in on-going research projects in
the lab as well as in laboratory and department seminars to facilitate exchange
of ideas on education and research. In addition, they are developing a
curriculum, based on their projects, that is applied in their own
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
determine how physical properties of the cellular microenvironment regulate
biofilm development within Myxococcus xanthus. A major limitation in this type
of study is a lack of appropriate in vitro materials to quantify the effects of
systemic changes in substrate mechanics on biofilm development. This project
creates new synthetic hydrogel systems, with well-defined tunable chemical and
mechanical properties, and uses them to determine the direct response of cells
to specific chemical and mechanical stimuli. Models of bacteria-substrate
interactions are tested in unprecedented ways. The project integrates
experimental and computational approaches, to build and test predictive models
of bacterial biofilm development and the functional roles played by the cellular
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.