* 2026050
* EAGER: Distributed Data-Sharing for Fast Response and Decision Support
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Tho Nguyen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 315,600.00

The vision of a smart city is underpinned by its ability to collect, manage, and
use data. However, data access remains a fundamental challenge across city
agencies, public institutions, and community stakeholders. This project is
championing a paradigm shift in data sharing by implementing a new data access
framework that allows users to share access to data in-situ instead of sending
copies of data around. This project builds on the new data access paradigm to
deploy a city Data Access Network (City-DAN) to support city managers get timely
access to important data for fast decision and response. City-DAN is piloted
first in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam and then scaled to other ASEAN cities. This
activity is in response to NSF Dear Colleague Letter Supporting Transition of
Research into Cities through the US ASEAN ((Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Cities) Smart Cities Partnership in collaboration with NSF and the US
State Department. The research team (University of Virginia) is working closely
with stakeholders in Ho Chi Minh City including city managers, departments, and
community organizers as well as Vietnam National University – International
University to transition technology into practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed distributed, peer-to-peer data access framework represents an ambitious
vision of the next generation data ecosystem. This project establishes a
foundational data platform to underpin smart cities by addressing issues of data
integrity, provenance, control, and timely access. This project takes advantage
of the unique deployment opportunity to pursue a vibrant research agenda on grid
computing. Specific research areas include advanced cyber infrastructure,
cybersecurity, networking, and persistent identifiers. This project will
especially focus on identity and access management (IAM) in the context of
unreliable infrastructure and weak level-of-assurance (identify proofing)
baselines. The project will examine new approaches for enhancing reliability
while balancing with transparency and QoS. Lessons learned also can be adopted
to advance the smart and connected community research community in the US and
other countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.