* 2026850
* EAGER: Annotating and extracting detailed syntactic information from a 1.1-billion-word corpus
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2024
* Beatrice Santorini, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 298,386.00

Over the past decade, very large text corpora of English have become available
to researchers that turn out to be of considerable value for the language
sciences. Even more recently, methods in natural language processing have
advanced to a point where we can begin to imagine conducting linguistic research
using automatically parsed and uncorrected corpora of the sort that has so far
been conducted using human-corrected corpora. It is this new situation that the
PIs wish to exploit by producing an automatically parsed billion-plus word
corpus of early modern English based on the digitized Early English Books Online
(EEBO) corpus that has recently been completed and made accessible to research.
The aim is to create an automatically parsed database with a level of accuracy
suitable for both linguistic and computational research, using the recently
developed cutting-edge methods in natural language processing. The resulting
resource will make possible investigations hitherto impossible; specifically,
the information contained in a parsed version of EEBO will permit researchers to
investigate frequency effects not just of words, but of larger grammatical units
(phrases and clauses). In addition to their inherent linguistic interest, the
results of such investigations may lead to the discovery of more sophisticated
meaning-based properties and how these vary, which should be of value for
research in natural language processing. The PIs have made progress on this
goal, having created a first automatically parsed version of the EEBO corpus and
begun to assess its accuracy. Some features like the syntax of clausal negation
are already within our reach, but for many other structures, it remains to be
determined how accurate retrieval with large-scale methods can be.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since EEBO is more than 300 times larger than even the
largest individual human-corrected corpora, it is expected that a more
accurately parsed version of it than the one now available will begin to allow
researchers to study phenomena that are only sporadically attested in existing
English corpora, to zero in on the very beginnings and ends of historical
changes, to investigate many different types of frequency effects (including the
novel ones already mentioned) with an accuracy and reliability not hitherto
possible, and to rigorously evaluate mathematical models of language change.
Because the stage of English covered by EEBO (1500-1700) is already recognizably
the modern language, a parsed version of EEBO can to some extent stand proxy for
a corpus of Present-Day English for research in the language sciences. As a
result, it should be useful as a training and testing ground for applications in
computational linguistics including part-of-speech tagging, parsing, named
entity recognition, and eventually lemmatization, sense disambiguation, and
others. EEBOâ€™s great genre variety and variable orthography and its moderate
distance from Present-Day English will also make a parsed version of it a
natural candidate for assessing and improving the robustness of these
applications and for developing novel parser evaluation metrics that can serve
as linguistically informed benchmarks for computational
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.