* 2026281
* SBIR Phase I:  Stabilization of the desired epitopes of hRSV-F protein for efficient absorption through the gut
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Swarnamali Rupassara, FruitVaccine Incorporation
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2021
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to provide global populations with a
safe, affordable and viable edible vaccine against the human respiratory
syncytial virus (hRSV). hRSV is a critical global health problem, annually
affecting 64 million people and causing over 160,000 death, motivating a
vaccine. Natural food-derived vaccines offer advantages over traditional
injections by providing a safe, affordable, non-invasive, non-egg-based (reduced
allergenic risk), vegan-friendly, effective and efficient antigen-delivery
system. The project addresses this need by developing a cherry-tomato-based oral
vaccine that can be administered painlessly in a chewable gummy-like pill
formulation or in oral drops. The proposed fruit-vaccines will minimize the
global incidence of hRSV through scalable production and distribution,
increasing global accessibility and vaccination rates. Furthermore, with fewer
disposables it is more environmentally friendly. This method could apply broadly
to other oral-delivery platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase I project will
advance peptide-based oral-delivery platforms. The project will improve the
yield and consistent expression of the immunogenic antigen (hRSV-F protein) in
the plant, both pre- and post-harvest, as well as before and after delivery into
the body. The approach involves bioengineering the plant-optimized gene for the
hRSV-F protein to improve its stability by blocking undesirable cleavage sites
while retaining the desirable protective epitopes of the hRSV-F immunogen.
Transgenic plants expressing the stabilized hRSV-F in the tomato fruits will be
grown in a greenhouse. The hRSV-F-containing cherry-tomatoes will be harvested,
homogenized (pureed), and then lyophilized (freeze-dried) to formulate
innovative vaccine purees or pills, respectively. Tasks include conducting
qualitative and quantitative analyses, such as color, consistency, pH,
concentration of intact hRSV-F protein, its potential degradation products and
desired epitope/s, analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
western-blot and high-performance liquid chromatography. These tests will help
characterize the persistence and effectiveness of the proposed changes on hRSV-F
protein expression, yield, and stability in fresh-fruits, tomato-puree and in
the freeze-dried fruit-pills. Similar assessments will be performed also post-
ingestion, in the gut contents and in blood of mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.