* 2026329
* EAGER: Development of a Novel Rotating Wind Tunnel for 3D Study of Turbulent Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jun Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 259,171.00

Turbulent flows in rotating thermal-fluid systems play a key role in a wide
variety of fields, from engineering (e.g., rotating machines, propulsion
engines) to geophysics (e.g., ocean currents, atmospheric currents, climate
system) to astrophysics (e.g., accretion disks around white dwarfs and freshly
formed stars). Yet the effect of rotation on the interplay among forces (i.e.,
Coriolis force and centrifugal force) acting on fluid particles and turbulence,
mean flow features, and solid boundaries is not well understood. This gap in
research is fundamentally attributed to the lack of adequate experimental
facilities. The principle aim of this project is to develop a rotating
experimental facility and advanced volumetric flow diagnostics tools to
investigate turbulence physics and facilitate the development/validation of new
turbulence models. The project will also encompass significant STEM education
and outreach activities, including multiple undergraduate research projects and
senior design projects, new curricula development, and research leadership
opportunities for women and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of
this project is to develop new experimental facilities and instrumentation to
study rotating flows and produce benchmark data sets for the geosciences and
engineering communities. Our specific aims are to (1) design and manufacture a
closed-loop wind tunnel to be mounted on an existing large rotation platform at
Purdue University and (2) integrate an onboard Tomographic particle image
velocimetry system for volumetric three-dimensional measurements of the rotating
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.