* 2026847
* Discovering the Self-Assembly Mechanisms of Carbon Nanotube Forests Using an Intelligent Autonomous Research Robot
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 657,420.00

The materials development is often slow and guided by trial and error. The
typical process development includes synthesizing a new material, characterizing
its structure, and then examining its physical properties. The process is
repeated iteratively by changing processing parameters and measuring how
parameter changes influence the properties of interest. This research will bring
to bear new advances in experimental hardware, artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) for materials processing in order to increase the rate of
materials development while decreasing cost and removing human biases. By
employing an autonomously-operating system, that employs AI and ML tools, carbon
nanotube (CNT) forest processing will be accelerated. CNT forests could be an
important source material for reinforcement materials in many key technologies,
such as plastic-based composites and automobile tires. With limited or no human
intervention, the autonomous system will launch experiments, observe and
characterize the results in real time, and then learn from the results to refine
the process. The tools and procedures developed will be used to enhance the
national manufacturing base and global competitiveness while enabling rapid
development of new materials and applications to advance public
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The autonomous system incorporates a) in-situ
scanning electron microscope (SEM) synthesis of CNT forests, b) computer vision
to quantify the governing mechanisms of CNT assembly, c) a complementary finite
element simulation, d) deep learning networks to predict CNT forest properties,
and e) a knowledge-based driven distributed control algorithm for autonomous
decision making. The system will first operate in manual mode to establish
baseline protocols. Process automation will then be demonstrated by allowing the
system to execute user-defined tasks. Autonomy will occur when the system plans
experiments based on previous results in a knowledge-base and then executes
experiments to observe the outcomes. As proof of concept, the system will
demonstrate the ability to deterministically synthesize CNT forests having an
effective modulus between 100 kPa and 1 GPa without human input. The open-source
software, data and the simulations generated in this work will be provided
freely to researchers and educators to benefit efforts for effective design and
control of materials discovery processes. Broadening participation in
computation among minorities and women will be pursued through engaging
undergraduates into the research environment and project
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.