* 2026825
* Collaborative Research: Unified Field Theory of Soft Amorphous Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Xiaoming Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 10/31/2023
* USD 168,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From collections of grains to
aggregates of proteins, colloids or polymers, soft solids have a variety of
structures and exhibit a broad range of physical response. They often exist at
the margin of mechanical stability, which leads to the adaptability exploited in
their applications. Examples include glass, cement, compacted sand, and even
yogurt or chocolate mousse. This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education focused on the physics of soft solids, with the objective
to develop and test a new theoretical framework for their dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Distinct from crystals, the structures of soft solids, generically,
do not exhibit any order. Therefore, their mechanical response cannot be
described by the conventional paradigm of broken symmetry and long-range order
that define the behavior of crystals. Conventional elasticity theories are built
on principles of momentum (mechanical equilibrium) and energy conservation, from
which symmetries, order parameters, geometry and topology of patterns emerge.
The absence of energy conservation in marginal soft solids, where dissipative or
active processes can be at play, invalidates these theories. In the new
framework proposed here, conservation principles emerge from just the
constraints of mechanical equilibrium. This approach provides a natural way of
incorporating the coupling between stress and structural rearrangements inherent
in soft solids, which is missing in existing theories, to construct an effective
field theory for amorphous materials with heterogeneities in stress and
deformation fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will engage as role models to
inspire a more diverse population of students to theoretical condensed matter
physics by promoting outreach activities that communicate and discuss how
theories are built, how they connect to phenomena and experiments, and what
specific skills theorists develop. Outreach activities will also disseminate the
excitement of condensed matter physics to K-12 students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education aimed at
understanding the structure-function relationship in amorphous soft solids such
as jammed grains, gels, and even biological tissues. It has become increasingly
clear that localized, sub-dimensional, stress patterns emerging from the
constraints of mechanical equilibrium, determine the non-equilibrium mechanical
response of a wide range of soft matter. Sub-dimensional excitations have also
emerged in tensor gauge theories, a class of field theories recently developed
for quantum spin liquids. A recently discovered rigorous mapping of such a
tensor gauge theory to mechanics of amorphous solids forms the basis of the
proposed research. This mapping has the potential to solve the problem of how
stresses get transmitted and why they localize in soft, amorphous solids. An
outstanding challenge in amorphous systems is identifying an order parameter
that distinguishes between different stress-carrying states. Remarkably, the
absence of an order parameter is also a feature of quantum spin liquids, where
topological indices such as winding numbers can distinguish between the states.
For mechanical structures, topological mechanics provides an index that can do
precisely that. Interestingly enough, the elasticity theories of soft matter and
tensor gauge theories for quantum spin liquids are field theories that emerge at
some level of coarse-graining, whereas topological mechanics explicitly takes
into account the network architecture in which the mechanical constraints
operate, suggesting that topological mechanics may be the right tool to
establish the connection between the microscopic mechanical constraints at play
in soft amorphous materials and the appropriate tensor gauge theory framework. A
combination of theory and numerical simulations will be used to explore the
implications of a new paradigm emerging from tensor gauge theory for soft
amorphous materials, and establish connections between this continuum theory and
topological mechanics, which provides a network-specific description of the
ability of amorphous solids to sustain and evolve under external stresses. Given
the ubiquitous presence of soft amorphous solids, a unified field theory of
their mechanical response will be transformative for soft condensed matter
physics, and the associated applied disciplines of materials science, chemical
and structural engineering. The collaboration will develop new computational
tools to complement and inform theory and identify new experimental tests. The
feedback between theory and simulations will be reflected in the research
training of postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students. The bridge created
between soft and hard condensed matter physics through the shared framework of
tensor gauge theories offers new opportunities for training at the interface
between soft and hard condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.