* 2026159
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Robotic Sanding Cells for Composite Parts in High-Mix Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Ariyan Kabir, GRAYMATTER ROBOTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impacts of this SBIR Phase I project are in improving the quality of
life of the manufacturing workers, helping U.S. manufacturers remain cost-
competitive in the global market, and improving consistency in the quality of
the manufactured parts. The proposed robotic cells will reduce the need for
workers to perform ergonomically challenging sanding tasks and reduce the risk
of worker injuries on sanding lines. The proposed technologies will enable the
human operators to focus on high-level decision making and the creative aspects
of the manufacturing tasks, while the robotic assistants will perform the low-
level tedious tasks. This would allow human operators to collaborate more as a
team and thereby improve worker productivity. Currently, there are more than
3000 companies in the U.S. alone doing composite fabrication. Most of them face
challenges due to a shortage of workers and high labor churn leading to longer
delivery times. The proposed work will enable manufacturers to improve quality
and lower costs. Moreover, it will enable manufacturers to reduce time to part
delivery by reducing reliance on human labor and easily scale production
capacity with changes in demand by adding or removing robotic
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed effort
is to develop a robotic sanding process for high-mix applications. The
technology will enable robots to program themselves by automatically generating
and safely executing trajectories based on the task description, accounting for
the uncertainties present in the environment. The robotic tools will reduce
cycle time by fast execution of safe and efficient execution of sanding project
related to the fabrication of composite materials. A robotic sanding cell will
be developed by incorporating appropriate sensors and tools, developing
algorithms for fast and safe workpiece localization in the robotic cell, and
assessing the post-sanding surface quality and the state of the abrasive media.
The sanding instrumentation will provide recommendations to the human operator
for initiating another robotic sanding pass or changing the abrasive
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.