* 2026936
* Strain Localization in Composite Inks and its Effect on Electrical Behavior under Monotonic and Cyclic Stretching
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Antonia Antoniou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 491,406.00

Flexible electronics offer tantalizing potential in health and environmental
monitoring. A crucial component of these devices is the electrical connection
provided by conductive inks consisting of metallic flakes embedded in a flexible
elastomer. Such composite connectors must remain conductive even after
repetitive loading, such as stretching. Presently, there is limited knowledge of
how the resistance to current flow is affected by cyclic loading. There is also
little understanding of the causes of catastrophic failure of the conductor,
which is essential for life-critical applications where current flow may be
interrupted. This award seeks to establish an understanding of the mechanical
and electrical response under cyclic loading for conductive composite inks
through experiments and models. This effort can guide design of stretchable
electronics and ensure reliability of such devices in a range of applications
including health monitoring. The award also supports development of new class-
based projects in undergraduate and graduate courses for both on campus and
remote learning students. Additionally, wearable electronics learning modules
will be developed for middle schoolers in the local counties with large
underrepresented minority populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this work is to obtain a fundamental understanding of the relationship between
mechanical and electrical behavior of metal-polymer composite inks for wearable
and stretchable applications when subjected to monotonic and cyclic loading,
with a specific focus on strain localization. It is intuitive to assume that
localized deformation dictates the evolution of the conductive percolation
network and affects the resulting resistance. In-situ scanning electron
microscopy and optical confocal microscopy, as well as focused ion beam
sectioning will be used to understand the mechanistic origins of strain
localization and quantify its evolution under various loading conditions. These
experiments will also produce datasets on the statistical distribution of
metallic flakes and voids, which will be used to understand the evolution of the
percolating network. Several flexible and stretchable inks will be investigated
based on material properties, defect distribution, and flake volume fraction.
Lastly, an existing percolation model will be enhanced with spatiotemporal
descriptions of these distributions to produce complementary data, predict
electrical resistance evolution, and provide composite ink design
guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.