* 2026198
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-time predictive battery pack diagnostics and algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Steven Chung, Rejoule Incorporated
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,199,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to support the sustainability of lithium-ion
battery (LIB) technologies. LIB use is growing and has consequently led to the
potential of increased battery waste. The Phase II project will develop novel
diagnostic technologies that enable automakers and energy storage providers to
quickly and accurately measure how their batteries perform and degrade in the
field. It will further use machine learning to develop more accurate battery
models and predictive health algorithms for field applications. These algorithms
will have the capability to make health predictions even without historical
information for the specific system, and the hardware will be portable for
different applications. A more accurate assessment of battery degradation in
real time can inform on-board algorithms, improve overall battery pack
efficiency, and reduce costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase II project addresses the challenge of measuring and
predicting degradation of large-format batteries, blending new hardware with
machine learning and electrochemistry. The project will conduct a comprehensive
battery aging study to quantify leading and lagging indicators of battery
degradation. Leading indicators include utilization, calendar aging, and
environmental effects, and lagging indicators consist of AC impedance, DC
internal resistance, and a battery’s specific charge/discharge patterns.
Anticipated results include the ability to accurately predict the remaining
useful life of a battery in under two minutes, even in the absence of historical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.