* 2026584
* FW-HTF-RM: Enhancing Future Work of Nursing Professionals through Collaborative Human-Robot Interfaces
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Olfa Nasraoui, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,515,705.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) research project
advances a vision for the profession of nursing where collaborative human-robot
interfaces (CHRIs) can enhance nurse productivity and reduce on-the-job stress.
Interfaces in this project are broadly defined as any link between humans and
intelligent machines such as robots, using advanced sensors, mobile computing,
and display devices. In this project, interfaces will intelligently “adapt” to
provide both physical and cognitive assistance to nurses and patients in future
healthcare environments. The project will pursue four objectives. The team will
develop a taxonomy of nursing tasks to determine those that can be justifiably
delegated to intelligent robots. The team will then compare the ability of two
novel CHRIs to facilitate stable and effective shared human-robot control of a
robot-assisted walking task (i.e., fall prevention). They will also investigate
a CHRI recommender system that coordinates patient sitting tasks such as vital
signs monitor and item fetching among several nurses and mobile manipulators.
The goal here is to determine the optimal number of robotic assistants per group
of patients and nurses. Finally, the team will evaluate the social and economic
impact of the technology on nurses, patients, and healthcare facilities. The
project will promote the progress of science and advance the national health by
providing a blueprint for engineering future nursing assistant robots, for
informing healthcare facility design to accommodate the robots, and for
advancing instruction on the use of intelligent robotic assistants into formal
nursing education, nurse training, and credentialing. Other potential benefits
of the project include the development of instructional programs in robotics and
machine learning at the University of Louisville, involvement of undergraduate
nursing students in this research, and outreach to rural primary care clinics
and hospital settings through the Center for Health Systems Innovation at the
Oklahoma State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes four
objectives: Behavioral observation, documentation reviews, task inventories and
critical incidents will be analyzed to develop a task, skill, and context
taxonomy to identify nursing tasks that can be assigned to intelligent robotic
nurse assistants; The team will develop two CHRIs and then compare their
performance in an assisted walking task with the abilities of human nursing
staff. These interfaces utilize neural networks and generic algorithms and
adjust to psycho-physiological and tactile signals from users and are designed
to allow novice nurses and patients to operate robots with wearable sensors for
prevention of falls. The team will then enhance the informational capabilities
of the physical CHRIs using collaborative filtering, hybrid recommendation and
machine learning techniques. The goal here is to develop an intelligent
recommender system that will promote efficiency in the deployment of robotic
assistants capable of performing patient sitting tasks such as vital signs
monitoring and item fetching. The interfaces in this project will be evaluated
by approximately 150 expert and novice users, nursing students and simulated
patients to advance understanding of which types of tasks are better assigned to
people and which may be delegated to robots in nursing scenarios. Finally, the
team will perform economic analyses of the impact of the technology on nursing
costs and the skilling needs for future healthcare industry through O*NET
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.