* 2026577
* FW-HTF-RM: The Future of Home Care Work: Designing Technologies for Trust, Privacy, and Empowerment
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Deborah Estrin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,881.00

Home health aides are an important group of frontline health workers and one of
the fastest-growing sectors of the U.S. workforce. Largely employed by public
agencies (Medicare and Medicaid), home health aides currently care for 48
million Americans. However, these workers face numerous challenges as they
provide in-home care for people with serious illnesses such as heart failure,
diabetes, dementia, and others. Despite spending more time with patients than
any other care provider, home health aides, who are mostly women and minorities,
are overworked, poorly compensated, and experience high levels of stress and
burnout. Their existing tools and technology ecosystems are outdated, hard to
use, and largely revolve around monitoring home health aides' labor rather than
supporting their work. home health aides find changes in patients' health
conditions frightening and struggle to reach supervising clinicians by phone
when they need clinical help. Finally, home health aides largely operate day-to-
day in isolation, without the ability to be mentored by peers and supervisors,
or to grow their skills and advance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses some of the challenges home health aides face via five complementary
research activities that aim to improve the work satisfaction of home health
aides, the care received by patients, and the integration of the care team. The
first two activities provide new mechanisms for home health aides to obtain
care-related information and support by assisting with routine care tasks via
multi-modal conversational agents that provide voice-, video-, and text-based
guides for completing tasks safely, and providing decision support for clinical
questions via a conversational agent that delivers medically-verified
information. In parallel, there is a critical need for new mechanisms that
enable reliable and timely communication and coordination between home health
aides and the rest of the care team. The next two activities engage with this
challenge by developing an asynchronous communication tool that connects home
health aides directly with clinical staff; and enables data-driven cooperative
work and care coordination via new multi-stakeholder and multiple timescale data
collection and reporting mechanisms. Taken together, these innovations provide
rich opportunities for home health aides to learn and practice new skills,
demonstrate their expertise, receive recognition, and meaningfully shape patient
care. The final activity creates opportunities for learning and career
advancement via new training programs that sustain a sense of progress and
advancement while improving patient outcomes. This project, taken as a whole,
will improve the skills, well being, and careers of home health aides of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.