* 2026203
* STTR Phase I:  Haptics in Telerobotics for Improved Remote Dexterity
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Jeremy Fishel, Tangible Research Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to advance haptics - electromechanical
systems that operate through the sense of touch. This technology may improve the
performance of telemanipulation systems, making the operation similar to that of
bare hands, and advance a new generation of robotic tools allowing humans to
remotely feel and interact with environments at a distance. Early applications
include scenarios where humans would be placed in dangerous (e.g., nuclear,
chemical, deep sea, mining, and space), complicated (clean rooms and surgeries),
or remote locations (remote maintenance). This technology may reduce the costs
of telework (including improved access for those with disabilities), travel, and
specialized, local healthcare workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will evaluate the contributions of
realistic tactile and force feedback as well as biologically-inspired haptic
reflexes in telemanipulation. Because experimental psychologists and
physiologists have demonstrated that the absence of tactile sensory information
is detrimental to the speed and dexterity of human hands, telerobot systems will
seek to build these systems. This work seeks to advance haptics for improved
telerobotics performance by making them robust to distraction and latency.
Several technologies for force and tactile feedback, intelligent haptic
reflexes, and control schemes will be developed and tested in a range of
telerobotic tasks to evaluate their merits and suitability in candidate
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.