* 2026010
* SBIR Phase I:  Volition With An App
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Elizabeth La Rue, HERA GLOBAL TECH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2021
* USD 255,880.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to decrease the number of overdose deaths
in the U.S. by making an AI-driven mobile app to those suffering from substance
use disorder (SUD). There were more than 67,000 drug overdose deaths in the U.S.
in 2018. This project will potentially alter the existing behavioral health
marketplace through its ability to save lives and reduce the $740 billion spent
annually treating SUDs. The app, freely available to anyone with a mobile phone,
uses an expert artificial intelligence (AI) system to suggest an appropriate
evidence-based recovery plan to those in need. Medically recognized contingency-
based therapy processes are incorporated to help individuals follow their
recovery plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop an expert system to develop an evidence-
based personalized recovery program to individuals affected with SUD. To do
this, the company is developing SUD self-directed recovery while enhancing
compliance and motivation through a novel, salient reward system. Increasing
recovery plan compliance is a major addition to current healthcare industry
functions. The project will utilize a positive feedback loop via the novel use
of value-based payment for individuals with substance use disorder with or
without clinician oversight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.