* 2026677
* I-Corps:  A machine learning algorithm to predict recurrent disc herniation following microdiscectomy surgery
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Morgan Giers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software to predict spine surgery complications. There are 1.2
million spine surgeries nationally per year and about 25% (300,000 cases) of
these are microdiscectomies. The main goal of microdiscectomy is to take
pressure off your nerves to relieve back pain. Among spinal surgeries,
microdiscectomies are less invasive and have quicker recovery times, however,
5-10% of microdiscectomy patients reherniate leading to additional surgery
costs, longer patient recovery times, and lost productivity. Additionally, over
1/3 of reherniations occur within 3 months of the initial operation. To put this
in perspective, these patients spend 6 weeks recovering from their first
operation only to reherniate within a few months and return to the operating
table for a second microdiscectomy or a spinal fusion. These revision surgeries
often require months of further recovery time and pain. These secondary
surgeries are also challenging for hospitals and insurance companies. Re-
admissions decrease hospital quality ratings, and are often not reimbursed by
insurance companies if they happen within 90 days. The proposed technology helps
support a reduction in surgical re-admittance by identifying patients likely to
reherniate and allowing for risk mediation, saving patients unnecessary pain and
reducing hospital costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a machine learning algorithm that uses presurgical data to
predict which patients are likely to suffer from recurrent disc herniation
following microdiscectomy surgery. This technology aims to reduce the
complication rates, thereby increasing patient satisfaction and decreasing costs
to the patient and hospital. The machine learning algorithm is capable of
correctly identifying 98% of herniation patients as either at risk or not at
risk of reherniation in a cohort of 350 patients from one institute. Expansion
of this work to multiple institutes is underway. Results have been collected
from 1077 patients from 4 institutes in 3 countries thus far, showing that
predicted rates of reherniation are higher in reherniated patients; however, the
overall percent correct classification is still poor in some institutes because
of physician inter-evaluator variability in calculating input metrics from
radiographs. The goal is to develop semi-automated image analysis software to
calculate input metrics, creating more consistency among institutions. This
consistency will make it possible to provide a predictive tool capable of
compiling all of the potential risk factors for reherniation and to report a
single unified probability of risk so that care decisions are better
informed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.