* 2026007
* SBIR Phase I:  An Injectable Treatment for the Repair of Damaged Tendons and Ligaments
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Adam Hacking, RegenX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,947.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be improvement of quality of life and reduction of healthcare costs
associated with tendon and ligament injuries which are notoriously difficult and
slow to heal, depriving millions of Americans years of productivity. Tendon and
ligament injuries are especially debilitating for the aged, the active or those
with physically demanding professions. Injured ligaments (e.g. anterior cruciate
ligament) or tendons (e.g. Achilles) require months of rehabilitation and can
take up to a year to heal. In the elderly, rotator cuff injuries are pernicious,
prevalent and refractory to treatment. Every year in the US, $130 billion is
spent on musculoskeletal injury-related medical visits, 60% of which are tendon
and ligament injuries. Tendon and ligament injuries result in 288 million lost
work days costing the US economy $50 billion annually. In spite of decades of
effort, there has been very little improvement in either the rate or the quality
of healing for these injuries. The injectable repair system proposed could
reduce healing time and improve repair quality. The proposed plan to drastically
reduce the cost of the raw materials through human cell engineering will make
the treatment solution universally affordable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will determine the feasibility of an entirely new approach to tendon and
ligament repair based upon the in vivo delivery and assembly of collagen
monomers into the path of force. The approach is derivative of two recent
innovations that will be combined in four objectives to produce an injectable
collagen-based solution designed to accelerate the repair of damaged connective
tissues (i.e. ligaments and tendons) the healing of which presents a significant
medical challenge. The first innovation is the use of CRISPR/CAS9 technology
which will be used to accelerate the production of collagen by human
fibroblasts. Objective 1 will to optimize the CRISPR process and scale it up
through isolation and expansion of cells receptive to enhanced collagen
production. Objective 2 will leverage the second major innovation, liquid
crystal collagen processing technology, to develop a shelf stable injectable
solution of highly-dense particulates that is expected to donate large amounts
of collagen to injured connective tissue. Objective 3 will demonstrate that the
injectable repair solution will deliver collagen to repair damage in vitro and
Objective 4 will apply the approach in vivo, to demonstrate that exogenous
collagen delivery can speed the repair of damaged, living
tendon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.