* 2026115
* SBIR Phase II:  Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing of Highly Crystalline Thin Film Semiconductor Substrates for Flexible Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Graeme Housser, LUX SEMICONDUCTORS INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,755.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will help enable the expansion of the Internet-
of-Things (IoT) through new peel-and-stick sensor nodes. Such IoT nodes require
low device cost, and thus low sub-component costs for sensing elements,
processing circuits, communications, and power. In addition, they are power
constrained, requiring minimal energy consumption during sensor data collection,
processing, and transmission. Integrating low-cost and low-power components into
a single size-limited device becomes a substantial challenge using conventional
semiconductor fabrication materials and processes. This SBIR Phase II project
will use a novel System-on-Foil approach that patterns efficient silicon
circuitry directly into a novel flexible silicon substrate, alongside low-cost
printed electronics. This approach enables the integration of all core IoT
elements, including microprocessors, sensors, antennas, interconnects, and power
supplies, making robust systems with applications in condition monitoring for
civil infrastructure, human health monitoring, automotive, grid battery
management, wind turbines, aerospace, and industrial
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will advance a novel semiconductor recrystallization technology
to support a new generation of flexible electronics. To include on-board
processing, communication, and memory circuitry, current state-of-the-art
flexible electronics rely on surface mounting and soldering of off-the-shelf
silicon chips, similar to rigid printed circuit board assemblies. This pick-and-
place approach not only reduces device flexibility, but also leads to
interconnection challenges that severely compromise device reliability. This
project leverages a thin film recrystallization process where equivalent silicon
circuits can now be patterned directly into flexible silicon, resulting in a
highly scalable manufacturing process that drastically improves device
reliability. By patterning all components directly into a high-temperature
substrate, conformal electronics can be made that are durable even in heavy
vibration and shock environments. The project objectives include the transition
of prototype recrystallization processes to a higher throughput and higher
quality pilot-scale recrystallization system. The resulting flexible silicon
substrates will then be used for preliminary development of integrated circuit
fabrication to produce active silicon components as a step toward fully
patterned System-on-Foil electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.