* 2026272
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Laparoscopic Device for treatment of Varicocele
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Tushar Sharma, VIVIFI MEDICAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance translation of a new procedure to
address varicocele, the most common cause of male infertility. Varicocele
affects approximately 30 million men in the US alone and is the direct cause of
over 1.5 million involuntary infertile couples. It is also associated with
testicular pain, erectile disfunction, and low free testosterone. Current
treatments have varying success, with only 50% of patients noticing &gt;50%
improvement in sperm parameters and up to 37% of patients showing no change. The
treatment for varicocele has not changed since 1929 and consists of ligation or
occlusion of the internal spermatic vein, the primary route of drainage for the
testis. This project will advance a new method of treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims at leveraging a highly effective procedure proposed to treat
Varicocele. Even though surgical ligation procedures have shown promising
clinical efficacy, the technical difficulty and low success rates motivate other
treatment modalities. This procedure was proposed in the 1980s based on an
advanced understanding of hemodynamics responsible for the pathophysiology of
varicocele. Preliminary tests suggest lower complication rates and complete
elimination of hydrocele formation, recurrence rate of up to 0.2%, and faster
recovery times. This project will advance a technology to simplify the
procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.