* 2026740
* RAPID:Novel Foam formulations for decontamination of surfaces with minimum wastewater generation
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2020
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,773.00

The broader impact of this RAPID project is to advance the understanding of a
new disinfectant composition. A common approach to contain the spread of
infectious diseases involves spraying decontaminating disinfectants onto the
floors in hospitals, apartments, parks, airports, footpaths, and other surfaces.
The disinfectants commonly used are bleach, hydrogen peroxide, phenols and
iodophors. Sprays of such solutions on surfaces do not stick to surfaces of
protective clothing and hence have to be applied multiple times a day for
decontamination results. Furthermore, such operations can result in seepage of
the solutions into the ground. Considering the pandemic nature of infectious
diseases such as COVID-19, decontamination practices can often span for months,
causing prolonged exposure to disinfectant fumes that may be harmful to the
lungs and irritating for the respiratory tract. The proposed project aims to
overcome these issues by developing and applying disinfectant formulations as a
foam allowing sufficient exposure. A foam with super spreaders can penetrate
cracks and crevices, sticking to surfaces long enough to decontaminate. The
formulation will be designed for decontamination of floors and windows in
houses, vehicles, hospitals, and large areas such as airports. In order to
further minimize the use of disinfectants such as bleach, an antimicrobial
reagent serving as the foaming agent will be used. This will benefit communities
experiencing contagious diseases.

The objective of this RAPID project is to prepare a set of innovative foam
formulations that differ in disinfectant and surfactant type, and test them for
their foamability and deployment using a sprayer. A biosurfactant surfactin that
also exhibits anti-microbial properties will be used as a foam stabilizer. This
project will: Determine the air/water interfacial tension as a function of
surfactant concentration; study parameters, including the rates of foam
formation (foamability) and breaking (stability), as well as bubble size;
determine and correlate storage and rigidity modulus values for the foams with
foam texture for different air/water ratios; study deployment with a variety of
delivery equipment, such as household and backpack sprayer and foam lancer;
characterize the time-dependent texture of foam formed on a tile surface and
relate it to the foamability, the foam-stability parameters, and the storage and
elastic modulus values. The tile surfaces after foam completely breaks down will
be analyzed using an electron microscope to assess if disinfectant is deposited
uniformly or in the form of patches. This assessment will be verified using the
Raman spectroscopic mapping of the tile surface; the interfacial tension data at
different ratios of surfactant types provide an estimate of their adsorption
density at the air/water interface in the presence of hypochlorite ions in the
aqueous phase, while the foam stability parameters provide insights into their
intermolecular interactions at the interface and the possibility of synergistic
effects among different types of surfactants that govern the stability of a
foam.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.