* 2026967
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Juan Wachs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 21,332.00

This award supports a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
participants from U.S. educational institutions, along with unpaid senior
members of the research community as mentors, to be held in conjunction with the
fifteenth Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) International
Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2020). The IEEE FG
conferences are the premier international forum for research in image- and
video-based face, gesture, and body movement recognition. Their broad scope
includes new algorithms for computer vision, pattern recognition, and computer
graphics, as well as machine learning techniques relevant to face, gesture and
body motion for a variety of applications. The conferences present research that
advances the state of the art in these and related areas, leading to new
capabilities in interactive systems, biometrics, surveillance, healthcare, and
entertainment, and they play an important role in shaping related scientific,
academic, and educational programs. The Doctoral Consortium will provide an
opportunity for Ph.D. students whose dissertations are on topics related to
automatic face and gesture recognition to present their proposed research, and
receive constructive feedback from an invited committee of faculty and industry
researchers, as well as from other students working in these areas. The event
will give students valuable exposure to outside perspectives of their work, and
provide a comfortable forum in which to discuss and fine-tune their career
objectives with members of the international research community, and identify
areas that need further development. The workshop will also enable these young
researchers to develop a network of contacts at a critical stage of their
careers, and will foster a supportive community of scholars and spirit of
collaborative research, which will have broad impact because graduate students
who are conducting creative and groundbreaking work are the foundation and
future of the community. The organizers will make a particular effort to recruit
and include students from underrepresented groups (women and underrepresented
minorities) and students from smaller schools or schools with less established
computer vision research. They will also try to recruit a demographically
diverse (in terms of region, type of employment and stage in career) group of
mentors to advise these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Consortium
will be a half-day event during the conference. This year, there will be four
distinct aspects to the event. First, each participant will be paired up with an
invited faculty or industrial researcher who works in the related area and will
act as their mentor both in the Doctoral Consortium and throughout the FG
conference. Second, there will be a career panel during a working lunch where
participants will have an opportunity to discuss their research and career
objectives with other participants and mentors in an informal setting. Third,
there will be a dedicated oral session for the students to present their
research to the invited committee. Fourth, there will be a poster session for
the students to present their work to all conference attendees. These four
activities, taken together, will afford an excellent and structured way for
students to communicate with other students as well as with established
researchers of their related research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.