* 2026316
* The Role of Museums in the Landscape of Minority Representation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Perry Carter, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 06/30/2024
* USD 508,350.00

People perceive museums to be among the most trustworthy sources of cultural and
historical information and knowledge. Because of this, how cultures and peoples
are represented in these spaces is important to understand, especially as the
landscape of representation changes over time. This project documents and
analyzes the scope and breadth of how the geography, history, and culture of a
minority group is represented in museums, and how this changes over time. The
research links the emerging and growing fields of Black and museum geographies
to advance research on museums as sites of public pedagogy that play a critical
role in Black spatialities - the spaces of the Black experience as well as a
more active understanding of the Black experience. By considering the multi-
faceted approaches to the planning, design, and management of public spaces,
this research enhances the understanding of the role museums play in
representing Black life in a way that challenges racism and racial mythologies
and mobilizes responses to racial controversies. Findings from this research can
be used to understand differential representation of other minority groups as
well. The project will broaden participation of an early-career researcher and
includes participation of undergraduate and graduate students in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed-methods approach the investigators
will systematically (1) document the impact that evolving museum content areas
have on visitor experience and learning, (2) compare the content of larger
established museums such as the Smithsonian to smaller regional museums to
assess how regional histories, stakeholder interest, and monetary resources
shape the represented history, and (3) analyze how museum curators address
controversial current events as part of museumâ€™s mission to support communities
at local, regional and national scales. The project will result in the
development of a theoretical model that contributes to explanations about the
growing willingness of museums to engage with difficult subject material. The
research advances geographical literature specifically in the subfields of
museum geographies and Black spatialities and as well as general research on
heritage landscapes and geographies of memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.