* 2026774
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: A Concrete Look at Advanced Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Huijia Lin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

The project studies advanced general techniques to accomplish tasks in a
privacy-preserving manner. For example, these techniques enable two or more
mutually distrusting entities to interact over a network to perform a joint
computation on their private data, without revealing this data to each other.
Many of these tools have been developed in the context of theoretical
cryptography, and only recently started finding their way towards adoption. The
project’s novelties are new viewpoints and techniques in the developments of
these tools which take inspiration from the analysis of more conventional in-use
cryptographic functionalities (like encryption). The project’s impacts are the
validation of existing solutions, the development of more efficient and more
secure solutions, and initiating new lines of theoretical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, this project introduces a new
vista on zero-knowledge proofs and multi-party computation, aimed at
understanding the trade-off between the concrete efficiency and the concrete
security of these protocols. The goal is to analyze existing solutions, but also
to propose new ones with better security and/or efficiency. While, in principle,
many existing analyses can be re-examined to be made concrete, the project
focuses on questions that also capture challenging technical barriers
encountered in the process of giving concrete guarantees which are as precise as
possible, and this, in turn, motivates new lines of theoretical research. The
concrete analysis developed in this project further informs and guides the
deployment of the advanced cryptographic techniques examined. As part of the
broader impacts, the investigators have an outreach component aimed at training
teachers and ambassadors to promote studies in STEM using
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.