* 2026003
* SBIR Phase II:  Using Intervention and Feedback to Improve Group Function In Online Contexts
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Elizabeth Porter, RIFF LEARNING INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 991,417.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to create an online, instantaneous feedback mechanism during online
engagements to improve soft skills of people group settings. The explosion of
online learning experiences in recent years, in which many courses fail to
engage learners or help them achieve their academic and professional goals, has
focused on the problem of engagement. Interest in online learning remains high,
as it presents an opportunity to broaden the reach of institutions and
companies, but success rates in broadly available learning experiences are low.
he project applies emerging innovations in artificial intelligence to the
problem of delivering high-quality learning at scale. While most applications
focus on individual learners and creating new personalized educational pathways,
this project highlights the importance of collective learning and the power of
peer engagement to help all members of a learning community reach their goals
together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will further develop specialized video and text chat tools to
collect data from groups engaged in synchronous online learning, analyze and
categorize patterns of communication, and give feedback to students to help them
have better, more successful experiences online. This project introduces several
innovations in data capture and analytics, as well as feedback to learners while
they are collaborating online. While many students use online collaboration
tools such as discussion boards, chat, and video, this project focuses on
providing interventions to change behavior in real-time. During conversations,
such as those happening when people brainstorm to solve a problem or work on
shared assignments, certain vocal patterns indicate engagement, reveal unstated
agreements and discords, and expose individual biases. Using deep learning and
data modeling, real-time feedback about conversational dominance is generated
and shown to learners while they are speaking. The project further explores the
effect of machine-generated insights about what happened during the
collaboration, and makes recommendations about behavior modifications, based on
predictive models. For more nuanced insights, these data are paired with facial-
gestural data, such as nodding or raising oneâ€™s eyebrows. Together, these
innovations combine data that has never been collected at scale before with
social science data models uniquely applied to online learning. The goal of the
project is to prove that insights like these have a net positive effect on
learning outcomes and raise the level of satisfaction with online learning
experiences that incorporate these tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.