* 2026561
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and Manipulation of Maize Meristem Size
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrea Gallavotti, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 833,278.00

The regulation of the size of meristems, groups of plant stem cells, plays an
important role in plant development and crop productivity. Increases in meristem
size achieved during the domestication of several crop species resulted in
bigger fruits and inflorescences, and continue to offer great potential to
increase yield. This proposal will provide a thorough understanding of the
genetic and molecular mechanisms essential for increasing ear size in maize, a
major crop worldwide, that can potentially translate to increased yields in
commercial hybrids. The research will be integrated with active scientific
training of high school students, and with a new research-based teaching module
that combines classic genetic analysis with translational research tailored to
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of the regulatory network
controlling meristem size is the transcription factor WUSCHEL (WUS). WUSCHEL
function has been proposed to have diversified between monocot and eudicot
species. In maize, however, WUS function has yet to be explored, despite its
importance in plant development and its recent use in plant transformation
technologies. The proposed research will reveal the function of duplicated WUS
genes in maize and their role as transcriptional repressors by combining genetic
analysis and transgenic approaches with single cell transcriptomics of maize
inflorescences. This work aims to uncover key mechanistic details of meristem
size regulation in maize and monocots in general, answering long-standing
questions regarding evolutionary conservation or diversification of WUS
function, and to reveal new regulatory targets that could be genetically
manipulated to increase maize yield and improve transformation
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.