* 2026981
* I-Corps:  MAGNETIC NANO PARTICLE GYROSCOPE
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Johnson Asumadu, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new magnetic-based nanoparticle gyroscopic sensor. Inertia
sensors accurately indicate change in orientation by detecting angular
acceleration. Presently, gyroscopic sensors are available in many technology
forms, but the most widely used are pressure-based micro-electromechanical
sensors (MEMs). This project proposes a new sensor in a relatively simple,
rugged design that is low cost and uses less power. It is designed for use in
challenging or dangerous environments, such as deep sea and high altitude.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a new
gyroscopic sensor with the ability to sense inertia due to the ability of the
magnetic nanoparticles to resist being tilted from their original space
positions. Magnetic nanoparticles in fluids, rotating magnetic field, and
gyroscopic technologies and methods provide a method and system for a gyroscopic
sensor. The next step is to understand performance requirements for parameters
such as particular bias and scale factor stability, environmental sensitivity,
repeatability, signal/noise ratio, minimum g-sensitivity (spinning frequency
resulting from an acceleration force); and identify ways improve
accuracy/performance, bandwidth, and size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.