* 2026324
* FW-HTF-P: Teaming Transplant Professionals and Artificial Intelligence Tools  to Reduce Kidney Discard
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Cihan Dagli, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Thousands of procured kidneys are discarded each year due to inefficient
workflow processes and negative perceptions for using lower quality or higher
risk organs. While some of this discard is medically necessary, some represents
lost opportunities to get patients off of dialysis and increase lifespans. This
Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier planning grant project aims to
transform the organ transplant matching process. The future technology is an
artificial intelligence (AI) system with usable trustworthy interfaces that are
fully integrated into the transplant healthcare work context between the demand-
side (transplant center) and supply-side (organ procurement organization). The
future workers are organ procurement coordinators and transplant coordinators,
physicians and surgeons. A single kidney can have thousands of offers before
one, if any, transplant center accepts it. The current process of manually
placing lower quality organs exacerbates lost opportunities. The AI system will
identify transplant teams and candidates that are most likely to accept a lower
quality organ so that the match can be identified quickly and the organ is less
likely to be discarded. This planning grant will build capacity for integrating
AI into transplant healthcare and engage workers as well as pre- and post-
transplant patients in a design-a-thon event. This research is driven by
transplant experts at Saint Louis University Hospital and experts in AI and
human factors from Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology. Once
validated, this research can also be applied to other data-intensive high-stakes
scenarios (e.g. military operations, critical
infrastructure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AI systems often suffer from technical,
human, and integration challenges. Over the course of the planning grant, we
will (1) document a transplant work system architecture and identify challenges
for re-designing this work process, (2) develop a proof-of-concept AI system to
predict which candidates are most likely to accept a lower quality kidney that
is at risk of discard, and (3) perform human subjects experiments to scope the
interface design and predict technology adoption factors. It is time-consuming
and costly to manually design neural architectures, so this project proposes an
approach that uses evolutionary algorithms to find the optimal architecture for
a particular data set. This will facilitate real-time adaptation as the data
inputs evolve over time. In addition, it is critical for AI systems to be
explainable and transparent, particularly in high stakes contexts. The project
will perform human subject experiments with lay populations to evaluate how
uncertainty visualizations and metrics influence performance, confidence, trust,
technology acceptance, and willingness to choose riskier
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.