* 2026045
* LTER: Ecological Response and Resilience to “Press-Pulse” Disturbances and a Recent Decadal Reversal in Sea Ice Trends Along the West Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Janice McDonnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,374,386.00

Part 1: Non-technical description &lt;br/&gt;The goal of all LTER sites is to
conduct policy-relevant ecosystem research for questions that require tens of
years of data and cover large geographical areas. The Palmer Antarctica Long
Term Ecological Research (PAL-LTER) site has been in operation since 1990 and
has been studying how the marine ecosystem west of the Antarctica Peninsula
(WAP) is responding to a climate that is changing as rapidly as any place on the
Earth. The study is evaluating how warming conditions and decreased ice cover
leading to extended periods of open water are affecting many aspects of
ecosystem function. The team is using combined cutting-edge approaches including
yearly ship-based research cruises, small-boat weekly sampling, autonomous
vehicles, animal biologging, oceanographic floats and seafloor moorings,
manipulative lab-based process studies and modeling to evaluate both seasonal
and annual ecosystem responses. These combined approaches are allowing for the
study the ecosystem changes at scales needed to assess both short-term and long-
term drivers. The study region also includes submarine canyons that are special
regions of enhanced biological activity within the WAP. This research program is
paired with a comprehensive education and outreach program promoting the global
significance of Antarctic science and research. In addition to training for
graduate and undergraduate students, they are using newly-developed Polar
Literacy Principles as a foundation in a virtual schoolyard program that shares
polar instructional materials and provides learning opportunities for K-12
educators. The PAL-LTER team is also leveraging the development of Out of School
Time materials for afterschool and summer camp programs, sharing Palmer LTER-
specific teaching materials with University, Museum, and 4-H Special Interest
Club partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Polar ecosystems are among the most rapidly changing on
Earth. The Palmer LTER (PAL-LTER) program builds on three decades of coordinated
research along the western side of the Antarctic Peninsula (WAP) to gain new
mechanistic and predictive understanding of ecosystem changes in response to
disturbances spanning long-term decadal (‘press’) drivers and changes due to
higher-frequency (‘pulse’) drivers, such as large storms and extreme seasonal
anomaly in sea ice cover. The influence of major natural climate modes that
modulate variations in sea ice, weather, and oceanographic conditions to drive
changes in ecosystem structure and function (e.g., El Niño Southern Oscillation
and Southern Annular Mode) are being studied at multiple time scales –from diel,
seasonal, interannual, to decadal intervals, and space scales–from hemispheric
to global scale investigated by remote sensing, the regional scales.
Specifically, the team is evaluating how variability of physical properties
(such as vertical and alongshore connectivity processes) interact to modulate
biogeochemical cycling and community ecology in the WAP region. The study is
providing an evaluation of ecosystem resilience and ecological responses to
long-term “press-pulse” drivers and a decadal-level reversal in sea ice
coverage. This program is providing fundamental understanding of population and
biogeochemical responses for a marine ecosystem experiencing profound
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.