* 2026574
* FW-HTF-RM: The Future of Teleoperation in Construction Workplaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mindy Bergman, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,396,612.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) research project
will advance fundamental knowledge in the discipline of "smart construction".
Construction is a work domain in which workers often struggle with the cognitive
"data overload" problem that emerges when they are required to attend to
multiple sensory stimuli at the same time. Visual stimuli place a high demand on
selective attentional resources that limit the utility of each additional visual
data display. The specific research objective of this project is to develop an
alternative - an electrotactile warning system that alerts excavator operators
about the location / proximity of unseen buried hazards. Excavator operators
face serious risks when working around buried utilities, including the risk of
damaging utility lines, which can result in costly consequences to society such
as disrupting essential services, serious injuries, and even death. Whereas
previous efforts to mitigate the likelihood of an accident have focused on
providing additional information to workers via visual displays, this can cause
a cognitive "data overload" that can reduce performance and increase stress at
work. Further, workers are often resistant to adopting the new technology. This
project will promote the progress of science and advance national prosperity
through the user-centered development of an electrotactile system capable to
augment excavator operator spatial awareness and performance in construction
workplaces. The findings from this project have important implications for
reducing excavation damage to critical infrastructure systems that are essential
for the functioning of society. The multidisciplinary approach will help broaden
career development opportunities for participating students, including women and
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly engage
construction workers in a set of four tasks that seek to improve the spatial
awareness of excavator operators using technology that can provide intuitive
spatial data on buried hazards. The project plans proprietary excavator sensor
technologies that can localize subterranean targets, as well as electrotactile
operator display technologies that can communicate these data to the worker. The
first task leverages user-centered design techniques to document task features,
worker roles and needs, and risks associated with excavation work. The second
task develops a telerobotic control framework that provides intuitive real-time
feedback of buried utilities to operators for enhancing spatial awareness of
those hazards. The third tests the supplemental feedback system in a virtual
reality environment, while the fourth tests the system in real-world testbeds.
In addition, the research promises to provide a framework for technology
adoption policy, detailing the risks and benefits of introducing new
technologies into emerging socio-technological landscapes where workers are
challenged by phased adoption of technologies and inconsistencies in interface
configurations between different tasks and different work
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.