* 2026090
* SBIR Phase II:  Smartphone Automated External Defibrillator
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Daniel Fleck, Altrix Medical, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 998,441.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to save lives through the miniaturization of
automated external defibrillators (AED) integrated with smartphones. Sudden
cardiac arrest (SCA) kills more than 320,000 Americans a year outside of the
hospital. An SCA can cause death if it is not treated in minutes. If an AED is
available, it can save a person's life. Unfortunately, today’s AEDs are often
not available outside of buildings or large population centers and are too big
to easily transport outside of an emergency situation, and thus they often
arrive too late for a victim. This research creates a new type of AED designed
to function as a personal device, small enough to be carried everywhere and
securely connected to the Internet through smartphone integration. These next-
generation AEDs will save lives by making them available when and where they are
needed. These units will be a lightweight addition to an EMT, soldier’s, or park
ranger’s emergency kit as a simple and lifesaving addition to everyone’s
smartphone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project will advance translation of a novel AED. Specific activities include
methods to develop language support; creation of new channels for ECG
transmission to emergency rooms and catheter labs prior to patient arrival; and
integration with telecommunication systems used by emergency response personnel
(e.g., 911). This project will optimize the trade space between form factor and
performance, using systems engineering methodologies for verification and
validation of the proposed solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.