* 2026928
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: TTP: Small: eSLIC: Enhanced Security Static Analysis for Detecting Insecure Configuration Scripts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Christopher Parnin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,978.00

Information technology (IT) organizations manage infrastructure using
configuration scripts. Configuration scripts help practitioners to accomplish a
wide range of jobs, including cloud computing, scientific research, and large-
scale data analytics. Even though configuration scripts enable scalable and
rapid delivery of software, security weaknesses in configuration scripts, such
as hard-coded passwords, can result in security and privacy problems such as
data breaches. Current research of configuration script security is limited in
finding types of problems that can be detected, preventing false positives, and
enabling actionability—all of which prohibits practitioners to take actions on
the identified security weaknesses, potentially leaving computing systems open
to security attacks. The project aims to address these limitations. The
project’s novelties are development of techniques and tools that will
automatically detect security weaknesses in configuration scripts developed
using a wide range of languages, heavily used in industry. The project's impacts
are related to securing the national cyber infrastructure, educating the next
generation IT workforce on cybersecurity, and broadening of participation
through recruitment of underrepresented communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on the development of techniques and tools that will
automatically detect security weaknesses in configuration scripts developed
using a wide range of languages heavily used in industry. Three main tasks will
be investigated for this project. First, qualitative analysis is applied in
order to determine a comprehensive list of security weaknesses for multiple
configuration script languages, and devise static analysis techniques for
automatically identifying each category of security weakness. Next, grammar-
based parsing and machine learning techniques are applied, evaluated, and
integrated into the derived static analysis so that false positives are reduced.
Finally, the development context of practitioners from the open source and
proprietary domain will be systematically mined to generate actionable alerts
and suggestions, which will enable practitioners to fix security weaknesses.
Along with the three technical tasks, industry panels will be organized, where
practitioners from industry will give feedback on the developed techniques and
tools. Findings from the project will be disseminated to government, industry
and open source practitioners, as well as to students who are learning about
configuration management in graduate and undergraduate level courses related to
cybersecurity. The project is expected to generate best practices for security
code review, automated tools, and education materials essential to secure
configuration script development. As a transition to practice (TTP) project, it
will facilitate collaboration with industry practitioners, so that a
comprehensive, holistic, practitioner-friendly security static analysis is
achieved to secure configuration script development and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.