* 2026398
* FW-HTF-P: Addressing the Wearable Technology Acceptance Gap for Industrial Workers Performing Repetitive Motion Work
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Lesley Strawderman, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2022
* USD 128,049.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) planning project
will advance fundamental knowledge concerning the acceptance and use of wearable
health and performance monitoring technologies in the industrial workplace.
Although wearables such as fitness tracking watches are used extensively by
consumers, there has not been widespread acceptance of wearables within
industrial manufacturing. Wearable devices can enhance worker safety, assist in
the early detection of potential repetitive motion injuries, and provide
information that allows safer and more efficient operations. But they can also
present privacy and ethical risks. This project involves fundamental research
into potential reasons for non-acceptance of wearable health and performance
monitoring technology, challenges faced when wearables are used, risk factors
and mitigations, including those related to privacy and ethical concerns. The
project investigates real and perceived barriers from the perspectives of
workers, management, and organizations. The project will promote the progress of
science and advance national health, prosperity and welfare by contributing new
knowledge and new conceptual frameworks related to wearable device acceptance
and use in manufacturing, warehousing, and logistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will identify key barriers to wearable technology integration in
industrial workplaces, and critical differences between individuals and
organizations in adopting new technology. A set of focus group interviews and
round table discussions will identify stakeholder perceptions of cost
effectiveness, safety and risk, usability, comfort, training and education,
implementation, and technological acceptance. Stakeholder groups include workers
and managers from industrial manufacturing businesses, future workers drawn from
communiversity students and faculty, and workforce development boards and
organizations at the city, county, and state levels. Feedback will be analyzed
through qualitative data coding. The goal is to develop a novel technology
acceptance model that will help all stakeholders understand the complex
relationships between technological acceptance and perceptions of cost
effectiveness, safety, security, privacy, risk, usability, comfort, and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.