* 2026853
* Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical Processes in a Subsurface Hypersaline Environment near the Abiotic Fringe
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Bess Ward, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 158,132.00

Deep groundwater environments contain a significant portion of Earth's biomass
and the organisms therein participate in biogeochemical cycling of carbon and
other elements. They are also among the candidate environments for the origin of
life, i.e., for the transition from simple, abiotic chemical reactions to
cellular, metabolic, replicants. This project is focused on deep (&gt;3km),
ancient (1-2 billion-year-old), hypersaline fracture water, accessed via
boreholes in a South African gold mine. Water-rock interactions in this system
contribute to increased fluid salinity and generate hydrogen gas, methane, other
short-chain hydrocarbons, and simple carbon-sulfur compounds that may be
important precursors to life. This project will advance understanding of carbon
cycling, saline groundwater (directly relevant to petroleum reservoirs), and the
origin and early evolution of life on Earth. The project involves international
collaboration and will engage both graduate and undergraduate students, with
emphasis on recruiting minority/underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
interactions of abiotic and biotic processes occurring over a ~2-billion-year
time scale in deep hypersaline fracture fluid environments. An initial suite of
samples was collected from each of two brine boreholes. Further sampling will be
conducted. Characterization of the samples will include identification and
quantification of dissolved and volatile organic carbon compounds, stable
isotopic analyses of inorganic and organic compounds and of fracture minerals,
and radiometric dating of dissolved noble gases. On the biomass of at least one
borehole, metagenomic, metatranscriptomic, metaproteomic, and lipidomic
analyses, in addition to virome characterization, will be performed. The
following hypotheses will be tested: 1) In the deeper, hotter (55°C) borehole
where the biomass abundance is extremely low, an inventory of abiotic organic
compounds formed by water-rock reactions over the past billions of years will be
characterized for the first time; 2) In the shallower, cooler (48°C) borehole
where the biomass abundance appears greater, the community will be supported by
abiogenic hydrocarbons, exhibit a greater expression of osmotic regulation and
phosphorous uptake genes, and possess lipids whose composition provide lower
membrane permeability. This proposal's focus on the abiotic organic geochemistry
and microbial cycling in hypersaline, hydrologically isolated, deep fracture
fluids has direct applications to globally significant Precambrian hydrologic
reservoirs, biodegradation of petroleum deposits, the origins and evolution of
life in the subsurface, and the exploration for extant life on Mars and other
planetary bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.