* 2026412
* FW-HTF-P: Immersive Virtual Reality Instructional Modules for Response to Active Shooter Events
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Sharad Sharma, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 132,352.00

This project addresses the need to significantly increase preparedness to
respond to active shooter events. During active shooter events or emergencies,
the ability of public safety professionals to react appropriately to the
situation is driven not only by pre-existing knowledge and skills but also
depends upon state of mind and familiarity with similar scenarios. The primary
focus of the activities in this project is to increase the efficiency and
preparedness of public safety professionals for active shooter events, with a
focus on the design of future technologies for conducting emergency response
training. The pilot research in this project involves developing immersive
virtual reality instructional modules to serve as a platform for emergency
training to be deployed across institutions of higher education (IHEs). These
active shooter response training drills and exercises will facilitate the
implementation of emergency operation plans and the translation of plans into
action. Overall, the project serves as the basis for training workers of the
future in the important work context of emergency response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot research in this project involves conducting
preliminary experiments to improve preparedness for an active shooter event
using an immersive virtual reality environment. This work builds on an existing
virtual reality instructional module for active shooter response and will expand
the simulation environment to include public safety professional training with
an active shooter scenario. The research will engage 15-200 university
volunteers (faculty, staff, and visitors) and the instructional modules will be
built and evaluated with 15-20 public safety professionals from Bowie State
University. A pilot study will be conducted for training in immersive and non-
immersive virtual environments. Overall, this work will contribute to the state-
of-the-art emergency response research and results could form the basis of
public education and awareness programs to help facility occupants, public
safety professionals, and IHE officials to respond appropriately during
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.