* 2026311
* How Do Fluctuations in Summer Temperature Affect Monsoonal Events?
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2023
* David Porinchu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 372,192.00

This project will document how the strength of the Indian Summer Monsoon has
varied over recent millennia and investigate how variations in the Indian Summer
Monsoon are linked to fluctuations in summer temperature. This knowledge is
crucial to improving our understanding of the mechanisms driving precipitation
variability in a highly populous, agriculturally-dependent region. The
quantitative records of precipitation data produced by this project will be used
to refine climate models simulating future precipitation conditions and thereby,
help society to better anticipate the potential impacts associated with
projected climate change. This project will broaden participation of
undergraduate and graduate students in field and laboratory-based geosciences,
advancing the STEM workforce with well-trained geoscientists. This
interdisciplinary project will strengthen collaborations between environmental
scientists both nationally and internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
historical instrumental record for the Indian Summer Monsoon is too short to
adequately document the full range of long-term variability in the strength of
the Indian Summer Monsoon. Lengthier records of long-term and abrupt
fluctuations in the Indian Summer Monsoon will provide insight into the behavior
of the monsoon system. This information will be used to improve the predictive
abilities of existing models simulating the potential responses of summer
monsoon precipitation to on-going and projected environmental variability. The
biological, chemical, and physical properties of sediment cores recovered from
lakes will be used to determine if precipitation is correlated with summer
temperature during the past, and if the widespread abandonment of Bronze Age
settlements corresponds to a short-lived interval of extreme aridity. This
project will contribute significantly to our understanding of how changes in the
mean state of environmental systems can influence the global
monsoon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.