* 2026826
* NSF GEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Impact of the Plio-Pleistocene Transition on Provenance and Sediment Routing from the Himalaya to the Deep-Sea Bengal Fan
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* James Gleason, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 96,832.00

The Himalayas represent the largest mountain chain on Earth, and reside mostly
in Nepal, India, Pakistan and China. The Himalayas began rising many millions of
years ago when India collided with Asia, which changed Earth’s climate, altered
ocean circulation and chemistry, and impacted the course of biological
evolution. Erosion of the Himalayas resulted in deposition of the largest pile
of sediment on the planet in the Bay of Bengal, the deep-sea Bengal Fan. Within
this sediment record lies the history of the Himalayas – the now eroded Mt.
Everests of the past, buried under sediment of the continental shelf and the
deepest parts of the Indian Ocean. In 2015, a multi-national expedition on the
JOIDES Resolution, a specially designed scientific drilling ship, recovered ~1.5
miles of sediment cores that contains this record. New research will use these
sediments to trace the history of Himalayan erosion and how two of the world’s
largest rivers, the Ganges and Brahmaputra, delivered it to the Bay of Bengal
over the last 3-5 million years. Giant mountain ranges like the Himalayas are a
rarity through geologic history, but without the Himalayas there are no
drenching Asian monsoons, no fertile floodplains or aquifers, no ancient Indus
Civilization, and no Mt. Everests in that part of the world. The results of this
research will therefore tell us about climate change, landscape evolution, and
how one of the world’s most densely populated areas came to be as seen today.
Understanding the past in this way can help us better understand the future for
the 10% of the world’s population that lives under the influence of this
incredible geographic feature. This project also supports international
collaboration between scientists and students from several universities in the
U.S., the U.K. and several Asian countries where field work will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Himalaya-sourced Ganges-Brahmaputra river
system and the deep-sea Bengal Fan represent Earth’s largest source-to-sink
sediment-dispersal system. IODP Expedition 354 drilled a 7-site transect in the
middle Bengal Fan, almost 1000 miles from the modern Ganges-Brahmaputra delta
shoreline, to expand the record of erosion and sediment routing from the
Himalaya to the deep sea. Previous research examined detrital-zircon (DZ) U-Pb
data from sandy turbidites in IODP 354 core to summarize Miocene to middle
Pleistocene patterns of sediment routing: this research identified major changes
in specific DZ U-Pb age populations that correspond to the Plio-Pleistocene
transition, and indicate major changes in provenance due to environmental
forcing. New research will build on earlier results and examine climatic and
tectonic processes that drove this provenance change. This research will be
grounded on analyses of 25 new samples of Plio-Pleistocene sand from IODP 354
core, which represent sand transport to the Bengal Fan during glacial periods
when sea level was low, as well as 60 new river sand samples from the modern
Ganges-Brahmaputra drainage that will be used to establish patterns
characteristic of the Holocene interglacial monsoon-dominated climate. Detrital
zircons and rutiles recovered from the sand fraction in these samples will be
used as the primary signal carrier and will be analyzed for U-Pb geochronology,
with zircons examined for (U-Th)/He thermochronology and Hafnium isotopes as
well. These samples and methods will fingerprint contributions from the main
tectonostratigraphic units of the Himalaya to the Bengal Fan in glacial vs.
interglacial periods and show how Himalayan erosion and sediment routing to the
deep sea changes over time. The dataset generated will serve the community as a
baseline for decades, and will be leveraged as a tool for public outreach at
professional meetings and workshops that emphasize source-to-sink concepts and
how the Himalaya to Bengal fan system responds to and records climate change and
tectonic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.