* 2026276
* FW-HTF-RL: Collaborative Research: The Future of Remanufacturing: Human-Robot Collaboration for Disassembly of End-of-Use Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sara Behdad, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,514,197.00

This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) project will
advance effective human-robot collaboration (HRC) to reduce electronics
remanufacturing costs and improve operator safety, while considering the highly
complex unstructured nature of the remanufacturing environment. Scarcity of
resources, environmental regulations, and potential profits from salvaging
valuable materials and components have motivated consideration of end-of-use
product recovery and remanufacturing. However there are significant challenges
related to the labor-intensive nature of disassembly, which is an integral part
of critical remanufacturing operations such as reuse, repair, maintenance, and
recycling. This project focuses on robot-assisted disassembly to increase
productivity, while enhancing job satisfaction and ensuring worker safety.
Today, disassembly is still a predominantly labor-intensive process that
requires direct contact with many elements that are potentially harmful to human
health. The research will advance fundamental understanding of the way humans
and robots distribute tasks, cooperate, and interact in a safe and complementary
manner. Among the expected benefits of the research results are improved quality
of life for remanufacturing workers, increased recycling and reduced waste for
used electronic materials, the creation of new manufacturing jobs, reduced
dependency on foreign sources of strategic materials, and increased stocks of
domestically harvested rare earth elements. The multidisciplinary research
crosses the boundaries between robotics, sustainable design, human factors, data
science, and labor economics, by the joint efforts between the University at
Buffalo (UB) and the University of Florida (UF). The research will positively
impact engineering education and workforce development through educational and
outreach activities such as workshops for K12 students, course development at
both institutions, timely training of graduate students, and a set of workshops
for industry and academic audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
focused on advancing an integrated framework that utilizes the capabilities of
both humans and robots in a safe, complementary, and interactive manner, towards
designing an economically viable disassembly system for the remanufacturing
industry. The research team will perform fundamental studies on collaborative
disassembly systems by implementing five interdependent research tasks within
the contexts of Future Technology, Future Worker, and Future Work: (1) work
environment monitoring with human motion prediction, (2) planning, learning, and
control for collaborative robots, (3) disassembly sequence planning under
uncertainty and exploring HRC-inspired design guidelines, (4) human-robotics
system integration, and (5) modeling and prediction of economic impacts of HRC
in remanufacturing environments. Specific knowledge gaps are addressed by mutual
interactions among product design guidelines, HRC, occupational safety
standards, and remanufacturing labor market. The convergent research approach
will allow iteratively adjusted and enhanced collaborative disassembly systems
to be implemented in future remanufacturing factories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.