* 2026819
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Data Capabilities: A data-driven modeling infrastructure to support research and education in volcanology, geochemistry and petrology
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 251,859.00

Research and education in volcanology, geochemistry, and petrology rely on data-
driven modeling tools. Modeling helps us to understand the conditions under
which rocks form, how magmas are transported from the Earth's interior to erupt
as lavas at the surface, and how temperature, pressure, and composition affect
the style and dynamics of volcanic eruptions. Observational and experimental
data are essential to calibrating models and to evaluating the veracity of model
outcomes. This project focuses on integrating data resources at EarthChem
(http://www.earthchem.org) with the modeling capabilities of the ENKI software
framework (http://enki-portal.org). The objective is to fully integrate these
two resources and to make them available to the scientific community as cloud-
accessible tools that support both research and learning. The integrated tool
will encourage community usage of data-driven modeling tools and entrain broader
participation of early career researchers in these fields by conducting
workshops that expand and engage the ENKI and EarthChem user base. Another goal
is to develop workflows that help to publish replicable, reproducible modeling
and data-driven research products. All software produced in this project will be
open source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project has the principal
objective of integrating data resources available at EarthChem with
thermodynamic and geodynamic modeling capabilities found in the ENKI software
framework. The goal is to develop an open-source, container-based and cloud-
enabled, data-driven modeling platform to support research and education for the
volcanology, geochemistry, and petrology (VGP) community. An equally important
objective is to encourage usage of data-driven modeling tools by conducting
workshops that expand and engage the ENKI and EarthChem user base and encourage
participation of early career researchers in the VGP community. The data
analysis and modeling frameworks will support research workflows that facilitate
dissemination and publication of results in a manner that is both replicable and
reproducible. The project addresses an important and established need of the VGP
research community. Previous to the development of the ENKI modeling framework,
modeling tools in VGP were principally app-based, operating system-specific, and
largely dependent on a small number of researchers for modification and updates.
ENKI enabled a paradigm shift in the approach to model-driven research in VGP by
creating an infrastructure based on Python frameworks that establish uniform
access to underlying tools, streamline the process of model calibration and
maintenance, and facilitate platform-independent access by the use of Jupyter
notebooks and servers that are accessed as cloud-based resources with a web
browser. A deficiency of the ENKI modeling environment is the absence of
persistent and well-maintained data resources that directly support model
calibration, that constrain parameters important for model usage, and that
provide means of evaluating model predictions. The EarthChem data systems
contain data that provide these constraints. Integration of EarthChem and ENKI
will deliver a robust modeling ecosystem that supports research and education in
VGP, and encourages standards in model usage, modeling workflows, and model
publication that better enable replicable and reproducible science. Community
engagement is a crucial component of the project. Three user workshops will be
conducted in a virtual or in person format with the aim of engaging early career
VGP researchers in utilizing the EarthChem-ENKI platform. All software produced
in this project will be open source. This work is funded by the Directorate for
Geosciences and the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.