* 2026167
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Fuel-Efficient Hybrid Hydraulic Refuse Truck
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Melinda Sims, V1 ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,917.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to increase fuel efficiency in vehicles across every
segment of transportation by integrating hybrid hydraulic technology. Hybrid
hydraulic vehicles have better fuel economy than traditional vehicles, and so
the commercial value proposition is drastic savings on fuel. The initial target
market is refuse trucks, because they are heavy and have frequent stops and
starts, and therefore waste haulers can see immediate savings in operational
costs. Since many municipal trash hauling contracts have integrated fuel
surcharges, reduced fuel use will also result in immediate savings to cities and
communities. The same hybrid hydraulic design can then be adapted to other
vehicle classes, such as delivery vehicles, mail trucks, taxis, semi trucks, and
construction equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop a fuel-efficient hybrid hydraulic refuse truck. Hybrid hydraulic
technology is not yet commercially successful because of 1) the
noise/vibration/harshness, and 2) the poor driving characteristics of the
vehicle. These problems are caused by the hydraulic motor pump (currently quite
noisy) and the transmission plus control strategy (which exacerbate poor vehicle
handling). The proposed R&amp;D will use a new motor specifically engineered to
be quieter, develop a new transmission to reduce friction, and design a control
system to improve driving quality. A newly available “floating cup” hydraulic
motor may finally solve stubborn noise and whining issues, while still
maintaining performance and enabling fuel efficiency, but it has never been
validated. The R&amp;D plan is to first test the new components, focusing on the
floating cup hydraulic motor. Then, modeling of the tested components will
confirm the expected efficiency gains on a typical refuse truck collection
route. Finally, a tailored control system and detailed design of the mechanical
system will validate the driving characteristics and economic value
proposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.