* 2026461
* STTR Phase II: Increased Security for Blockchains Applied to Healthcare
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Katherine Kuzmeskas, SIMPLYVITAL HEALTH, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2024
* USD 989,853.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is a significant increase to the security of
healthcare safe public-private blockchain protocols. The use of blockchain
technology drives efficiencies in direct alignment with improved patient
experience and improved health, both at a reduced cost. The economic impact of
bringing down the costs of providing healthcare has the potential to benefit
millions of lives. One serious threat on Proof-of-Work (PoW) blockchains is the
double-spend attack. With a successful double-spend attack, miners can reverse
payments and obscure the audit trail of data access. The deployment of the
proposed protocol will ensure the integrity of both these properties. More
broadly, the proposed system can improve security for any PoW blockchain, such
as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Litecoin. The system can also greatly improve user
experience by processing in a timely and standard manner via regularly created
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to virtually
remove the threat of double-spends for healthcare safe blockchains. Existing PoW
blockchains are based on computational puzzles. Once a miner solves a puzzle,
she adds a block to the chain and is rewarded with coins. In expectation, miners
produce blocks proportional to their share of the computational resources. But
mining is a random process and occasionally a miner with a small share of the
resources can generate a majority of the blocks. In those cases, a minority
miner can overwrite existing blocks, nullifying or double-spending earlier
entries. The proposed system prevents double-spend attacks by requiring miners
to aggregate multiple solutions to the PoW problem before submitting a block.
This aggregation ensures that miners with the majority of the processing power
have a high probability of submitting the majority of the blocks, reducing the
risk of double-spends by orders of magnitude. The technical work includes:
First, developing a new consensus mechanism for blockchains. The consensus
mechanism is a highly sensitive, embedded piece of software and this adoption
will be handled with careful engineering. Second, the project will decrease
associated bandwidth use on the network, a primary cost. The project will seek
to create a new solution for reducing network costs based on advanced filters.
Third, the project will address and mitigate remaining security issues, such as
proof withholding attacks and Denial of Service attacks. Finally, the work will
empirically quantify the improvements to ensure high quality engineering and to
inform translation strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.