* 2026177
* SBIR Phase II:  Solar Concentrator Unit for Low-Cost Metal Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Andrew Brewer, BLUESHIFT, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,140,533.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project comes from the development of a concentrated
solar 3D printer capable of operating on the Moon. The 3D printer efficiently
harnesses the heat of the Sun to fuse lunar soil into custom parts for producing
mechanical components and structures. The resources on the Moon, particularly
sunlight and soil, enable in situ parts production without the expensive step of
launching materials from Earth. This capability for in-space manufacturing could
be used for many applications. Furthermore, the proposed technology can be used
to develop a low-cost, consumer 3D printer capable of fabricating custom
components of metal, glass, and many previously inaccessible materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will advance development of a Solar Additive Manufacturing (SAM) test
platform. This project will explore several feedstock materials, including lunar
soil simulants, glass, and a select metal. Test coupons will be produced to
characterize part quality and strength and iterative testing will be performed
to optimize printer performance. Custom mechanical components will then be
produced from lunar soil simulants as a demonstration of practical parts for
lunar manufacturing. The final stage of the project will be to reduce system
complexity and design a lightweight, purpose-built solar 3D printer. This effort
will produce a low-cost solar printer ready for the consumer market as well as a
lunar payload prototype design for testing in a lunar
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.