* 2026970
* RUI: Confronting Structural Complexity in the Computational Design and Understanding of Perovskite Materials for Solar Energy Conversion
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Robert Berger, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 268,067.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RUI award supports computational
research to design and understand "perovskite" compounds, a technologically
important class of materials with the ability to absorb and harness the energy
in sunlight. Perovskite compounds have the general formula ABX3, meaning they
consist of three chemical elements in a 1:1:3 ratio. In the past decade, some of
these compounds have shown promise in photovoltaic solar cells, meaning they can
convert sunlight directly to electricity. Other perovskites are solar
photocatalysts, meaning they can use sunlight to drive chemical reactions that
generate fuel. A unique property of perovskites is that their structure can be
changed in many subtle ways -- substituted with different elements, pulled and
twisted, layered and decorated -- to optimize their ability to convert sunlight.
With all of this freedom to modify perovskites, computers are valuable tools in
predicting which of these materials will behave in desired ways. In this
research, the principal investigator (PI), undergraduate, and master's-level
students will use computers to predict how and understand why substitutions and
movements of atoms affect the ability of perovskites to absorb and convert
sunlight. In addition, the research group will develop a new computational
method, faster than traditional methods, to quickly and roughly search the huge
variety of perovskite materials for properties of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the PI's mentoring and
teaching activities and curriculum development at Western Washington University,
a primarily undergraduate institution. The award will enable the training and
mentoring of a diverse group of undergraduate and master's students along with
opportunities for the PI and students to present their work at regional and
national research conferences. In recent years, the PI has worked to "flip" his
undergraduate physical chemistry courses, designing in-class problem solving and
computer simulation activities to engage students in more active ways. There is
evidence in the education literature that this approach leads to a variety of
positive learning outcomes (especially among lower-performing students) and
promotes equity and inclusion by engaging students with a wide spectrum of
different learning styles. In the coming years, the PI will refine and further
develop these curricular materials for physical chemistry and develop similar
student-centered training materials relevant to his group's research areas.
These materials will help students learn about fields such as computational and
solid-state chemistry, which are rarely covered in the undergraduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RUI award supports computational research to
design and understand perovskite compounds for solar energy conversion. In the
past decade, halide perovskite solar cells have emerged as a promising and
rapidly developing technology. So too have oxide perovskites been explored for
solar photocatalysis. Along with advances in synthesis and device engineering,
there have been density functional theory (DFT)-based studies of various aspects
of the structure and properties of these materials. However, due in large part
to the structural complexity of experimentally relevant perovskite
superstructures and nanostructures, cases in which theory and computation have
truly been on the leading predictive edge of this field have been limited. In
order to advance fundamental understanding of structure/property relationships
and guide experimentalists in the search for new materials, the PI,
undergraduate, and master's-level students will study three research areas in
the computational elucidation and design of halide and oxide perovskites. These
projects will use electronic structure calculations to: 1) tune electronic
properties using strain and its couplings to composition and structural
distortion; 2) identify novel, energetically stable classes of perovskite
superstructures with desired properties; 3) develop, test, and deploy a new
semi-empirical approach (based on the extended Hueckel method) to the rapid
high-throughput screening of complex perovskite superstructures and
nanostructures. These projects will advance the state of the field in terms of
fundamental understanding, discovery and tuning of new materials, and method
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the PI's mentoring and
teaching activities and curriculum development at Western Washington University,
a primarily undergraduate institution. The award will enable the training and
mentoring of a diverse group of undergraduate students (with nine summer
research stipends over three years) and a master's student, and opportunities
for the PI and students to present their work at regional and national research
conferences. Students will learn about renewable energy and key areas of
chemistry (computational and solid state) that are rarely seen in the
undergraduate curriculum, and will gain computational skills (Linux and
programming) that are increasingly valued in the modern workforce. In parallel
with these research efforts, the PI will develop and assess synergistic
educational materials for students, in the form of standalone computer
simulation lessons in key topics of solid state chemistry (e.g., crystal
structure and symmetry, X-ray diffraction, and electronic band structure and
reciprocal space). These lessons are an outgrowth of the suite of computer
simulation lessons that the PI has developed and used in student-centered
activities in undergraduate physical chemistry
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.