* 2026594
* FW-HTF-P: WORK WELL: Understanding the interrelationships between humans and technology to improve the quality of work life in smart buildings
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Michael Fry, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,720.00

Humans construct buildings primarily to protect themselves from environmental
forces. Many people spend 1/3 of the day for 5 days a week at work in buildings
and these buildings have become increasingly more sophisticated and
technologically advanced in providing optimized and controlled indoor
environments. While these “Smart Buildings” may be energy efficient, little is
known about the impact such buildings have on the physical, mental, emotional
and spiritual health of the individuals who work in highly automated and
technically-controlled environments. This project assembles a multidisciplinary
team of researchers that converges disparate research in a single, comprehensive
strategy to correlate building performance measured across multiple variables,
such as energy efficiency, maintenance, noise levels, lighting types and levels,
air quality, temperature, humidity and air movement against the health, well-
being, and workplace satisfaction of the individuals in those buildings. The
outcome of the project will be new, comprehensive lines of inquiry that
holistically explore the interactions between these various aspects in order to
improve the design and functionality of buildings in service to the health and
wellbeing of the people who occupy them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
focus on workplaces in high-performing buildings that have “tight” building
enclosures and highly automated heating, air conditioning, and lighting systems.
The quantifiable performance of these offices and of the buildings as a whole,
will be obtained from the energy metering of the buildings to determine the
Energy Use Intensity (EUI) for comparison across structures. Detailed analysis
of the building envelopes will yield a common method to compare the efficiency
of building construction for each office under study. To obtain more detailed
and specific local data, sensors will be placed within offices and various
locations in each of the subject buildings to systematically capture noise, air
quality, temperature, humidity, light, air velocity and airborne compounds.
Environmental data will be captured by accessing regional weather records and
sensors installed outside each of the buildings. Directly measurable physical
health data from individual occupants of the buildings will be obtained through
wearable biosensors, while qualitative information about workplace satisfaction
will be obtained through a series of post-occupancy-evaluations. The systematic
collection and analysis of data across multiple factors will reveal unforeseen
interactions or unintended consequences between building performance and
occupant well-being and will lead to new findings and proposed interventions to
improve both the performance of buildings and the satisfaction of the people
working in these high-performing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.