* 2026262
* The Hidden Innovation Infrastructure:  Understanding the Economic Development Role of Technician Education in the Changing Future of Work
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marilyn Barger, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,708,318.00

The roles of technicians and two-year institutions are unrecognized in most
traditional approaches to measuring the impact of higher education on economic
development. This project aims address this gap by identifying the economic
impact of technician education programs and workforce development at two-year
institutions. The research will investigate the hypothesis that community
college technician education programs and the NSF Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) Program form an infrastructure that creates both a workforce of
skilled technicians and an ecosystem of supports that help to increase workplace
productivity and innovation, thus spurring regional economic development. The
multi-faceted mixed-methods research study will include a national analysis of
community college technician education and economic development, as well as in-
depth regional case studies of technician education and industries in advanced
manufacturing. The national analyses will examine data from the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics Occupational Employment Statistics and the U.S. Census County
Business Patterns. Case study sites will be selected based on ATE program
investments, level of rurality, manufacturing sector, economic context, and
economic development region. The project will advance understanding of
technician education’s contribution to economic development in two ways. First,
the project will develop a more refined conception of the role that community
college technician education plays in economic development. Second, the project
will provide a deeper examination of workplace outcomes beyond simple employment
and earnings models to generate insights on the nature of technician work and on
innovation and productivity in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to a new data collection, two primary datasets will be combined in the analyses:
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Employment Statistics data and
the U.S. Census County Business Patterns data. Both use the North American
Industry Classification System. The Integrated Post-Secondary Education System
data and ATE program award data will be used to measure different cognate areas,
such as the number of students in higher education. The National Center for
Education Statistics crosswalk between Classification of Instruction Program
codes with the Standard Occupation Classification codes will be used to link
education programs to occupations. The project will examine trends in technician
production from community colleges and trends in the technician labor market,
which will be augmented with data from the NSF’s National Training, Education,
and Workforce Survey. A quasi-experimental difference-in-differences approach
will be used to establish causal linkages between technician education/ATE
program and innovation/economic and workforce development. On-going work by the
Aspen Institute and the State New Economy Index will inform case study measures
and analyses. Comparative analysis of the linked case studies will contribute
to: identifying the presence or absence of the phenomenon of interest; exploring
how the phenomenon varies across conditions; investigating differences in the
impact of the phenomenon; testing theoretical and emerging linkages among
different phenomena; and examining conditions under which the phenomenon arises.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.