* 2026342
* CAREER:   Algorithms in nature: Uncovering principles of plant structure, growth, and adaptation
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Saket Navlakha, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,022,294.00

The goal of this project is to help make algorithms a preferred language for
describing problem-solving strategies used by biological systems. Algorithms
have long been the language of computing, and all biological systems must
compute (i.e., process information) to survive. Thus, the study of "algorithms
in nature" can represent a new field of interdisciplinary research between
computer science and biology. More specifically, this project seeks to uncover
fundamental network design strategies and optimization principles shared by
branching structures in nature, including plant shoot (above-ground) and root
(below-ground) architectures, as well as neural branching arbors in the brain.
Understanding the basic patterns that evolution has used to design these systems
has bi-directional benefits; it can lead to improved understanding of how these
natural networks process information and function in both health and disease,
and it can lead to new computational strategies for building better engineered
networks. Educationally, making the study of algorithms a requirement in life
science curricula can help educate the next-generation of interdisciplinary
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This project has three Aims. The first Aim is
to discover principles governing how plant architectures grow and adapt to
changing environments. This Aim will: (1) study how different network
optimization trade-offs sculpt the shape of plant shoot architectures using the
theory of Pareto optimality, and how different trade-off objectives are
prioritized depending on the environment and species; (2) determine the
molecular mechanisms (genes) that drive prioritizations; and (3) determine what
search algorithms are used by plant shoots to find resources and to strategize
growth. These questions will be studied using 3D laser scanning of crop species
(tomato, tobacco, sorghum, corn, rice) grown across multiple conditions and
time-points, and of model species with different genetic backgrounds. Overall,
this Aim will link network design principles commonly studied in computer
science with those driving network formation and adaptation in plants, and may
help design and evaluate breeding strategies to enhance crop yield. The second
Aim is to develop models of network warfare to study plant-plant competition.
This Aim will: (1) create "gladiator-style" arenas to study how two plants
battle for limited light; (2) develop game theory methods to assess whether
dominant or stable strategies emerge; and (3) quantify how competition
strategies differ based on the species of the two plants and their growth
environment. This Aim will lead to predictive models of plant social
interactions that can inform the design of polyculture farming spaces based on
which plants "get along" the best. The third Aim is to test the generality of
these principles to other biological and engineered branching structures. This
Aim will test if the branching properties learned from plant shoot architectures
also dictate the structure of plant root architectures below ground and neural
(axonal and dendritic) architectures in the brain. For example, are root
architectures also Pareto optimal? What search algorithms do they use to find
nutrients? How does competition affect these strategies? This will also lead to
the first quantitative comparison of branching structures across two kingdoms of
life, from plants to neurons. Finally, this Aim will also study human-engineered
networks that also must adapt their structure to resource availability and
demand in dynamic environments. Insights from biology could reveal new
strategies for optimal reconstruction of damaged infrastructure after war or
natural disasters, or extension of existing infrastructure into developing
areas.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; URL:
http://www.snl.salk.edu/~navlakha/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.