* 2026805
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Dynamic protein autoinhibition as a mechanism for rapid DNA recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Junji Iwahara, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 748,464.00

In this NSF-BSF project, the research team will seek a molecular mechanism
whereby proteins efficiently find their binding target in complex, cell-like
conditions. For a protein to perform its biological function, the protein must
find and bind to a target molecule. The binding surface on the protein (the
functional domain), that interacts with the target molecule, can also interact
with other parts of that same protein, preventing the protein from performing
its function. This process is called ‘autoinhibition’ has been found in various
proteins, including gene-regulatory proteins and enzymes. The current project
will elucidate how autoinhibition impacts the efficiency of proteins in their
search their targets among numerous similar molecules. The research team tests a
hypothesis that autoinhibition can reduce the risk for the proteins to get
trapped at nontargets and thereby accelerate the binding to the targets. This
international project, supported by both NSF and BSF, involves educational
outreach for high school students that demonstrates for students the importance
of interdisciplinary collaboration and the universal nature of science across
the globe. The project can provide an innovative way to engineer the molecular
properties of proteins for various biotechnological purposes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is theory-driven and integrates approaches of
experimental and computational biophysics in a synergistic fashion to shed light
on the fundamental principles of autoinhibition. The research team will study
the role of autoinhibition of DNA-binding proteins in their target search
process in the presence of numerous nonfunctional high-affinity ligands, which
are referred to as decoys. During the search process, DNA-binding proteins
encounter with numerous decoys, which can severely impede association with
targets. The research team will examine the dynamic autoinhibition as a
potential mechanism to diminish this adverse impact of decoys. The
autoinhibition that undergoes dynamic conformational equilibrium will be studied
for natural and artificial systems where an inhibitory segment and ligands
(decoy or target) compete for the positively charged molecular surface of a DNA-
binding domain. The research team will pursue two specific objectives: 1) to
delineate competition of intra- vs. inter-molecular interactions; and 2) to
elucidate the role of dynamic autoinhibition in target search kinetics. The
research will utilize nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods, stopped-flow
fluorescence methods, and computational approaches. The project is expected to
delineate what dictate the balance between the autoinhibited and uninhibited
states and how the balance influences the target search kinetics. The project
will also explore applications of the dynamic autoinhibition to protein
engineering for improving the kinetic properties of DNA-binding
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics and Genetic Mechanism Clusters of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.