* 2026375
* Collaborative Research:  GEM--Multi-harmonic Whistler Waves, Their Origin and Contribution to Electron Scattering
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Anton Artemev, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 247,579.00

Multi-harmonic whistler waves are capable of scattering and accelerating
electrons to high speeds in the Earth’s inner magnetosphere and other plasma
environments. Understanding the origins of these waves and how they interact
with electrons is important for forecasting and predicting space weather and its
effects on sensitive systems such as satellites and space craft. The project
supports three early career scientists and undergraduate research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three main objectives to this
project: 1) What plasma parameters determine the possibility and rate of the
whistler wave energy cascade to multi-harmonic frequencies of the electrostatic
component? 2) What plasma parameters determine the possibility and rate of the
whistler wave energy cascade to multi-harmonic frequencies of the
electromagnetic components? 3) How does the whistler wave energy cascade to
higher frequencies influence the efficiency of whistler waves in accelerating
electrons? This will be accomplished by analysis of multi-harmonic whistler wave
measurements from the Van Allen Probes and the Time History of Events and
Macroscale Interactions during Substorms mission in the Earth’s inner
magnetosphere and by the Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission in the day-side
magnetopause reconnection. Spacecraft observations will be combined with
numerical simulations (multi-fluid magnetohydrodynamic code) of whistler wave
steepening and test-particle simulations of electron interaction with these
whistler waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.