* 2026358
* RAPID: A matter of life or death: Identifying factors that regulate susceptibility or resistance of bay scallops to an emergent coccidian parasite
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Bassem Allam, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 233,796.00

The bay scallop, Argopecten irradians irradians, is one of the most economically
and ecologically important species in coastal areas of New York State and the
region. In summer/fall 2019, 90% of the scallops in eastern Long Island died,
and this coincided with the emergence of an undescribed parasite that disrupts
the kidney of infected animals. Genetic analysis showed that the parasite
belongs to the Coccidia subclass of parasites, and this pathogen is now
designated bay scallop Coccidia or BSC. This project will identify how BSC
infects and kills scallops, and why some scallops are resistant to infection or
death. Results from this study promotes the progress of science because research
will identify mechanisms that regulate host-parasite interactions in scallops,
and may help us understand how other Coccidia cause disease in economically
important systems. It advances the national prosperity and the bioeconomy
because results help scallop farmers and ecologists prevent or minimize death of
this economically-important crop. This research will also provide tools to
enable a broad research community working on apicomplexan parasites of
invertebrates. This proposal also uses funding to train a post-doc, and graduate
and undergraduate students to train the next generation of scientists. Results
expected from this work will facilitate the recovery of bay scallops in New York
waters, and will serve as a reference if BSC spreads to other coastal regions in
the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the common nature of Coccidia infection in
invertebrates, very little is known about the biology of these microorganisms
and the factors that regulate infection success. This RAPID will use an ongoing
epizootic to generate information needed to characterize an ecologically- and
economically-important member of the Coccidia that infects bay scallop (BSC).
The study will use a combination of high-throughput sequencing techniques
(genome and RNA sequencing), traditional cellular techniques (parasite
purification, primary cell culture), and molecular biology methods to
characterize BSC and probe the relationship between parasite life stages and
scallop health; to evaluate how the disease will develop with the onset of
summer conditions, conditions thought to be stressful to bay scallops; and to
determine what genetic and environmental factors differentiate resistant
scallops from susceptible ones. The new data are expected to solve an
information gap that has been hampering the understanding of the mechanisms of
survival and disease of BSCs in marine invertebrates. Moreover, the genetic
information obtained from this work can be the basis for developing diagnostic
tools to identify BSC infections and outbreaks in the future, which helps the
bioecomony. This research will identify mechanisms that regulate host-parasite
interactions in scallops, and may help us understand how other Coccidia cause
disease in economically important systems. This research will also provide tools
to enable a broad research community working on apicomplexan parasites of
invertebrates. This award also uses funding to train a post-doc, and graduate
and undergraduate students to train the next generation of STEM
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.