* 2026568
* FW-HTF-RM Collaborative Research: Augmenting Remote Medical Procedure Training and Assistance with Spatial Computing and Volumetric Capture
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Neal Sikka, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 897,306.00

Healthcare expenditure accounts for 17% of the US Gross Domestic Product and 12%
of the workforce, but access to highly skilled health professionals is not
evenly distributed across geographic and socioeconomic strata.
Videoconferencing-based telehealth systems partly address this inequality by
enabling experts to assist and train remote or rural medical personnel. However,
videoconferencing alone cannot adequately convey three-dimensional information
that is essential in performing many medical procedures. For example, it is very
difficult for an expert to precisely guide an operator's hand remotely in
performing a medical procedure using only videoconferencing. This project will
transform the way medical personnel communicates and collaborates across the
distance by allowing for real-time exchange of three-dimensional information
that is missing in current videoconferencing telehealth. The project will lead
to more equitable access to healthcare; improved success for medical procedures
that require the assistance of a remote expert; more cost-effective distribution
of healthcare skills and training; and higher quality expert medical advice from
a distance. It will also engage students in interdisciplinary research using
emerging technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research include: i)
developing an understanding of the communication needs for medical staff in
distant training, mentoring and procedural assistance, ii) insights into the
application of mixed-reality volumetric representation and transmission in
remote healthcare settings; iii) design guidelines for a mixed-reality
volumetric communication system that simulates the physical presence of the
patient at the location of the remote expert; iv) clinical evaluation of the
utility of 3D spatial information in remote medical procedures assistance; and
v) user studies examining the efficacy of spatially-enhanced communication in
remote medical training and guidance. The project aims to enroll 144 trainees
consisting of medical and allied health students, physicians, physician
assistants, and nurse practitioners to participate in randomized training
experiments in three conditions: current standard training, 2D and voice
guidance, and 3D mixed-reality. To achieve the above goals, researchers will
also advance spatial computation and volumetric capture technologies. The
project deliverables include a prototype of a spatial communication telehealth
system that will create a real-time three-dimensional representation of the
patient. This shared representation will be annotated with information exchanged
between the medical procedure operator and the remotely guiding expert. The
project is a collaboration between the Department of Emergency Medicine and the
Clinical Learning and Simulation Skills Center at George Washington University,
and American University. The multidisciplinary research team includes
researchers from computer science, human-computer interaction, communication,
telehealth, emergency medicine, medical simulation, and medical
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.