* 2026510
* FW-HTF-P: Telemedicine at Scale: Expanding the Healthcare Workforce and Healthcare Access
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Anita Komlodi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,899.00

Access to emergency medical services (EMS) for both rural and urban populations
is hampered by an overstretched healthcare workforce. Many healthcare issues do
not need the resources of an emergency room or hospital. Instead, they would be
better served through "hospital at home" medical care or specialized in-patient
units. A versatile, mobile health workforce provides a scalable solution that
can be grown out of the already existing EMS infrastructure and education
pathways. For example, many entry-level medical personnel can provide immediate
care in the field by tele-consulting with a single highly trained medical
expert. One negative of this approach is that it increases the cognitive,
communicative, and affective load on both the remote consultant and the local
worker. Through a collaborative workshop, experimental study, and series of
interviews, this project will identify the challenges and opportunities of many-
to-one telemedicine. The aim is to provide a clear set of hypotheses towards the
shape of the future EMS workforce, the training needed for that workforce, and
the economic impact on the EMS workforce and healthcare costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three major activities. The first
activity will gather emergency healthcare leaders and educators, telemedicine
system designers, and health economists for a workshop on Telemedicine-at-Scale,
in order to explore the existing challenges, as well as potential directions for
innovation. The aim is to define the problem space for work in this area,
including new technologies that could be developed and the educational and
fiscal models needed. The second activity is an exploratory study on
collaboration challenges inherent in one-to-many telemedicine. This will include
an assessment of the cognitive, communicative, and affective load experienced by
both the field telemedic and the experienced clinician. The third main activity
will connect the research team with community partners to understand the fiscal
motivations and challenges of Telemedicine-at-Scale. The working hypothesis is
that the telemedic in the field could be an entry-level pathway for high-school
graduates interested in healthcare while also providing a first line of mobile
healthcare providers to supplement an overstretched ambulance
corps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.