* 2026618
* FW-HTF-P: Training an Agile, Adaptive Workforce for the Future of Manufacturing with Intelligent Augmented Reality
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Kemi Jona, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 149,999.00

The future of the American manufacturing workforce faces a perfect storm of
challenges: (1) a shortage of workers due to the retirement of the Baby Boom
generation, (2) a shifting skillset due to the introduction of advanced
technologies, and (3) a lack of understanding and appeal of manufacturing jobs
among younger cohorts. Consequently, over 2.4 million U.S. manufacturing jobs
are anticipated to be left unfilled by 2030 with a projected cost of $2.5
trillion on the U.S. manufacturing GDP. Augmented reality (AR) has been recently
adopted for experiential training and upskilling of manufacturing workers. AR is
proven to reduce new-hire training time by 50% through spatiotemporal alignment
of instructions with worker experience. However, evidence suggests that
overreliance of workers on AR scaffolds can cause brittleness of knowledge and
deteriorate performance in adapting to novel situations. This project will
investigate if and how AR can help manufacturing workers develop agility and
adaptability on the shop floor while avoiding the risks associated with
dependence on technology and stifled innovation. A new intelligent AR system
will enable dynamic adjustment of AR instructions to worker task performance and
enhance their ability to master complex tasks such as assembly and maintenance.
This research will serve the national priority for rapid and lifelong upskilling
of manufacturing workforce, especially underrepresented and under-served
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A convergent team of learning scientists,
labor economists, cognitive psychologists, computer scientists, and
manufacturing engineers will investigate three fundamental research thrusts: (1)
Future work: Labor market analyses of changes in employer skill requirements
will be conducted to understand the degree to which AR technologies have been
introduced in the U.S. and the skillsets workers will need in future factories.
(2) Future technology: An intelligent AR system will be devised to understand,
predict, and guide the behavior of AR-supported workers through adaptive
scaffolding of instructions to their performance and level of expertise. (3)
Future worker: Hypothesis-driven human-subjects research will be conducted to
understand the impacts of adaptive AR scaffolds on worker performance, cognitive
load, and learning. The overarching goal of this research is to balance the
efficiency and innovation of future manufacturing workers by improving their
ability to transfer the acquired knowledge and skills to new situations on the
shop floor. Experts from industry, government, and academia will be convened in
a multidisciplinary workshop to illuminate the potentials and risks of AR
technology for training future workforce and bridging the skills gap in
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.