* 2026523
* High-resolution deep-tissue microwave thermometry
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 381,737.00

The internal temperature of the human body can be considerably different from
that of the skin. Athletes, soldiers, firefighters, and astronauts under heavy
training or challenging ambient conditions can have abnormal core temperatures,
resulting in hyperthermia, and heatstroke, making internal body temperature
monitoring important. The difference between internal temperature (e.g., heart)
and skin varies up to 2 degrees Celsius over the 24-hour circadian cycle for a
healthy person. A disrupted circadian rhythm can result in seasonal affective
disorder, type-2 diabetes, and heart disease. Internal tissue temperature is
relevant in cancer hyperthermia (heating) treatment, and hypothermic (cooling)
neo-natal brain rescue. Currently, a noninvasive, wearable and inexpensive
method of measuring internal body temperature (IBT) does not exist. The goal of
the proposed research is to study and develop an internal body temperature
monitoring device that has the potential of being disposable and inexpensive.
The motivating applications are in areas of: (1) medical diagnostics and
monitoring; (2) medical treatment; and (3) forensics, organ transportation and
artificial tissue growth. The proposed device lends itself to internet of things
(IoT) integration in hospital, home and ambulance settings. Additionally, the
method applies to industrial applications such as monitoring temperature of
food, mixed waste, etc. The PI is active in outreach, and related to this
proposed work plans to engage with local schools through the Timmerhaus
Ambassador program, and by informing athletes and working with the University of
Colorado Sleep and Chronobiology Laboratory. The international component of the
proposed effort includes a collaboration with Carlos III Univ. in Madrid,
evidenced by proposed student exchanges and no-cost participation in tissue
grafting applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new method of integrated design,
implementation and calibration of an external passive radiometer will be studied
and developed for monitoring internal body temperature by measuring total black-
body power in a narrow frequency range with relatively long integration time.
The frequency of operation is chosen for low interference (quiet bands) and high
skin depth in tissues. The proposed basic research builds on a successful proof-
of-concept that unveiled challenges that need to be solved before the method can
be applied. This proposal focuses on the following topics: &lt;br/&gt;1.
Comparing radiometer architectures and determining the best architecture to
achieve improved temperature resolution over a small (few degrees C) temperature
range on a chip, at frequencies that have low RF interference, e.g. the 1.4 GHz
quiet band. &lt;br/&gt;2. Investigating the fundamental limits on spatial
resolution, and designing probes and probe arrays that enable high resolution.
Near-field phased array probes are proposed for improving transversal spatial
resolution, while multi-frequency probes show promise for improved depth
resolution, with a goal of 1cm in all three dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;3. Tissue
layer thicknesses and electrical properties vary on different parts of the body
and between humans. In order to estimate internal temperature, a one-time time-
domain reflectometry probe array measurement that determines tissue layer
characteristics is proposed, for improved temperature resolution estimation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the intellectual merits include contributions
in high-frequency circuit and system design, near-field phased array probes over
complex layered media and time-domain layer
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.