* 2026809
* RAPID: Explainable Machine Learning for Analysis of COVID-19 Chest CT
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Albert Hsiao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 120,243.00

In December 2019, it was discovered that a widely contagious pneumonia was
caused by a new coronavirus infection now named COVID-19. The primary test for
detection of the virus is real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with
sensitivity of approximately 71% in some studies. However, this test may require
several days to provide a result. Perhaps more importantly, imaging with x-ray
or computed tomography (CT) are required to confirm pneumonia, which is the
principal cause of death, as it leads to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS). Recent studies have shown sensitivity of chest CT for approximately 98%
for COVID-19 pneumonia and could provide immediate results but currently require
human interpretation. Given the need for rapid, more accurate diagnosis, this
project will use, adapt, and evaluate explainable machine learning techniques to
diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia. This project will improve the understanding of
mechanisms of COVID-19 and will help mitigate its
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viral nucleic acid detection using real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is the primary method for diagnosis of
COVID-19 infection, which has rapidly spread worldwide as a global pandemic.
Sensitivity of this test for COVID-19 infection has been estimated at
approximately 71% in some studies and may require several days for a result.
X-ray and CT imaging are complementary technologies that allow diagnosis of
COVID-19 pneumonia, which can evolve to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) -- the principal cause of death in patients with COVID-19 infection.
Especially early in the course of the disease, chest CT has multiple advantages
over RT-PCR yielding results more quickly and is already widely deployed, but
requires expert radiologist interpretation. The number of chest CTs may rapidly
exceed the speed and capacity of already strained radiologists. An explainable
machine learning algorithm may address this disadvantage to expedite the
interpretation of chest CT and assist rapid triage of patients to the ICU,
inpatient ward, monitoring unit, or home self-quarantine. Machine learning
algorithms, specifically those leveraging deep convolutional neural networks
(deep learning), have the potential for facilitating even more rapid diagnosis
within minutes. This project seeks to validate the use of explainable deep
learning methods to adjust diagnostic operating points for multiple
applications, including (a) disease screening, (b) disease staging and
prognostication, and (c) evaluation of treatment
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.