* 2026271
* Stress Testing Theories of the Glass and Jamming Transitions Using Hyperellipsoids
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Robert Hoy, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2024
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education in the fields of solidification processes, statistical
mechanics, and computer simulations. How does a given liquid decide whether to
crystallize or to form a disordered solid like window glass when it is cooled?
This question remains unanswered, and is a principal focus of current materials
research. Glass-formation is closely related to the jamming transition, the
solidification of a granular material, like sand or coffee beans, that occurs
when it is compressed. Although great advances in theories of the glass-jamming
transition have been made over the past decade, most of these theories assume
particles are spherical. This is a potentially serious limitation because very
few real-world glassy and granular materials are composed of spherical molecules
or grains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance our knowledge of
the glass-jamming transition by conducting a coherent research program that
focuses upon its dependence on particle asphericity. The research will
systematically relate differences in the structure of glassy and jammed systems
composed of model ellipsoidal particles to differences in particle shape and
sample preparation protocol. The relatively low computational cost of the
ellipsoidal-particle model will be exploited to explore relevant parameter
spaces far more broadly than is feasible for chemically-detailed models. Key
questions to be addressed are: (1) Does the importance of particle anisotropy
decrease as spatial dimension increases? and (2) To what extent do the peculiar
features of ellipsoids’ jamming transitions influence their glass transitions?
The planned studies are designed with the aim to contribute maximally to the
long-term goal of obtaining a level of physical understanding sufficient to
develop predictive design principles for granular and glassy materials with
tailorable structural, mechanical, and acoustic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the training of one PhD student and
one undergraduate student in granular and glass physics, statistical mechanics,
and computer simulations. The PI will also develop and disseminate “EllJam”, an
iPhone/iPad app that illustrates the solidification physics of 2D ellipsoids.
Playing with parameters such as the particle aspect ratio and compression rate
will allow the user to discover and distinguish parameter values leading to
crystalline solids from those which lead to disordered solids, and hence to
develop some basic intuition for which factors control the outcome of
solidification. This app is intended to capture the interest of K-12 students
and young researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education in the
fields of solidification processes, specifically, the glass-jamming transition,
statistical mechanics, and computer simulations. While the importance of
particle anisotropy in controlling macroscopic properties of glassy and jammed
systems has long been recognized, it is only within the past decade that the
development of cheap high-output 3D printers has allowed production of grains
with a wide variety of precisely specified shapes. Advances in synthesis
techniques have allowed comparable shape control for colloids as well as
preparation of orientationally-ordered small-molecule glasses. Over this time,
computers have become powerful enough to simulate large systems of aspherical
particles over long timescales. Although great advances in theories of the
glass-jamming transition have been made over the past decade, most of these
theories assume particles are spherical and hence cannot capture the effects of
particle anisotropy. This is a potentially serious limitation because very few
real-world glassy and granular materials are composed of spherically symmetric
molecules or grains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will carry out studies that
will systematically relate differences in the structure of glassy and jammed
systems composed of ellipsoidal particles to differences in particle shape via a
coherent program of coarse-grained simulations and analytic modeling. The PI
will also “stress-test” recently developed high-dimensional theories of the
glass-jamming transition by determining whether they remain at least
qualitatively accurate for systems composed of aspherical particles.
Specifically, the research team will first develop a parallel molecular dynamics
code for simulating hyperellipsoids. Then it will conduct simulations and
analytic work aimed at determining how coupled dimension and particle-aspect-
ratio-dependent effects influence both jamming and the thermal glass transition.
Key amongst the questions to be answered by these studies are: (1) Does particle
anisotropy become less important as spatial dimension increases and the tendency
of particles to locally order decreases — and if it does, how rapidly? and (2)
To what extent do the peculiar features of jamming transitions in ellipsoids,
more precisely jamming densities that become singular as the aspect ratio of a
particle approaches unity, influence their thermal glass transitions? Answering
these questions will contribute to the soft matter theory community’s long-term
goal of obtaining a level of physical understanding sufficient to develop
predictive design principles for granular and glassy materials with tailorable
structural, mechanical, and acoustic properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will fund the training of one PhD student and one undergraduate student in
granular and glass physics, statistical mechanics, and computer simulations. The
PI will also develop and publicize “EllJam”, an iPhone/iPad app that
illustrates’ 2D ellipsoids’ jamming physics. The user will be able to choose the
system size, the particle aspect ratio, and the compression rate, and then watch
how ellipsoid jamming varies with these parameters. The user will also be able
to choose between monodisperse systems which tend to crystallize in 2D and the
50:50 bidisperse systems typically employed in jamming studies. This app should
be of interest to both K-12 students and young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.