* 2026176
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel injectable long-acting local anesthetic for postoperative pain management
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Brett Davis, REBEL MEDICINE INC
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 255,838.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops novel pain therapeutics that can reduce
or eliminate the use of opioids after surgery. Opioid-based medications are a
mainstay of postoperative pain management, with approximately 80% of surgical
patients receiving prescriptions, but may result in opioid-misuse disorders with
10% of patients progressing to long-term use. In addition to being potentially
deadly, this use can be associated with adverse events, such as addiction,
respiratory depression, cognitive impairment, nausea, constipation; consequences
include increased cost of care, hospital length of stay, and readmission rates.
The goal of the proposed work is to develop a prototype long-acting local
anesthetic that is easy-to-use, can provide sustained local anesthesia for 72
hours, and presents limited safety risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project will perform formulation optimization of a novel long-acting local
anesthetic for postoperative pain management. Currently, options for long-acting
local anesthesia suffer drawbacks such as limited duration, high costs,
inadequate efficacy, cumbersome equipment, and risk of infection; these limit
their utility as safe and effective postoperative pain management. This project
will optimize formulation parameters for the desired drug release profile.
Additionally, the stability of the resulting formulations will be validated to
ensure adequate shelf-life stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.