* 2026498
* FW-HTF-RL: Learning systems that enable healthcare workers to perfect safety-critical hospital work
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Sara Singer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,200,000.00

This project develops new technology to assist healthcare workers, thereby
making healthcare&lt;br/&gt;safer and more cost-effective. Healthcare is 18% of
the Gross Domestic Product, yet errors annually&lt;br/&gt;lead to as many as
250,000 deaths and more than $500 billion in costs. The project is
creating&lt;br/&gt;virtual assistants in intensive care and surgical units,
which guide nurses and other healthcare&lt;br/&gt;workers, using worker input
and experimental results to guide technology development.
These&lt;br/&gt;virtual assistants give step-by-step guidance and feedback
during complex tasks and monitor&lt;br/&gt;routine activities to make sure no
steps are missed. Benefits include assistance in learning
new&lt;br/&gt;activities, reducing stress, detecting possible problems, and
automating some of the work providers&lt;br/&gt;do now to document their ongoing
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is developing prototypes,
experimental results, and effectiveness&lt;br/&gt;measurements in healthcare
settings for virtual assistants, called “ambient intelligent
monitors”&lt;br/&gt;(AIMs). The team includes computer scientists, electrical
engineers, clinicians, behavioral&lt;br/&gt;scientists, and healthcare
economists at Stanford hospitals, Intermountain hospitals,
and&lt;br/&gt;Stanford’s Schools of Engineering, Business, and Medicine.
Research goals include developing&lt;br/&gt;sensors, computing, and software for
AIMs, discovering how clinical workers prefer to&lt;br/&gt;communicate with
AIMs, and experimenting with work environments to maximize their value
to&lt;br/&gt;patients, families, and clinicians. The project includes three
cycles of research, covering hand&lt;br/&gt;hygiene, Intensive Care Unit care
bundles, and laparoscopic surgery. Each cycle includes
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;design, development, implementation in normal hospital care,
and evaluation. The research is&lt;br/&gt;proceeding along four parallel tracks.
One track is designed to develop hardware for capturing privacy-
protected&lt;br/&gt;data on edge devices such as cameras, depth sensors, and
microphones. A second&lt;br/&gt;track is for developing algorithms that discern
success and failure in enacting intended clinician&lt;br/&gt;bedside activity. A
third track is for obtaining healthcare worker input to develop preferred
ways&lt;br/&gt;for AIMs to interact with people, such as providing verbal
prompts, confirming observations&lt;br/&gt;made by sensors, and automatically
updating medical records. A fourth track is for running&lt;br/&gt;experiments to
measure the clinical, behavioral, operational, and economic impacts of the
AIMs.&lt;br/&gt;By coupling the engineering research with real-world deployment
and clinical studies, this research&lt;br/&gt;will create new knowledge that is
unattainable in a purely technology-driven or purely&lt;br/&gt;observational
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.