* 2026128
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanostructured 3D Catalytic Coatings for High-Efficiency Pollution Control and Air Purification
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Elijah Shirman, METALMARK INNOVATIONS, PBC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,698,136.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is addressing the growing societal need for
indoor air purification, as indoor air quality (IAQ) directly affects human
health, productivity, cognitive function, and quality-of-life. Awareness of the
long-term consequences of poor IAQ has recently witnessed an increase due to
research results, improvements in monitoring and sensing technology, public
awareness campaigns by organizations such as the American Lung Association,
World Health Organization, and Environmental Protection Agency, and, most
recently, the COVID-19 pandemic. Finding sustainable, economical, and effective
solutions to the problem of poor IAQ will greatly benefit public health and
wellbeing and will help curtail the spread of pathogens, minimizing the need for
social distancing. This project will develop a new system air purification,
addressing viruses, harmful chemicals, odors, and ultrafine
particulates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to scale up the production methodology and coating
process of novel catalytic materials. The materials are 3D nanostructured porous
powders that are designed at multiple length scales to achieve enhanced
catalytic activity, stability, and longevity, while reducing costs and utilizing
raw materials in an environmentally responsible manner. The system uses a
synthetic approach based on self-organization of nanoscale building blocks and
wet chemistry tools in order to assemble finely structured coatings for
integration in air-purification units. This project focuses on expanding it to
production scale, wherein achieving control over the composition, structure,
porosity, and placement of nanoparticles on a production scale is challenging.
The materials platform development will include adaptation to high-throughput
instrumentation and scale-up of the material production and coating process to
pilot production. In the process, this project will develop tools and guidelines
for manufacturing hierarchically-structured functional materials more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.