* 2026922
* RAPID: A Multi-Level Analysis of Social and Behavioral Responses to COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Brian Lickel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 198,187.00

The COVID-19 outbreak represents a rapidly unfolding and important challenge to
the United States and to the world at large with the potential for significant
social and economic impact. Non-pharmaceutical interventions were implemented as
part of a broader effort to slow the spread of the disease. U.S. citizens were
instructed to increase hygiene efforts such as hand-washing and to increase
social distancing by limiting contact with other people, especially in large
crowds. In some states, school and business closures, as well as other forms of
mandated restrictions, also began impacting people and families. Understanding
the public’s response to this ongoing outbreak is vital, and social
psychological and decision-science perspectives may uniquely contribute to the
effectiveness of governmental and non-governmental efforts to respond
effectively to further crises. This project examines predictors of behavior
during the outbreak (for example, engaging in social distancing), emotional and
coping responses (for example, seeking social support), and changes in social
attitudes (for example, trust in public policies). The research tests the idea
that both personal welfare and collective/national welfare can facilitate
appropriate health behaviors. By following people over time during 2020, the
study provides periodic snapshots of public responses to the outbreak as well as
testing important scientific questions that will inform future public health and
disaster-response interventions.

This RAPID project is centered on a four-wave longitudinal survey of a
representative sample of 3,000 U.S. residents. Study participants are first
contacted in March, 2020, and then again at three later time-points roughly
every 12 weeks. The research is designed to provide an index of the evolving
public response to the outbreak throughout the year. Threats are conceptualized
as either threats to the self or threats to the national welfare. Similarly,
reactions to those threats are framed as requiring personal responsibility or
requiring a national response. Because the study assesses the same participants
over time, the research addresses how changes in people’s circumstances predict
changes in psychological and behavioral responses. One question is whether
changes in concerns regarding the broader social impact predict adherence to
public health advice and mandates differently than concerns about personal
health impacts. The study also identifies participants’ geographic location;
over time, survey responses will be integrated with publicly available data to
examine how local factors influence psychological responses. This will help
address whether people in states and communities with greater investment in
community resilience (e.g., public health funding) show better coping responses
to the outbreak than in states and communities with lower investments in
community resilience. The study design incorporates communication interventions
at waves 2 and 3 to test the role of social norm information and shared (versus
individual) responsibility on people’s willingness to follow public health
guidelines and mandates. Using these longitudinal, geographic, and experimental
methods, the research will test hypotheses on four broad topics: personal and
social responsibility, norms and social influence, coping and emotion
regulation, and impacts of the outbreak on social cohesion and conflict. The new
knowledge will inform future public health and policy interventions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.