* 2026623
* ARTS: Taxonomy and Molecular Systematics of Mesh Web Spiders (Araneae: Dictynidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sarah Crews, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 791,385.00

Spiders are an incredibly diverse group of organisms that play an essential role
in ecosystems all over the world. In spite of their notoriety and the fear that
they often inspire, huge gaps in our knowledge remain for some groups of
spiders. Often generalized as small and brown or grey, many spiders in the
family Dictynidae are quite colorful, and are perhaps most notable for their
intriguing distributional patterns and fascinating ecological characteristics.
In fact, this “dark corner” of the spider tree of life comprises a group that
occupies virtually every terrestrial ecosystem on earth and contains the only
fully aquatic spider species. While some species are endemic to very small
areas, others are some of the most widespread of all spider species. This level
of variation within a single family of spiders shows considerable potential as a
system for answering a broad range of evolutionary and ecological questions,
especially as they relate to the evolution of specific characteristics or
behaviors. This project aims to resolve the evolutionary relationships among
this group of spiders and their relative position within the spider tree of
life, shining a light on one of the most poorly known parts of the spider tree
of life. Additionally, a main goal of this project is to train the next
generation of taxonomic experts, organismal biologists and systematists in
Dictynid spiders in the US.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dictynidae are a hugely
diverse family nested within the “marronoid clade”. Because the relationships of
the genera, of species in the genera, and the relationship of the family within
the spider tree of life, are largely unknown, efforts to ask interesting
questions in an evolutionary context are stymied. We aim to open the door to
evolutionary and ecological studies of the group by creating a taxonomic and
phylogenetic scaffold in support of further research for years to come. We will
accomplish this by: 1) Revising the moderately diverse, unusual genus Lathys
using morphological data and data gathered from Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS); 2) Determining the phylogenetic relationships of all dictynid genera
using NGS data; 3) Using NGS data to determine the placement of Dictynidae
within the spider tree of life. We will collect both specimens of Lathys and
representatives of all dictynid genera worldwide with our multinational team of
collaborators. Standardized images from all specimens, including types, will be
produced using high-resolution stacked images, SEM micrographs, and microCT
scanning of nearly 50 amber fossils to allow for consistent morphological
analysis. Low coverage genome sequencing will be used to produce molecular data
that will be incorporated with the morphological matrix to subsequently be
analyzed using Bayesian Inference. This method allows the analysis of a combined
morphological and molecular dataset, paramount for the inclusion of fossil taxa,
which subsequently allows us to use tip dating to produce a time-calibrated
phylogeny. We will conduct these analyses separately at three taxonomic scales:
Lathys, all dictynid genera, and the “marronoid clade”. We will use
probabilistic inference on the resulting Lathys phylogeny to test Laurasian
biogeographic hypotheses. Finally, ancestral state reconstruction will be
conducted to examine the evolution of morphological characters as well as
ecological and behavioral characters, including aquatic habitat association and
hunting strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.