* 2026264
* Using geospatial data to understand the relationship between tropical forest phenology and productivity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Susan Cordell, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 328,931.00

This project will investigate the relationship between leaf phenology – the
timing and amount of leaf production – and primary productivity in contrasting
wet and dry tropical forest habitats. Tropical forests are one of the largest
and most diverse biomes on Earth. Yet, estimates of gross primary productivity
(GPP) – the largest flux of the carbon cycle – are not well understood from
these regions. Leaf phenology in tropical forests can be highly variable because
of climatic seasonality and a diversity of species. Further, it is unclear how
these dynamics affect forest productivity. Geospatial monitoring from satellites
provides an unprecedented ability to track forest dynamics across sites and
seasons. Merging these cutting-edge technologies with ground-based measurements
will help identify site-specific processes that underlie broad-scale geospatial
patterns leading to more accurate interpretation of satellite observations. This
project will integrate research with education and citizen science by working
with an existing outreach program, which provides outdoor, place-based,
experiential environmental education to middle and high school students. A
postdoctoral researcher will collaborate with middle and high school teachers to
educate and train future spatial scientists, providing geospatial data for the
proposed research while also meeting Next Generation Science Standards to help
grow a more data-capable workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaf phenology and
growing season length are thought to be primary factors controlling the
terrestrial carbon cycle by setting the length of time available for
photosynthesis and plant growth. Yet in the tropics there is a year-round
growing season. Further, it is unclear how variation in GPP is tied to changes
in leaf phenology. New satellite measurements of solar-induced fluorescence
(SIF) will provide a proxy for GPP across large extents at repeated intervals.
While SIF-related studies are accumulating, global and continental scale
patterns have not been linked to processes occurring at the plot-scale. This
project will synthesize ground-based phenology data with unmanned aerial vehicle
and satellite measures of SIF to investigate the relationship between leaf
phenology, climatic seasonality, and productivity. Results from this work will
help disentangle the relationship between productivity and phenology in diverse
tropical forests, and advance our understanding of mechanisms and site-specific
differences underlying broad scale variation in satellite SIF. The methods
developed in this study will have broad applicability to a wide range of
environmental change and conservation applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.