* 2026019
* Testing the impact of reworking on the isochronicity of tephras deposited in diverse sedimentary environments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Amanda Keen-Zebert, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,810.00

This project will improve the ways we interpret and utilize the record of
sediments that document the Earth’s geologic history. New methods will be
developed to define the age of tephras, sediment that originates from volcanic
eruptions, and well-established methods will be used to better understand
paleolake level fluctuation in the Great Basin of the U.S. in Nevada. This will
aid in reconstruction of paleoclimate and landscape dynamics which contributes
to understanding modern changes to climate and informs hazard mitigation,
particularly as it relates to drought and desertification in the Great Basin and
western U.S. Owing to its contribution to understanding drought hazards, the
project contributes to the national health, prosperity, and welfare of the U.S.
by increasing knowledge needed for resiliency to global and environmental
change. The project also will provide training and support to early and mid-
career women and outreach on topics investigated to an audience of interested
stakeholders, particularly in the Great Basin in Nevada.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tephras are sediments that comprise volcanically erupted
material. An outstanding problem in using tephras to accurately interpret
paleoclimate and landscape phenomenon is identifying when they were deposited.
This project will resolve questions related to defining the timing of tephra
deposition using luminescence dating, which is a burial age dating approach that
finds the time of the last exposure of sediment to light or heat. In this
project, questions about the window of geological time in which tephras are
deposited will be tested. The timescales of tephra reworking after deposition
will also be tested. These questions are critical to using tephras as markers of
time in the sedimentary record. This study is being conducted in the Great Basin
of the U.S. because existing data allows us to test our methods and resolve
conflicting interpretations of paleo lake-levels that rely on the tephra record.
This work will yield a reliable dating methods to date tephras that are older
than the 35 ka upper limit for reliable radiocarbon and younger than the 120 ka
lower limit of reliable K/Ar and 40Ar/39Ar dating techniques. This work will
also contribute to improving interpretations about paleoclimate and
reconstructions of landscape dynamics, such as lake-level fluctuations, that are
made from tephra correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.