* 2026143
* SBIR Phase I:  The early detection of HLB Disease in citrus trees utilizing a novel isothermal PCR technology to identify host small RNAs
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Sarjubhai Patel, FYR DIAGNOSTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a quick, cost-effective, and
sensitive early detection assay for Huanglongbing (HLB) disease (aka citrus
greening disease) to guide management strategies and limit its spread. HLB is
the most impactful and devastating disease plaguing the global citrus industry.
Current diagnostic tools are either unreliable for early detection or infeasible
to scale; they are hindered by time-consuming sample preparation, delayed result
reporting, and high operation costs. The lack of technology to detect the
presence of the HLB disease-causing bacterium at an early stage and diagnose HLB
with minimal sampling has contributed to inadequate disease control.
Consequences include a 60% decline in citriculture acreage and a 72% reduction
in oranges for processing, a threefold increase in citrus farming expenses, and
costs in the US of $11 B annually. This technology will provide a new diagnostic
tool for rapid detection and precise, defensive management of citrus crops with
respect to HLB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will address the
critical need for a highly sensitive early-detection assay for HLB, a major
threat to the citrus industry, to support effective disease management.
Currently, HLB is primarily detected by a PCR assay for the pathogen itself. The
assay is frequently ineffective, as the titer and distribution of HLB-associated
bacteria within citrus trees, the types of tissue infected, and degree of
disease progression are highly variable. Development of new diagnostic tools to
detect infection prior to symptom development and independent of direct pathogen
presence is crucial. This project will combine two innovations, small non-coding
RNA biomarkers associated with the host tree instead of the pathogen, and a
novel RNA amplification methodology, to develop a 30-minute assay performed in a
single step, with the capability of detecting infection by HLB-causing bacteria
at 10 weeks post-inoculation with over 80% specificity and sensitivity. The
Phase I project will 1) demonstrate feasibility of using a novel amplification
technology to detect an RNA biomarker panel in infected tree samples; 2)
validate assay performance, and 3) compare the assay to traditional
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.