* 2026097
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemical Flow Reactor for Uniform Deposition of Li Metal Anodes
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Vedasri Vedharathinam, alpha-En Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,737.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances battery technologies for electric
vehicles and related applications. The proposed project advances beyond the
current Lithium-ion (Li-ion batteries by demonstrating a cost-effective and
scalable process to manufacture high-purity, defect-free Lithium (Li) metal
electrodes with superior cycle life. Lithium metal batteries promise
substantially higher energy density than Li-ion batteries, and have a compelling
value proposition for electric vehicles and portable electronics applications.
The proposed technology addresses so-called "range anxiety" in electric
vehicles, enabling use of these batteries for ranges exceeding 300 miles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to investigate large
area Li-metal thin films deposition with high microstructural and compositional
uniformity by overcoming Li-ion concentration gradients in the electrolyte. The
project proposes to develop superior Li-metal anodes with the aid of an
electrochemical flow reactor to overcome the electrolyte-phase mass transfer
limitations. Though reproducibility and uniformity of the thin film anodes is
not a concern at electrode areas less than 3-cm2, scaling up to areas exceeding
25 cm2 for commercial pouch cell format can lead to non-uniform and
dendritic/mossy morphology, resulting in capacity loss and poor cycling life. A
large-area electrochemical flow reactor will be assembled and the process
parameters for high-performance Li thin film anodes will be established,
producing films with high purity (&gt; 99.99%) and controllable thickness (5-50
micron) with a form factor greater than 25 cm2. The key innovation is an
electrochemical flow reactor to produce high-performance lithium metal
electrodes using low-cost water-based mineral feedstocks at a commercially
viable scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.