* 2026025
* SBIR Phase I:  An Artificial Intelligence-Based Global Seasonal Forecasting System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Maximilian Evans, CLIMATEAI INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 241,820.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to provide timely and highly localized climate forecasts, plus
information such as extreme heat and frost risk, to insurance, energy, and
agricultural stakeholders. Climate forecasting at sub-seasonal to seasonal (S2S)
timescales is challenging, yet essential for proactive risk management of
extreme natural hazards. This project will leverage artificial intelligence and
cloud computing to implement a data-intensive approach for revolutionizing
global climate forecasting. The project will provide efficient and accurate
seasonal forecasts at relatively low computational cost in a user-friendly web
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to utilize advanced artificial intelligence techniques in
order to develop a localized, timely, and reliable climate forecasting system
that is industry-focused and crop-specific. In this project, state-of-the-art
artificial intelligence techniques will be deployed to advance operational
climate forecasting skill at a global scale. While conventional forecasts are
trained exclusively on observational data, this project will train models on
historical simulations and reanalysis, then evaluate them with observations. In
this approach, the training dataset is substantially larger, consequently
improving accuracy. This processing at scale is enabled with cloud
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.