* 2026148
* Analytic Augmentation Component for Workshops on Computational Cybersecurity in Compromised Environments (C3E)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Daniel Wolf, Cyber Pack Ventures, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,850.00

The Computational Cybersecurity in Compromised Environments (C3E) workshop
series identifies recent challenges in the changing cybersecurity landscape and
explores different possible courses of research action. The workshops stimulate
discussion and awareness among industry, academia and government that
cybersecurity challenges are complex problems with many perspectives, competing
interests, and possible consequences for society. The C3E workshops also offer
challenge problems, encouraging team-oriented multidisciplinary approaches to
investigate a challenge by considering socio-economic outcomes, trust, public
safety, privacy risks, technology policy, and the larger consequences for
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme for the upcoming C3E challenge
problem is motivated by concerns over social-cyber manipulation at scale. The
challenge is to explore hybrid approaches to support cognitive security in
human-machine teaming, leveraging advances in artificial intelligence, machine
learning, and analytics at Internet scale. Of particular interest are processes
for decision-making and analytic judgments that may be vulnerable to incorrect,
incomplete, misleading, or misinformation in cyber-mediated contexts, the means
to mitigate these vulnerabilities, and methods for restoring trust once lost.
The research results will be widely disseminated to inform the research
community and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.