* 2026230
* STTR Phase I:  Asymmetric Propulsion for Enhancing Marine Maneuverability
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Kaeli, ARMADA MARINE ROBOTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 255,821.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will enhance technological understanding of
Asymmetric Propulsion, which will in turn enhance scientific understanding of
the oceans. Asymmetric Propulsion uses a single-bladed propeller to both move
and steer an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV). In addition to eliminating the
need for control fins, reducing cost and complexity, and increasing efficiency,
it can also allow AUVs to hold station over objects of interest. This capability
has numerous scientific, military, and commercial applications because it allows
the same robot to perform large-area surveys and then hold station over specific
objects and perform close-up inspections. Such missions currently require
multiple specialized robots and supervision from a support ship. Providing these
dual capabilities in a single AUV will enable surveys without a ship, reduce
costs and energy, and increase the rate and resolution of ocean studies. The
focus of this Phase I project is improving control of Asymmetric Propulsion for
holding station relative to an object of interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop and test
control algorithms that preserve roll stability when Asymmetric Propulsion is
used to turn and maneuver torpedo-shaped AUVs. Using a single motor with an
asymmetric propeller to both move and steer an AUV is mechanically simpler but
computationally more complex. Holding station relative to an object by actuating
a single degree of freedom is a nontrivial under-constrained control and
navigation problem. This problem has numerous applications in marine,
terrestrial, and aerial robotics. A simplifying approach is to implement a
library of scripted behaviors that can be selectively executed based on position
input from visual sensors. These behaviors will independently be constructed to
reduce the sudden torques that induce roll in torpedo-shaped AUVs. This approach
will lead to a successful demonstration of stable maneuverability using a
surface test platform that is free to move in roll.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.