* 2026924
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: MELODIES for MUSICA: A modular framework to compare model results and observations of atmospheric chemistry
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Gabriele Pfister, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 470,000.00

Our ability to predict air quality and to understand chemistry-climate
interactions depends on a comprehensive understanding of atmospheric
composition, developed through the comparison of observations and models. This
project will facilitate identifying short-comings and uncertainties in models,
help assess new model developments, and identify where and what type of new
observations are needed to improve our understanding of atmospheric composition
and processes. This will be accomplished through the design of a modular
framework that integrates diverse atmospheric chemistry observational datasets
with numerical model results for the evaluation of air quality predictions. In
addition, by making observational datasets more accessible, a larger community,
including students, will be engaged in atmospheric composition research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design a modular framework that
integrates existing and future diverse atmospheric chemistry observational
datasets with chemistry model results for the evaluation of air quality and
atmospheric composition. This framework, MELODIES (Model EvaLuation using
Observations, DIagnostics and Experiments Software), will be developed as part
of the Multi-Scale Infrastructure for Chemistry and Aerosols (MUSICA). As
opposed to existing model evaluation tools, this project will develop a generic,
portable, and model-agnostic software. The first year of the project will fully
explore existing model comparison software available in the atmospheric
chemistry community and identify components that could be incorporated for this
project. Community input will clarify the needs for model-observation
comparisons and identify suitable datasets. The research team will also develop
adaptable and usable tools to provide access to the complex atmospheric
chemistry datasets (numerous compounds with complex, non-standardized names,
various time and spatial sampling, different instruments and platforms), as well
as routines to extract model results at appropriate time and spatial resolutions
to quantitatively compare to the observations. Such tools will need to operate
on a range of different models (global or regional, structured or unstructured
grid), provide an interface to ingest new observational datasets in a user-
friendly way and provide comprehensive User Guides. A tutorial will be given
near the end of the project, targeting graduate students and postdocs, to
demonstrate the completed tools. The users will be taught the process of
evaluating models with a wide range of atmospheric chemistry observations, as
well as illustrating ways they could contribute to the further development of
MELODIES. This project is funded by the Atmospheric Chemistry program in the
division of Atmospheric and Geospace Science and the Directorate for
Geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.