* 2026579
* A Neural Network Model for Predicting the Solar Energetic Particle Events
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Bala Poduval, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 585,664.00

The origin and injection of seed particles in the acceleration and transport of
solar energetic particles (SEPs) in the Sun’s corona and the solar wind is still
a poorly understood problem in heliophysics, thus making it a formidable task to
predict with accuracy the SEP flux for the sake of reliable space weather
forecast. This 3-year project aims to investigate the distribution of seed
population in the solar corona and its influence in the production of SEPs. The
project team will develop a Machine Learning (ML) model for the prediction of
SEP events, which will be based on the Energetic Particle Radiation Environment
Module (EPREM) code developed at the University of New Hampshire. The model will
utilize data from the GOES, STEREO, and the Parker Solar Probe satellites, and
it will adopt open-source ML libraries. This project is expected to advance our
understanding of the origin and distribution of seed particles in the Sun’s
corona, which influence the acceleration and transport of SEPs throughout the
heliosphere. The project will develop the necessary technique and an algorithm
for surrogate models that will have diverse applications in space weather
forecasting. The research investigations, led by a mid-career female PI, will
involve graduate students at the University of New Hampshire. The research and
EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge in developing a ML model for an
accurate SEP prediction is the lack of sufficient database of observed SEP
events to train and validate the ML model, which is known as the “class
imbalance” problem. One way to circumvent this difficulty is to employ surrogate
models: that is, train the ML model on synthetic/simulated data of SEP events,
and then optimize and validate the model using the observed SEP data. During
this 3-year project, the team will simulate major SEP events using the EPREM
code in order to explore the parameter space for the seed population; they will
consider the pre-, during, and post-event spectra of the events selected for the
study. The project team will also simulate time-series of SEP fluxes by
incorporating these seed population parameters in order to train the ML model
and then use the available SEP events database for testing. The project will
make use of deep learning techniques such as LSTM as well as classification and
dimensionality reduction techniques such as PCA, tSNE and
autoencoder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.