* 2026087
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrasensitive ion-sensors for wide range pressure measurement
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Daniel Esposito, GUARDION, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2023
* USD 999,687.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is enabling increased throughput and quality in
semiconductor, chemical and biochemical manufacturing. The ability to monitor
pressure from atmosphere to ultra-high vacuum is a critical need for these
industries. This need is currently addressed by using combinations of vacuum
monitoring technologies that, in many cases, require the high cost of employing
multiple devices for a single job, allowing for multiple failure modes, and
increasing the space constraints on the manufacturing equipment. Errors in
accuracy in current systems can lead to lower production yields and failures due
to exposure of fragile elements to atmospheric pressure can lead to higher
maintenance costs and lower process availability. In this context, this new
technology offers a substantial commercial benefit across several large-scale
manufacturing industries. This technology will be further leveraged for other
large-scale verticals such as mass spectrometry and radiation
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will exploit ultrasensitive ion-sensing properties of low-power
graphene sensors combined with voltage-controlled ion sources and resetting
mechanisms for vacuum sensing. The core scientific breakthrough that underpins
this technology is an ultrahigh intrinsic charge-to-current amplification
mechanism inherently present in the graphene sensors. This results in measurable
changes in electrical conductance caused by the attachment of trace quantities
of ions on the sensors. The nonlinear nature of the charge-to-current
amplification scales to higher values at lower ion-flux rates, thereby allowing
greater effective sensitivity at lower pressures. In addition, combining these
sensors with voltage-tunable ion sources and appropriate resetting mechanisms
enables stable, long-term operation over a wide range of operating vacuum
pressure. Manufacturing sensors at the chip scale allows for multi-sensor
readout for improved signal and reproducible behavior, along with resilience
against failure. Taken together, these technological innovations will allow the
development of high-performance vacuum gauges for diverse
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.