* 2026088
* The Generic Herbicide Industry: A Global Production Network Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Becky Mansfield, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 263,817.00

Economic activity is increasingly organized through geographically distanced but
organizationally linked supply chains, or “global production networks.” Little
is known of how these networks shape the availability and use of substances that
act as key drivers of global environmental change. This project will examine one
driver – agrochemicals -- through the lens of production networks. It focuses on
herbicides (i.e., weed killers), which are among the most important class of
pesticides for many countries. Such countries are fast-growing markets for
herbicides and, for the first time, they have become their main producers and
exporters. The research will investigate this transformation, and what this
means for economic development, farming systems, and access to food. The project
works across the economy-ecology divide to create explore relationships between
environmental change, agro-food systems, economic development, and human health.
The project will develop new tools for sharing results, including an interactive
database and map of herbicide regulations around the world. New tools and
knowledge about the economic and political forces shaping agrochemicals will be
made available to industry, policy makers, and non-governmental organizations
involved in the international regulation of
pesticides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the transformative role
of new, generic herbicide manufacturing firms as important drivers in these
chemicals’ widespread availability and use. These firms form part of a global
network of activities that includes raw material extraction, active ingredient
production, final product formulation, distribution and use. The research design
combines qualitative and quantitative methods to understand how the geography of
this network has changed in relation to countries’ levels of development since
2000. It examines how these patterns are shaped by power dynamics among firms,
interactions between firms and governments, and the changing nature of
herbicides themselves due to weed resistance and public health. Results of this
work will inform further research on the industrial side of agricultural
intensification and its implications for health and wellbeing, environment, and
food security. The project will support further development of economy-ecology
approaches to the study of global industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.