* 2026283
* FW-HTF-P: Essential Decision-Making Skills for the Future Workforce in Smart Manufacturing
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Theresa Castor, University of Wisconsin-Parkside
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 134,190.00

In 2019, there were over 15.7 million workers in manufacturing, making it the
fourth largest industry in the United States. In the next decade, many workers
in manufacturing could see their jobs eliminated or reconfigured. Nearly 10
percent of the jobs in manufacturing will be entirely new. Manufacturing is
increasingly relying on smart technologies such as artificial intelligence, the
internet of things, robots, cobots, and more. Preparing workers for this so-
called fourth industrial revolution is not simply about training the workforce
to push different buttons or monitor screens. Such an approach would only
prepare workers for the machines of today and would fail to address decision-
making skills needed for interacting with the smart-technology enabled
workplace. This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF)
Planning Grant project is identifying the specific decision-making skills that
will be needed for the current workforce to be successful in smart manufacturing
facilities of the future. The results from the project will help local and
regional agencies create plans and prepare the workforce to ride the tide of
technological change as manufacturing facilities adopt smart technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year planning project is gathering information on
worker decision-making in established smart factories from different countries
to identify decision-making competencies. These case studies, along with an
experimental psychology project, and multiple, advisory group meetings, are
being used to develop a smart factory worker readiness survey to identify
individual strengths and gaps in essential decision-making skills. The project
end result will be the development of training modules to assist current and
future workers in the manufacturing industry work be more effective decision-
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.