* 2026082
* SBIR Phase I:  Precision Lasers for Controlling a Major Agricultural Parasite
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Hailey Scofield, COMBPLEX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
and validate a novel solution for specific pests affecting honey bees.
Beekeepers around the globe consistently cite Varroa mites as a leading cause of
honey bee colony loss and, in the United States, attribute to these mites an
estimated $2 B in agricultural damages every year. Since arriving in the U.S. in
the late 1980s, Varroa mites have developed resistance to most known chemical
pesticides, leaving beekeepers with few treatment options that do not also
negatively impact the colony or contaminate honey. This project will develop a
year-round, automatic, and chemical-free method for controlling Varroa mites,
effectively mitigating the existing honey bee decline and resolving the chief
problem facing beekeepers across North America and Europe, improving global food
and agriculture supplies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is the interdisciplinary application of selective photothermolysis
technology combined with in-depth understanding of honey bee behavior to
remotely detect and destroy a harmful apicultural pest. This project is
investigating the field efficacy and cost effectiveness of employing a computer
vision-driven identification algorithm to identify the Varroa mite, a serious
honey bee parasite, and then introduce a high-power laser burst to immediately
destroy the mite while it remains attached to the infested bee but without
harming the host. The research objectives include quantifying the negative
effect on mite population growth during the growing season and determining the
number of laser/detector devices required to maintain permanent year-round
control of Varroa mites in a standard colony.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.