* 2026822
* NNCI: nano@stanford
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Debbie Senesky, Stanford University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,525,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure site at Stanford University, nano@stanford, promotes nanoscience
and engineering by making experimental resources and the know-how to use them
available to all. At the core of nano@stanford are four advanced research
facilities that are open for use by any researcher, from other universities,
industry, or government: the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), the
Stanford Nanofabrication Facility (SNF), the Stanford Microchemical Analysis
Facility (MAF), and the Stanford Isotope and Geochemical Measurement and
Analysis Facility (SIGMA). These facilities are staffed with technical experts
dedicated to supporting the progress of science and together span the full range
of fabrication and characterization methods to serve the broad user community.
The site welcomes all disciplines; researchers use the facilities to solve real
world problems in energy, environment, medicine, and beyond. The site also hosts
artists and teachers, as its mission is to train and educate, not only the
researchers in the facilities, but anyone anywhere wanting to learn about
experimental nanoscience and technology. nano@stanford cultivates a library of
just-in-time educational materials aimed at building foundational knowledge for
the newest researchers and is available to everyone everywhere. nano@stanford
has developed and will expand programs in workforce development, teacher
training, and K-12 outreach. Through its partners in the NNCI network,
nano@stanford will continue to expand these efforts to educate beyond the
classroom and beyond the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;nano@stanford offers a comprehensive array of
nanofabrication and nanocharacterization equipment and expertise, housed in
facilities that encompass ~30,000 ft2 of lab space, including 16,000 ft2 of
cleanrooms, 6,000 ft2 of which is low vibration. Fabrication capabilities are
anchored by a full electronics device fabrication cleanroom and a nanopatterning
laboratory that are supplemented by a dozen lab spaces providing specialized and
flexible processing systems. Characterization capabilities encompass the full
suite of tools for imaging and chemical/physical property identification of
materials. nano@stanford offers advanced capabilities not normally available to
the research community at large. These specialized capabilities include: MOCVD
for growing crystalline films of III-V materials; Electron-Beam Lithography for
wafers up to 200 mm; NanoSIMS for isotope analysis at high lateral resolution;
scanning SQUID for high resolution mapping of surface magnetic fields.
Experienced, technical staff support all researchers, who have used the
facilities to develop and characterize advanced structures, such as photonic
crystals, photodetectors, optical MEMS, inertial sensors, optical/electronic
biosensors, cantilever probes, nano-FETs, new memories, batteries, and
photovoltaics. nano@stanford welcomes researchers in non-traditional areas of
science and engineering, such as the life sciences and medicine, earth and
environmental sciences, and offers personal consultations, seed grants,
fabrication and characterization services, seminars and webinars, to the nano-
curious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.