* 2026076
* I-Corps:  Genetically Enhanced Red Blood Cell Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Leon Grayfer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a safer, reliably supplied, and cost-effective red blood cell
product that may have the potential to address global blood scarcities, relieve
many of the logistical challenges of the current donor blood supply chain, and
decrease risk in transfusion medicine. Blood bank directors in the United
Statesâ€™ $2.6 billion red blood market face deep logistical challenges in
maintaining the daily blood supply, managing comprehensive and intensive testing
regiments, implementing new tests, and managing intra-hospital distribution.
This technology will be created by genetically engineering human stem cells to
promote their differentiation into mature red blood cells, within a laboratory
environment. This would allow a theoretically limitless supply of red blood
cells, independent of human donors, that could be made to be any blood type and
created on demand. The proposed technology may impact public health by ensuring
supply of red blood and reducing the risks associated with transfusions. This
can also impact scientific research related to red blood cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores translation of a scalable
method for mass-producing an enhanced red blood cell product created through the
use of novel genetic engineering techniques. The process of differentiating stem
cells into erythrocytes in vitro is well established but has been shown to have
several issues limiting translation, including the cost of production and cell
culture expansion. Specific modifications to the stem cell genome and optimized
manufacturing conditions may help promote wider dissemination of ex vivo red
blood cell synthesis. This project will advance the development of specifically
targeted genetic engineering techniques to enable higher cellular production
rates and to induce controllable cellular states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.