* 2026052
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced bonding and cutting techniques for manufacturing solid aluminum parts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Alison Forsyth, ALLOY ENTERPRISES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in creation of a new aluminum parts
manufacturing process. Aluminum is used extensively in many industries and can
used in environmentally friendly applications. The proposed technology combines
next-generation laminated object manufacturing (LOM) with a novel metallic
bonding process and software advancements to create solid aluminum parts ten
times faster than current additive technologies. This process can produce parts
faster and at a lower cost compared to existing solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project addresses aluminum oxidation for
manufacturing applications in which the oxide layer between foils must be
disrupted. The team will explore multiple bonding techniques to minimize
manufacturing defects while maintaining consistency of thermomechanical
properties. The project's three principal goals are: 1) establish mechanical
testing and optical inspection methods, 2) develop and optimize cutting and
bonding processes, and 3) create a sample part to demonstrate technical
feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.