* 2026142
* SBIR Phase I:  Structure-based drug discovery for intrinsically disordered proteins
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Virginia Burger, NEW EQUILIBRIUM BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,872.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable drug discovery for life-threatening
diseases. A group of proteins involved in cancers and neurodegenerative
disorders, as well as many proteins inside bacteria and viruses, are desirable
therapeutic targets due to their role in disease. Designing therapeutics to
regulate these proteins is difficult because of their challenging structural
features. Specifically, these proteins constantly shift shapes instead of
remaining rigid like existing therapeutic targets. This project aims to develop
a computational-experimental platform to facilitate the discovery of
therapeutics for shape-shifting proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project facilitates structure-based
drug discovery for intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), a class of flexible
proteins implicated in life-threatening diseases. The extreme flexibility of
IDPs enables their diverse cellular functions, but obscures experimental details
about their conformations. Because of this, traditional drug discovery methods
have lacked the structural details needed to design and optimize ligands that
regulate IDPs, and no drugs have been successfully developed that target IDPs.
The first aim of this project is to develop an AI-chemistry-based molecular
dynamics algorithm for accurately modeling conformations adopted by a given IDP.
In the second aim, these structural models will be coupled with NMR fragment
screens in order to obtain detailed models of the interactions between the
proof-of-concept IDP and any small molecule fragments observed to bind the IDP.
In the third aim, the structural models will direct the fusion, extension, and
optimization of promising fragments to design lead candidates for regulating the
proof-of-concept IDP, and biophysical experiments will validate and guide
computational hypotheses. Together, these aims provide a systematic platform for
structure-based drug discovery for IDPs, as well as a set of lead candidates for
targeting the proof-of-concept protein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.