* 2026431
* FW-HTF-RL: Testing a Responsible Innovation Approach for Integrating Precision Agriculture (PA) Technologies with Future Farm Workers and  W ork
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,11/30/2021
* David Clay, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 3,013,792.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) project will
advance the fundamental understanding of building stronger human-machine
networks in agriculture through the development and testing of socially and
ethically desirable precision agriculture technologies and workforce
augmentation approaches. Precision agriculture employs data-based agricultural
technologies and practices and localized farm data to generate site-specific
farm recommendations that can improve farm productivity and environmental
sustainability. To unlock this potential of precision agriculture, educators and
scientists are eager to train the future farm workforce. To embrace any
training, farm workers need to believe they can trust the information they will
get from these technologies and there needs to be a clear and understandable
path to converting data to usable information. This project will use real farms
in South Dakota and Vermont as living laboratories for developing and testing
new precision agriculture tools (intelligent decision support system), sensor
driven performance-based incentives for implementation of sustainable
agriculture practices, and workforce training initiatives that can enhance farm
workers’ trust and confidence in precision agriculture tools. The living
laboratory approach will involve farm workers as users, co-producers, and co-
evaluators of precision agriculture tools. This interactive technological
development process has the potential to increase farmworkers’ trust in
precision agriculture tools, enhance the training processes, increase farmers’
adoption of these tools, improve farm productivity, and on and off-farm
environmental sustainability. Positive spillover from this project will also
accelerate the transition of co-designed and co-evaluated artificial
intelligence innovations in agriculture into many other economic
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a living laboratory approach
to: (1) Develop, deploy, create algorithms, and test the ability to convert data
collected from hyperspectral and multispectral sensors, field monitors, and in-
situ nutrient sensors into useable information for farm workers through an
Artificial Intelligence-based integrative decision support system; (2) Pilot an
on-farm, sensor-driven performance-based payment for ecosystem services
mechanism; and, (3) Implement principles of responsible innovation to draw
policy-relevant insights that can strengthen human-machine networks in
agriculture. The living laboratory approach taken by this interdisciplinary
project team will: (1) Advance foundational understanding of responsible
innovation for trustworthy artificial intelligence in agriculture; e.g. under
what conditions of innovation, policy, and workforce training do farm workers
come to trust recommendations made by intelligent decision support systems; (2)
Develop and test innovative intelligent decision support system to integrate big
data from heterogeneous sources and scales, e.g. unmanned aerial vehicles and in
situ sensors; (3) Test the development and integration of novel low-cost nano-
scale sensors for measuring soil and water phosphorus and nitrogen in the living
laboratory farms, and (4) Help evolve new areas of ecologically responsible
farming; e.g. how sensor-based payment for ecosystem services mechanism can
revolutionize design of sustainable human-environment-technology partnerships.
Through educational and outreach programs, this project will train 15
interdisciplinary PhD students and immerse more than 100 undergraduate students,
48 farmers, and stakeholders from public, private, and non-profit organizations
in the living laboratories. This research builds on the successful precision
agriculture research initiatives at South Dakota State University and University
of Vermont and envisions the development of new approaches in modeling this
complex socio-technical system for the purpose of successfully and responsibly
transitioning agricultural workers for digital transformations in farm work in
South Dakota and Vermont, and eventually rest of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.