* 2026042
* SBIR Phase I:  Heap leaching and slope saturation monitoring with muon detectors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Tancredi Botto, MUON VISION INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,945.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project focuses on the
development of a broad-scope technology for advanced geophysical density
measurements and the monitoring of fluid fronts based on the passive detection
of naturally occurring cosmic rays. The primary application area is in the
mining sector where the technology is expected to be able to drive significant
efficiency improvements (up to 10%) in the recovery of copper and other metals.
These efficiencies could potentially result in a commercial value of close to $1
billion per year in the United States alone. The technology can also be applied
to monitoring the stability of dams and levees, a widely recognized ongoing
concern, where it can provide significant safety and environmental
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the
development of field-ready instrumentation, and in particular an innovative fit-
for-purpose network of cosmic ray detectors that can be easily scaled and
reconfigured to cover large or small investigation areas with a customizable
spatial resolution at a minimal cost. This project will also demonstrate
original data inversion methodologies and function of such methods in the
feasibility study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.