* 2026479
* W-HTF-RL: Collaborative Research: Improving the Future of Retail and Warehouse Workers with Upper Limb Disabilities via Perceptive and Adaptive Soft Wearable Robots
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Vikram Kapila, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2024
* USD 899,883.00

This project will investigate modeling, perception, and control of soft wearable
robots to provide physical assistance and skill training for older workers and
workers with physical disabilities in jobs involving picking, placing, and
assembly tasks. If successful, the project will enhance their employment,
inclusion, and integration in work that is relevant to retail, warehouse, and
manufacturing. It is estimated that this technology can directly benefit nearly
20 million people in the U.S. with upper limb impairments due to neurological
and musculoskeletal disorders. The long term goal of the project is to improve
the quality of work, productivity, and employment of people with disabilities,
who are the nationâ€™s largest minority and untapped labor force. To do so, the
project will deploy artificial intelligence-powered, soft assistive robots to
support workers and understand the resulting impact on economics and policy
making. The proposed work has the potential to contribute to national economic
growth and health by broadening participation of people with disabilities in the
workforce. The assessment of economic impacts will provide the first econometric
data-driven understanding of the productivity and labor market effects of
artificial intelligence- and robotics-driven augmentation, with a specific focus
on the underrepresented population of individuals with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together multiple disciplines,
including soft robotics, computer vision, learning and control, occupational
therapy, worker training and labor economics. This convergent research team
represents a collaboration with Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, New York
University, and assistive device manufacturers. The team and project activities
are structured to achieve multiple convergent goals and deliverables, including:
1) A model of interactions between a lightweight and complainant soft wearable
robot with human workers; 2) An interactive visual perception framework that
enables multimodal intention detection and action monitoring in a semantic 3D
map of the dynamic workspace and provides in-context visual feedback for
collaborative robot manipulation; 3) A framework for the transfer of
demonstrated skills through cost function learning and model predictive control
with perceptual feedback integration for online movement and impedance
adaptation of exoskeletons; 4) Training programs for occupational therapists and
people with upper-limb disabilities will entail a multi-pronged strategy to
enhance awareness and knowledge regarding the scope and effectiveness of
assistive robots and improve perception towards their use in collaborative
workspaces; 5) Increased understanding the economics of assistive technologies
using federal data on occupational ability requirements and then using these
estimates in conjunction with productivity results on assistive technologies to
construct a range of cost/benefit estimates of these technologies; and 6) An
evidence-based policy approach that uses quantitative and qualitative data from
field experiments, interviews, and focus groups with employers and employees to
determine attitudes, barriers, and best practices for adoption and acceptance of
assistive wearable technologies in the workplace. This project has been funded
by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program
to promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology
partnership in work contexts by advancing design of intelligent work
technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.