* 2026259
* Tuning the Interactions between Biomolecules and Surfaces via a Peptide Self-Assembled Monolayer Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Julie Renner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,826.00

A modern societal challenge is to develop effective health monitoring and
treatment devices for non-communicable diseases, which cause more than 60% of
annual worldwide deaths. Meeting this challenge involves integrating solid
materials with biological systems where the interfaces must be engineered to
avoid biofouling and simultaneously maintain complex functionalities. One way to
engineer the interface between solids and biological systems is through self-
assembled monolayers, a class of nanostructured materials composed of molecules
which assemble spontaneously to make and organized layer that is one molecule
thick. Currently, common antifouling self-assembled monolayers have drawbacks
such as bioaccumulation, undesired immune responses and limited tunability. This
project focuses on engineered peptides as promising new molecular frameworks for
self-assembled materials because they 1) are easily tunable and therefore have
the capacity to be multi-functional, 2) possess controllable, ordered secondary
structures, 3) self-assemble into different nanostructures, and 4) are
biocompatible. The goal of this project is to provide fundamental insight into
peptide self-assembly, structure and antifouling mechanisms and establish design
rules for amino acid substitution into the engineered peptide framework. This
contribution is significant because the design rules gained in this project will
allow peptide-based self-assembled monolayers to be tuned to have a variety of
functionalities for a broad range of fields, and advance implantable
nanobiotechnologies and other technologies which interface with biological
media. This proposal supports education and diversity through an expanded
outreach program which encourages underrepresented high school students to
participate in summer research programming. In addition, a unique graduate-level
learning module will be innovated which supports the National Science
Foundation’s priorities for improving graduate student workforce preparedness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to develop design
rules for amino acid substitution into a peptide self-assembled monolayer
framework based on a fundamental understanding of assembly, structure, and
antifouling. This proposal specifically focuses on a polyproline peptide
framework because it features a 3-fold symmetrical structure, antifouling
properties, and has the potential for guest residue substitution. Thus, this
project aims to 1) understand the ordering and assembly mechanisms of
polyproline self-assembled monolayers, 2) establish design rules based on a
polyproline-guest residue framework, and 3) discover polyproline-based self-
assembled monolayer antifouling mechanisms. Currently, there is no clear
strategy for how to make changes to peptide sequences without negatively
impacting self-assembled monolayer properties or antifouling. In addition, the
ordering of peptide self-assembled monolayers is often not characterized nor are
the kinetics and thermodynamics of assembly and antifouling. Therefore, there
exists an urgent need for a peptide-based framework that has predictable and
well-understood self-assembly, fouling, and material properties. This project
will address that need by studying a peptide self-assembled monolayer system
featuring guest residues via in situ monitoring and advanced surface
characterizations. Anticipated fields where the technology will be used include
therapeutic nanoparticles, nanoswimmers, nanostructured electrodes for
implantable fuel cells/sensors, and catalysis. Thus, this proposal addresses
major challenges to realizing widespread use of implantable monitoring and
treatment devices by enabling multifunctional antifouling surfaces. This
proposal will also have a high impact on society through outreach and
educational programs. Specifically, the principle investigator has created a new
research experience program for female high school students designed to
encourage participants to consider science and engineering careers. The
principle investigator is currently working with a local high school that has
91% minority students, and plans to significantly grow the program.
Additionally, graduate students will learn industry-relevant skills through an
innovative, hands-on, project planning module. The motivation for the module is
to help students best-utilize their technical skills in the private sector,
where 42% of doctoral recipients in science and engineering
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.