* 2026918
* Collaborative research: Multi-disciplinary investigation of the links between volcanism, marine redox, and mass extinction during the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jeremy Owens, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 211,321.00

The end-Triassic mass extinction that occurred ~210 million years ago was one of
the largest in Earth’s history. Understanding the timeline of environmental
stresses that led to this event and similar events, provide important context
for understanding current and future global change. Our current understanding is
limited, mostly because of the limited geographic coverage of data and most of
exisiting studies narrowly focus on the time interval of the mass extinction
itself. This study will address these gaps by investigating a record of
environmental and biologic change that is recorded in the fossils and chemistry
of sedimentary rocks now located in the Wrangell Mountains of Alaska. This
unique sequence of rocks represent marine sediments that were deposited in an
understudied part of the planet — the Paleo-Pacific or Panthalassic Ocean.
Additionally, this project will enable the mentorship and scientific training of
graduate and undergraduate students and will involve a number of public outreach
activities that highlight the interdisciplinary nature of geoscience research
used to tackle big scientific problems like the causes of mass extinctions.
Museum and traveling exhibits will be developed and the project team will engage
in visits to high school science classrooms and public science open
houses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a multi-disciplinary approach
to develop a more holistic understanding of the geographic and temporal record
of marine diversity and redox conditions within the oceans before, during, and
after the end-Triassic mass extinction from an understudied Panthalassic Ocean
site. This will be accomplished by studying the long-term Late Triassic through
Early Jurassic time interval recorded in the McCarthy Formation in the Wrangell
Mountains of Alaska. Paleontological data will be collected for four major
taxonomic groups (ammonoids, bivalves, conodonts, corals); geochemical data
(carbon, sulfur, and thallium isotopes; iron speciation; redox-sensitive trace
metal abundances); and uranium-lead dates from ash beds. Through the careful
integration of the paleontological, geochemical, and geochronological results,
the proposed study will provide a framework for understanding the relationship
between the biotic, marine redox, and carbon cycle changes. Results of the
proposed study will be used to directly assess and temporally constrain the
timing of (1) marine diversity losses and recovery, (2) local and global
environmental changes, and (3) the potential factors that led to mass extinction
and allowed for faunal recovery during the Late Triassic to Early
Jurassic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.