* 2026766
* Collaborative Research: Revealing the Role of Vacancy Order in Regulating the Dislocation Behavior in Transition Metal Carbides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Christopher Weinberger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 286,107.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Transition metal carbides are a class of ceramics
that have a wide range of uses including cutting materials, nuclear energy, and
coatings. These applications subject these materials to both temperature and
mechanical loads, which they must withstand in service. This project
investigates the role of chemistry and crystal structure in controlling the
mechanical mechanisms responsible for these properties. Through this project,
graduate students will be trained to test, characterize, model and predict the
mechanical behavior of transition metal carbides. Those students typically find
employment in the energy, defense, and aerospace sectors of society. In
addition, this project develops secondary education learning modules that
explain hardness, as a technical definition, to middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The transition metal carbides
are known to have unique mechanical properties which are intimately linked to
their chemistry and structure. This project investigates how this chemistry, and
specifically the order of the carbon atoms, controls the mechanical mechanisms
responsible for peculiar anomalous hardening and low temperature creep in these
carbides. The experimental and computational research develops synergic support
in elucidating the fundamental mechanics of dislocations in these ceramics
relative to temperature, chemistry, and most importantly, the order of the non-
metal sublattice. This project provides, for the first time, a description of
the mechanical properties in terms of chemical order using the order parameter.
This project is particularly relevant now given the importance of these
materials for use in the energy, aerospace, and defense industries, especially
the area of applied hypersonics. Furthermore, understanding the mechanistic link
for such mechanical properties will aid the development of new compositionally
complex transition metal carbides. Given the nature of the research, the
graduate students are trained in an integrated manner for the two complementary
areas - advanced materials characterization and materials modeling. This
research further enhances the field through symposiums led by the investigators
on the deformation mechanisms in ceramics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.