* 2026799
* Collaborative Research: Origin and Evolution of Intraplate Magmatism at the Revillagigedo Archipelago, Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Elisabeth Widom, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,708.00

Intraplate Magmatism at the Revillagigedo Archipelago, Mexico
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most volcanic activity on Earth takes place at arcs like
the Cascades or within plates at hotspots, such as Hawaii. Recent work reveals
another class of within-plate volcanism that can’t be explained by either of
these processes. This project will explore the causes of volcanic activity in
one of these places, the Revillagigedo archipelago, active volcanic islands and
underwater volcanoes. The volcanism in the area, with no active plate boundary
and no evidence of a deep root beneath it, provides an ideal location to test
ideas about why this kind of volcanism occurs. We will conduct a research voyage
to these islands to study the seafloor and measure properties of the ocean
crust. Submersible dives will observe the underwater volcanic systems and
collect samples of lava. The chemical composition of lava from the cruise and
existing samples from the above-water volcanoes will be used with the
geophysical measurements to develop an explanation for why this area is
volcanically active. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intraplate volcanism on Earth takes
many forms. In some cases, it is clearly related to a deep-rooted mantle plume,
but in others, the root of magmatism is much less constrained. This proposal
will address the origins and relationships between two apparent styles of
intraplate volcanism, expressed at an abandoned mid-ocean ridge spreading center
and a weak hotspot, both present in the Revillagigedo archipelago, Mexico. A
research cruise will collect geophysical data and new submarine samples of
potentially young regional lavas. When integrated with new data for existing
samples, these constraints will provide a framework for testing several key
hypotheses for the origins and evolved character of the regional volcanism. This
work will test the potential roles of a failed spreading center, a chemical or
thermal mantle heterogeneity, a persistent melt layer at the lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary, and upwelling driven by lithospheric structure as
potential explanations for driving continued magmatism at this fossil plate
boundary. This work will further test between roles of crystallization- vs.
assimilation-driven processes in producing voluminous peralkaline, silicic
magmas in an oceanic intraplate setting. Major/trace/volatile element and
isotopic geochemistry of erupted lavas will be analyzed in order to determine
ages of volcanism, fingerprint the mantle source characteristics, model mantle
temperature and magmatic liquid lines of descent, and evaluate assimilation or
crystallization processes that may modify magmatic compositions. Geophysical
data and modeling will aid in development of a model of local lithospheric
structure and age. This combination of geochemical constraints on lava
compositions/ages and geophysical constraints on lithospheric structure and
history will enable assessment of the critical processes responsible for
magmatic activity and evolution in an oceanic intraplate setting, for comparison
with other intraplate oceanic islands and seamounts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.