* 2026631
* RAPID: Real time monitoring of information consumption regarding the coronavirus
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2022
* David Lazer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of accurate information as
a vehicle for helping the public take needed steps to ensure their health and
safety. But social media contain both accurate and inaccurate information. This
project will analyze how social media affects the quality of information
received by people during the extended crisis. Who receives what information?
And in what ways do social media amplify or dampen informational inequalities?
The project will build a real-time monitor of information consumption regarding
the corona virus, drawn largely from Twitter. Specifically, the project will:
(1) build a real time monitor of information regarding the corona virus that
would be made available to state and local officials; and (2) evaluate how a
medium such as Twitter amplifies/dampens existing informational inequalities
around socioeconomic status. The project will focus on identification of
misinformation (e.g., ersatz cures) that pose health risks. The project will
supply aggregate information to relevant state and local officials regarding the
type and quality of information regarding corona virus circulating in their
communities, thus informing interventions that public officials can make to
combat that misinformation. More generally, the project will identify patterns
of information that governmental officials can use to combat misinformation
during other extended crises, including those with public health as well as
other origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responding appropriately to COVID-19
requires that individuals have accurate information about how it is spread and
what they can do to mitigate virus effects. However, misinformation is
prevalent, with Twitter being a major source of both accurate and inaccurate
information. This project will utilize a matched sample of 1.8 million Twitter
handles and voter registration data. The large scale of the data will permit
production of reasonable inferences of content sharing at subnational levels—at
the state level, and within regions for large states. Because the Twitter data
will be linked to voter registration records, and because voter registration
data includes information on age, gender, race, partisanship, and address, thus
allowing linkage to census tract information, the project will be able to
evaluate the relationship between socioeconomic status and information exposure.
Further, the project will augment with a survey of about 2000 of the matched
data to further examine the factors that affect the quality of information
people receive about the corona virus. Findings from the project will inform
theories in the social sciences regarding information diffusion, socioeconomic
inequality, social media usage, the security of cyberspace, and political
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.