* 2026824
* Collaborative Research: Measurement and Modeling of Brown Carbon (BrC) from Boreal Forest Wildfires in Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Lung-Wen Antony Chen, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 134,526.00

This project is focused on characterizing the emissions, optical properties and
radiative impacts of brown carbon (BrC) from biomass burning in the Arctic. The
hypothesis is that BrC in the Arctic is different because boreal forest fires
tend to be smoldering due to the large consumption of below-ground biomass, and
the photochemical processing of aerosol in the Arctic is slower due to the
strong UV absorption by stratospheric ozone (longer light path). The improved
understanding of the properties of BrC found in the Arctic will enable chemical
transport modeling to better assess the direct radiative effects of BrC from
boreal forest fires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on three
topics: (1) the emissions and optical properties of BrC from boreal forest
fires; (2) the emissions and physical properties of organic aerosol and black
carbon in the Arctic; and (3) the influence of Arctic biomass burning on the
radiative budget at the surface. The project includes both a measurement and a
modeling component. Data collected in this project data will be compared with
that from two long-term monitoring networks with sites in the Arctic, the
IMPROVE network and the Chemical Speciation Network. The results of the project
will be shared with the Alaska Fire Science Consortium, based at University of
Alaska Fairbanks, to help disseminate the results to the interagency fire
management community in the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.