* 2026518
* FW-HTF-P: Mapping the Human-Technology Frontier to Improve Trauma Care: A Transdisciplinary Approach to Identify Opportunities, Challenges, and Risks
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* JADE WILLIAMS, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 149,966.00

Trauma-related injuries are the leading cause of death in Americans under the
age of 45. While human costs are overwhelming, the economic costs are also
alarming. In 2005, fatal unintentional injuries resulted in $1.3 billion in
medical costs and $82.9 billion in lost work costs, including cost of goods and
services not produced and provided by the individual for the duration of their
working life. Furthermore, diagnostic errors and delays in treatment are the
most common errors reported in trauma resuscitations, accounting for almost 75%
of preventable deaths. Using a conservative estimate of $10,000 per error-
related adverse event, the cost estimate is $418 million annually. The trauma
workforce is sizable: In 2017 there were 42,348 practicing emergency medicine
physicians, and, in 2019, an estimated 167,375 practicing emergency medicine
nurses, 78 percent of which are women. Unfortunately, however, 38 percent of the
nurses and approximately 60 percent of the physicians in emergency medicine
reported some symptoms of burnout. This project will draw from a broad range of
expertise and perspectives in emergency medicine, sociology, communication
studies, interior design, computer and information science and engineering, and
industrial and systems engineering to investigate the clinical practice of
trauma care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will develop
transdisciplinary and convergent research capacity, research infrastructure, and
foundational work to build a comprehensive research agenda for supporting and
improving patient safety and prevent burnout syndrome in trauma care. The goal
is to design clinically informed intelligent technological interventions for
optimal decision-making in trauma care and to facilitate effective team training
for diagnostic and treatment processes in trauma resuscitations. The primary
research objectives are two-fold. First, researchers will develop a holistic
conceptual framework for, and a theoretical understanding of, diagnostic and
treatment care planning to model and analyze trauma care. Second, the project
will develop an evidence-based approach for challenge, opportunity, and risk
assessment to evaluate and justify pervasive technological interventions for
trauma care. The research team will conduct a series of observations,
interviews, focus group studies, and organize charrette workshops to collect
data. Researchers will also use content analysis, mapping analysis, statistical
methods and machine learning to analyze and mine data, and utilize grounded
theory to guide the identification, modeling, and analysis of the salient
features of the underlying human-techno-physical
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.