* 2026540
* FW-HTF-P: Advancing the future work of nuclear operators through virtual reality-based training
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Andreas Enqvist, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 181,999.00

Nuclear reactors generate close to 20% of the energy required by the nation,
provide power for submarines, aircraft carriers and deep space exploration, and
are involved in the manufacture of vital radiopharmaceuticals. Nuclear reactor
safety is unique in that even after an incident is identified and the reactor
shut down, the damage to people and environment continues due to decay heat and
radiation leakage, which must also be contained properly. Nuclear reactor
operators are critical workers who monitor the operational health of the
facility and are the first line of defense in case of an incident. It takes more
than a year to train each nuclear operator given the need for significant
practical experience. Further, while new reactors have improved reliability and
resilience to cybersecurity attacks, the new reactor designs are smaller and
more modular, and fundamentally different from current designs. As a result,
this fundamentally changes the nature of the reactor operator’s work from a
historic single focus to concurrent multi-plant operations. Informed by these
new requirements and expectations, this project brings together diverse
stakeholders to design new virtual reality-based technologies for future nuclear
reactor operator training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning activities include
three areas of investigation relevant to the “Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier” program. First, regarding work, the project will explore
the role of future reactor designs in changing the nature of the reactor
operator’s work and training. For example, this could increase the number of
plant operators needed (creating a need to reduce training time), reduce the
hours per shift (creating opportunities for currently under-represented groups
such as women), or create new demands on the operator such as increased use of
spatial memory (requiring specialized training). Second, regarding technology,
the project will investigate the use of virtual training environments in
addressing training challenges for future reactor operators. Third, regarding
workers, the project will consider the work context of future reactor operators
with respect to design of virtual training environments. For example, this could
include issues regarding upfront costs, security and privacy, and
transferability. The planning activities include a systematic literature review,
focus group, survey and simulation demonstration, and will generate foundational
material for a future proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.