* 2026944
* RAPID: On-mask Chemical Modulation of Respiratory Droplets
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Jiaxing Huang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spread of infectious respiratory
diseases, such as influenza, SARS, MERS, and COVID-19, usually starts from
virion-laden respiratory droplets, which are released by an infected person
during coughing or sneezing. Most of the droplets end up depositing on various
surfaces such as doorknobs, tabletops, buttons, handrails, and touchscreens,
turning them into potentially infectious objects. For infection to occur, these
virions must remain active when they are picked up by another person, often
through direct contact by hands, and then transferred to mouth, nose and eyes.
Direct transport of virus-laden droplets and nuclei to the respiratory tract is
also possible through inhaling within close proximity to the source. Therefore,
to slow down or even prevent virus spread, it would be desirable to greatly
reduce the number and activity of the virions in those just-released respiratory
droplets. This RAPID award, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, explores chemical
modulation strategies for deactivating virions in the respiratory fluid droplets
passing through a medical mask. This can reduce the number of active virions at
the very source of their spread pathways, the cough. The project also helps to
seed an effort to rally researchers in physical sciences and engineering to
study the problems, develop new hypotheses, create user-centered solutions and
educate the general public, to address the many challenges associated with the
transmission and spread of infectious respiratory
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Facial
masks are often required for patients to block and absorb large respiratory
fluid droplets, and to reroute those smaller escaping droplets to reduce their
forward travelling distance. It would be desirable to develop drop-in strategies
to add anti-viral functions to the disposable masks used by patients. This RAPID
project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, develops such an on-mask, chemical
modulation strategy that focuses on altering the chemical composition of the
escaped respiratory droplets to deactivate virions. The starting model system is
a chemical modifier based on a conducting polymer. The polymer is doped with
chemical agents that are known to generate harsh micro-environment to deactivate
virions. The dopants can readily dissolve in warm respiratory fluid droplets
during exhalation, but they do not vaporize in the incoming stream of colder and
drier air during inhalation. Such an on-mask chemical modulation strategy adds
chemical sanitization function to common medical masks for reducing the
viability of virions. Since this drop-in chemical modulation is applied at the
very beginning of the chain events of virus transmission, it is effective for
all potential transmission pathways. Additionally, through this award stronger
connections between biological/medical research and physical
sciences/engineering are established and serve to inspire new hypotheses,
questions and ideas that drive innovations to address the challenges associated
with the transmission and spread of infectious respiratory diseases. A
significant effort of this RAPID project is used to achieve this goal, so that
the physical sciences and engineering communities can be better informed,
educated and prepared to work with biological and medical researchers to create
solutions, and join them in the educational outreach activities for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.