* 2026029
* SBIR Phase I:  The Development of Signal Sensing, Processing and Mapping Technology to Enable Curative, Patient-Specific Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Sarah Kalil, CoreMap, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2021
* USD 251,134.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a diagnostic technology
capable of identifying the drivers of Atrial Fibrillation (AF), which promises
to enable new therapeutic options for a large population of under-served
patients. AF is the most common and complex cardiac arrythmia. AF patients are
at severe risk of complications including stroke, heart attack and death. AF
patients have limited treatment options and medications are only effective
approximately half of the time. Ablation is highly effective at treating other
arrythmias, but current diagnostic mapping technologies are limited in the
ability to provide customized treatment for chronic AF. This project will test
concepts of a new device to measure AF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will validate the ability of a novel
micro-electrode array to accurately measure AF in an animal. This is important
because conventional intra-cardiac catheters lack the spatial resolution to
adequately resolve discrete, closely spaced activations. Accurate resolution of
cardiac tissue activations is essential to deduce the properties of diseased
tissue and to plan effective patient-specific ablation therapy. Optical mapping
is a gold standard for measuring electrical activation of tissue and therefore
provides a trusted platform for comparative validation. The expected results are
to observe complex activation patterns on an ovine heart model using the novel
micro-electrode array, and for those electrical patterns to be corroborated by
optical mapping data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.