* 2026075
* Collaborative Research: Conservation Tillage for Sustainable Food, Energy and Water Systems: Linked Econometric and Process-based Models
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Zhen Lei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 167,404.00

The sustainability of food-energy-water systems (FEWs) depends critically on
whether agriculture can reduce its environmental and ecological footprints while
continuing to increase crop yields. Conservation tillage (CT) has been advocated
as having advantages of reducing soil erosion, improving soil quality and
agricultural productivity, saving energy and water, and improving water quality.
However, the adoption of CT has stalled in the U.S. and remains low in many
other countries including China, due partly to insufficient understanding of
CT’s economic and environmental impacts and to farmers’ behavioral gaps and
deviations from the optimum. This project aims to take an integrated systems
approach to link process-based models that can simulate complex biophysical and
biogeochemical interactions of tillage effects on FEWs, with observational data-
based econometric models that incorporate farmer behaviors and decisions. The
linked models will be calibrated with experimental field data and decades of
observational data in the U.S. Corn Belt, and rich experimental field data and
newly available observational data in Northeastern China, taking advantage of
the vast heterogeneity between the two countries. Simulation of the linked
models will generate and aggregate spatially and temporally explicit knowledge
and information for farmers to better understand the best practices associated
with CT in relation to FEWs, for governments to design more effective targeting
policies to achieve a social optimum that accounts for environmental
externalities, and ultimately for optimal adoption and diffusion of CT. The
project, involving international and multidisciplinary collaboration between
teams from U.S. and China, will advance a set of interdisciplinary models of CT
in FEWs contexts that are grounded on frontier science and behavioral studies,
integrate data from vastly different regions, and are applicable to a wide range
of biophysical and social economic settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will fill important knowledge and model gaps about the impacts of CT in FEWs
settings. Impact analyses of CT have mostly been conducted through controlled
experiment studies and process based simulation models, without taking full
account of farmer behavior. Econometric models using observational data can
reveal farmer behaviors, but cannot make “out-of-sample” predictions. More
importantly, process-based models and econometric models on CT have not been
linked to incorporate both biophysical and behavioral processes. The proposed
research will link econometric models and process-based simulation models in
novel ways that allow better understanding of farmers’ suboptimal behavior and
decisions. The linked models will enable policy scenario analysis and simulation
of dynamic impacts of CT on FEWs, for each type of field-weather-policy
combinations, to understand CT adoption and impacts. The field level analysis
can be scaled up and aggregated to greater scales such as counties and regions.
The linked models will provide more trustworthy and reliable outputs, better
inform farmers about CT with spatially explicit adoption and implementation
recommendations, and provide more effective policy recommendations for socially
optimal CT adoption and implementation. The project will generate practical
recommendations and policies on optimal CT practice, which will be disseminated
to stakeholders including farmers and policy makers in the U.S. and China and
elsewhere in the world. The research will be incorporated into various
undergraduate and graduate programs and courses at the institutions in the U.S.
and China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.