* 2026612
* FW-HTF-P: Distributed Intelligent Assistant to Infrastructure Inspection Workers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 166,000.00

Sustainable, safe infrastructure carries the prosperity of our society. The
Nation faces a grave infrastructure challenges in maintaining and upgrading its
infrastructure to deliver an adequate standard of service compatible to the
expectations of its citizens. Besides, the prosperity of our communities
requires to embrace and erect emerging types of service infrastructure (i.e.,
autonomous vehicles, connected vehicles, Internet of Things, etc.) to meet
modern-day expectations of digital and connected world. Infrastructure
inspection provides important data to support decisions on its management,
rehabilitation, and reconstruction plan, which cost billions of dollars each
year. Various infrastructure service sectors conduct routine inspections of
their infrastructure conditions (such as road, bridges, culvert, transmission
lines, etc.). The infrastructure inspection industry employs tens of thousands
workers in the private sector. The public sectors also maintains in-house
workforce to inspect public infrastructure such as interstate highway, bridges,
levees, etc. While there are significant advancement in robotics and information
technologies, there are major technical barriers to make them fully integrated
to augment human inspection and judgment. Consequently, human inspection remains
as the mainstream for information collection across a variety of infrastructure
sectors. This planning grant aims to define the road map towards how robotics
and AI-driven techniques can be seamlessly integrated with human inspectors to
improve their efficiency, reliability, and safety. The hypothesis is that the
nexus of inspection workers and technology will support sound data-driven
infrastructure decisions, and therefore help improve the level of service of the
existing infrastructure system as well as better target high payoff futuristic
infrastructure investments. It therefore will explore the frontier of human-
technology nexus in domain with high impacts on the welfare of the
infrastructure inspection workers as well as on the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning activities by this project will
implement a number of strategies to build a roadmap for human-robotics
integration center upon infrastructure inspection workers. The integrated
research theme is defined in the areas of Inspection efficiency and reliability,
Inspector safety and cybersecurity, Decision machine in support of inspection
decisions, Open framework for public engagement in infrastructure inspection. A
number of planning activities will be implemented including the planning
workshops, an interdisciplinary lecture series, regular teleconference meetings,
and thrust leadersâ€™ convocations. Stakeholders of infrastructure owners,
inspection service providers, community colleges will be involved to provide
inputs to refine the roadmap to advance convergence research agenda. Concerted
efforts will be targeting at fostering workforce training and innovation
culture. Besides providing extensive opportunities for dynamic interactions and
transdisciplinary engagement, the planning activities will also provide
participants with training of essential team science skills. The effectiveness
of the planning activities will be measured by timely collecting feedbacks,
which will be incorporated to further improve the planning activities for the
best outcomes. This project will catalyze the integration of robotics and AI-
driven techniques to help efficiency and safety of workers during infrastructure
inspection, crucial to the sustainability and resilience of our infrastructure
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.