* 2026218
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RM: Expanding Rural Ceramics Craft and Computational Fabrication: A Synergy
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Leah Buechley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 818,567.00

The aim of this project is to synergistically create new career opportunities
for rural craftspeople by blending long-standing craft traditions with new
computational fabrication technologies, and to develop new computational
fabrication techniques inspired by craft traditions. Craft businesses keep vital
cultural traditions alive, contribute significantly to regional economies, and
provide communities with a sense of identity and purpose. Craftspeople and their
businesses play significant roles in rural areas, where employment options are
limited, and communities have a strong sense of identity and pride that is
rooted in local craft traditions. Computational fabrication combines
computational design, (using computer programming and algorithms to create
digital designs), with digital fabrication. Computational fabrication has, thus
far, been explored primarily in contexts of academic research and industrial
manufacturing. However, as the availability of fabrication machines diversifies,
computational fabrication grows compatible with small to medium volume
manufacturing craft practices. This project will introduce computational
fabrication to new constituents and broaden the development of computational
fabrication technologies to represent diverse community cultural forms, values,
and needs. It will engage several hundred rural craft practitioners in NM and CA
with new opportunities to grow their businesses and creative practices through
engagement with computational fabrication and a unique co-development process.
It will also engage diverse, rural, middle- and high-school students and
teachers in computation, design, fabrication, and entrepreneurship through a
series of outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;The team of researchers will partner
with rural craftspeople, in New Mexico and California, to co-develop new
software, construction techniques, and business strategies that integrate
computational design, digital fabrication, and traditional craft. The project
will focus on ceramics, while working to ensure that research findings are
generalizable to other craft domains. Through a methodology of workshops,
interviews, and co-design residencies, the project is expected to develop
transformational research contributions–involving practices, methodologies,
techniques, and theory across fields–by (1) developing new forms of
computational fabrication inspired by craft traditions; (2) investigating new
syntheses of ceramic craft practices and traditions, community economics, HCI
theory, and computational fabrication technologies; (3) exploring how the co-
design and co-development of technology can integrate cultural, economic, and
technological concerns; (4) applying Value Chain Analysis to ascertain the
economic and cultural viability of new forms of rural production that blend
traditional craft and computational fabrication; (5) developing deeper
understandings of the unique challenges and opportunities facing rural craft
businesses to contribute to studies across a range of fields–including
developmental economics, international management, geography, and
sociology–which are concerned with the increasing segregation of and
inequalities between rural and urban communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.