* 2026719
* RAPID: Impacts of Design and Operation Attributes of Mass-Gathering Civil Infrastructure Systems on Pathogen Transmission and Exposure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Shuai Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,809.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will support fundamental research to
reveal how the design attributes and operation strategies will influence the
transmission of and exposure to infectious pathogens within mass-gathering civil
infrastructure systems. During the pandemic of 2019 novel coronavirus, the mass-
gathering civil infrastructure systems, such as schools, airports, and public
transit systems, can become hot spots for spreading the infectious disease.
There remains a striking knowledge gap in understanding the impacts of
infrastructure design and operation on the occurrence, distribution, transport,
and viability of pathogens. It is imperative to address this knowledge gap.
Results from this project will lead to bio-informed guidelines for managing
critical civil infrastructure systems to prevent exposure of facility users to
pathogenic microorganisms, and reduce risks of spreading infectious diseases,
and thus alleviating burdens on healthcare systems and citizens. This project
will provide much needed insights for infrastructure design reconfigurations and
operation practices during the pandemic, in the recovery, and beyond to prevent
further disease outbreaks and support healthy, resilient, and smart communities.
As a result, this project will help promote public health, national security,
and economic prosperity. In addition, this project will raise public science
literacy and awareness of infectious diseases, and improve student education and
training, as well as K-12 outreach and engagement activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of this research is to parameterize
relevant design attributes and operation strategies of infrastructure systems,
and subsequently evaluate their impacts on pathogen transmission and exposure
from spatiotemporal microbiome profiles. Three aims will be pursued: 1) identify
and quantify the design attributes and operation strategies that may impact
pathogen dynamics; 2) audit the types, abundance, and co-occurrence patterns, as
well as spatiotemporal dynamics of microorganisms, particularly pathogens,
associated with spatially and functionally distributed system components; and 3)
characterize the impacts of design and operation on the transmission and
exposure pathways of microorganisms in infrastructure systems. The spatial and
functional interdependence of system components will be considered to
parameterize design attributes based on building information modeling and
syntactic analysis. The operation strategies will be modeled using integrated
data sensing and simulation techniques. A model-informed sampling approach will
be developed with molecular and metagenomics techniques to characterize
spatiotemporal microbiome dynamics. The impacts of design and operation on
microbial transmission and exposure pathways will be assessed using integrated
source tracking and machine learning methods. At the nexus of infrastructure
system engineering and environmental microbiology, this convergence research
will provide unique insights into design attributes and operation practices
impacting pathogen transmission and exposure in mass-gathering civil
infrastructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.