* 2026304
* Continent-Scale Low Frequency Lightning Remote Sensing
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Steven Cummer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 740,316.00

This grant will support fundamental research that develops and applies new
radio-based methods for detecting and measuring lightning discharges. Lightning
causes substantial physical and economic damage every year; energetic lightning
with high electric charge transfer has important practical consequences, such as
forest fires and damage to structures. High impact lightning processes are not
routinely measured. Energetic lightning flashes and meteorological conditions
that create them are not well understood. Lightning also generates high energy
radiation, but the specific process by which this occurs remains unknown. This
project will develop new understanding of the conditions that produce these high
impact phenomena and will deliver new tools for their improved detection and
monitoring to help mitigate their impact. The research activities will involve
students from under-represented groups and will enable innovative educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lightning remote sensing with low frequency
electromagnetic fields is a powerful tool for probing and quantifying lightning
processes from long distances and thus over a wide geographic area. This project
has two main goals that build on low frequency lightning remote sensing
techniques. First, a multi-sensor lightning charge moment change network will be
resurrected, improved, and expanded; the network will deliver near real-time
lightning impulse charge moment change measurements across the United States.
This network will open the door to new scientific studies, such as the
connection between thunderstorm structure and high charge transfer lightning, as
well as deliver real-time guidance for researchers across the US who target
measurements associated with energetic lightning, such as sprites. Second,
detailed analysis of new and archived observations from an existing network of
low frequency radio sensors across the globe will be mined for new datasets to
improve our understanding of the mechanisms through which lightning generates
high energy radiation in the form of terrestrial gamma-ray flashes. Detailed
measurements of lightning current and charge motion before, during, and after
terrestrial gamma-ray flashes will illuminate the physics behind their
production and provide key experimental constraints on possible physical
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.