* 2026058
* SBIR Phase II:  Machine Learning Driven Synthetic Sensor for Plant Water Stress
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Adam Koeppel, Aquasys LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,199,999.00

This SBIR Phase II project will advance a novel system for sensing, predicting,
and addressing plant stress, offering affordable guidance for permanent and
specialty crop farmers. This guidance will simultaneously reduce irrigation
water and agricultural chemical applications, while also increasing crop yields
and farmer profits. The project will develop easy-to-use equipment and software
that delivers guidance compatible with installed irrigation systems and
processes. The addressable market for this technology is $3 B in the United
States and $30 B internationally. The system's ability to reduce the use of
irrigation water and chemicals has a profound societal benefit. The system will
conserve scarce fresh water resources, allowing for population growth and an
increase in irrigated land. The system will reduce water pollution from
agricultural activities, addressing a $210 B annual problem in the United
States; furthermore, it will improve agricultural yields, ensuring adequate food
for growing populations, with reduced use of pesticides and
fungicides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will demonstrate a
software and distributed hardware system for measuring and predicting yield-
reducing plant abiotic and biotic stressors, and delivering intervention
guidance to farmers to mitigate these stressors. In order to predict plant
stresses at a localized level, many data feeds must be fused and analyzed to
create a synthetic sensor estimating plant water stress, predicting
microclimatic conditions, and performing localized plant disease and pest
modeling. The project will advance the fields of ultra-low power sensor arrays,
wide-area networking, machine learning, and human interface design for big data
interpretation. &lt;br/&gt;This project will expand a test system by adding
microclimate and disease and pest model prediction algorithms for precision
temporal and location-targeted interventions of irrigation, fertilizer,
fungicide, pesticide, and biostimulant applications to mitigate plant
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.