* 2026513
* FW-HTF-RL: Personalized Virtual Job Assistants to Prepare Individuals with Neurodevelopmental Disabilities for Entry Level IT Jobs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Donald Hantula, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,310,269.00

About 4% of children and young adults in the U.S. are diagnosed with
neurodevelopmental disabilities, characterized by difficulties such as impaired
motor function, learning, language, and non-verbal communication. Young adults
affected by those disabilities are significantly less likely to find employment
and have smaller earnings if they become employed. This project focuses on
future workers with mild to moderate neurodevelopmental disabilities. The
objective of this project is to gain scientific understanding and to develop
technology to support stronger participation of neurodiverse individuals in a
future workforce. The project will focus on entry-level information technology
(IT) jobs because: (1) the demand for IT skills is growing, (2) neurodiverse
individuals often have abilities desirable in many IT jobs, and (3) IT jobs
provide opportunities to work regular and flexible hours, which is important for
this population of workers. The outcome of the project will be an artificial
intelligence (AI)-enabled software platform that creates a synergy between
future workers, employers, and intermediate job coaches in a way that reduces
accommodation costs and supervision needs, and increases worker productivity and
job satisfaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an
interdisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in data science, software
engineering, human-computer interaction, behavioral science, and special
education, who will collaborate with vocational programs and employers to
transform the current state of employment for young adults with mild to moderate
neurodevelopmental disabilities. This project will integrate scientific
knowledge from applied behavior analysis and best practices in job micro-tasking
to guide the development of an AI-enabled software platform that implements
effective strategies for job customization, job training, and on-job support.
The platform will allow employers and job coaches to easily design and put into
production job tasks for their neurodiverse workers. This project will address
important interdisciplinary research challenges: (a) what tasks are appropriate
for what segment of the neurodiverse worker population; (b) what are the basic
task analysis principles that enable job decomposition and chaining; (c) what
user interface design principles can minimize cognitive burden of workers; (d)
what aspects of worker behavior and performance can be observed unobtrusively
and ethically, and when and how to provide support; and (e) how communication
between workers, employers, job coaches, and researchers can be more effective.
Success in this project translates to increased autonomy and inclusivity of
neurodiverse individuals in the workforce, reduced job training and on-job
support costs, improved public health, and a more productive
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.