* 2026995
* RAPID: Immunogenicity of SARS-CoV2 to Human T Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2021
* USD 124,472.00

Pandemics caused by infectious pathogens have plagued humanity since antiquity.
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus is
currently spreading across the world rapidly, including in the United States,
with major adverse impact on health and the economy. The SARSCoV-2 outbreak has
led to several urgent efforts to develop vaccines that may offer protection
against this virus. It is unknown as to whether the current approaches being
pursued will elicit protective immune responses in humans. While vaccines have
been very effective against many pathogens, the empirical methods for vaccine
development pioneered by Pasteur and Jenner over two centuries ago have failed
to produce effective vaccines against Human Immune Deficiency Virus, Malaria,
Tuberculosis, and many other pathogens. Therefore, rational design of vaccines
based on a mechanistic understanding of the pertinent virology and immunology is
being pursued, and these efforts include work that is rooted in statistical
physics. SARSCoV-2 is phylogenetically most similar to SARS-CoV. This project
will use a machine learning approach to understand how the SARS-CoV-2 virus
interacts with the immune T cells. This work will directly impact the design of
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and vaccines against future endemic-causing
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses of patients who have recovered from
SARS-CoV shows that antibody responses are not prevalent a few years later, but
memory T cell responses are durable and may offer long-term protection. The main
questions addressed by this project are 1. Will the SARS-CoV peptides targeted
by human T cells that are mutated in SARS-CoV-2 still elicit human T cell
responses - i.e. are they immunogenic? 2: Are the 102 peptides identified by
host major histocompatibility molecules binding assays alone that are common
between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 immunogenic in humans? If not, they are
irrelevant from vaccine design perspective. The goal of the work proposed here
is to take a physics-based machine learning approach to determine the
immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 proteins to human T cell
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.