* 2026615
* FW-HTF-P: Design of Tools and Technologies for Industry 4.0 Manufacturing Work
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

As information technology has matured, a Fourth Industrial Revolution—often
referred to as Industry 4.0—is emerging. Industry 4.0 aims to use technology to
integrate design, manufacturing, and consumer activities seamlessly, resulting
in increased productivity, reliability and customer satisfaction. However, the
process of transitioning to Industry 4.0 can be challenging to both companies
and workers. Companies cannot stop operating while their production systems and
processes are being updated. Due to the cost of the technology and the need to
train the workforce, the transition may need to take place over a period of
years. Workers who cannot adapt to the new technologies and processes risk
losing their jobs. This project will bring manufacturing industry
representatives and researchers together to develop a plan for future research.
The research plan will lay the groundwork for development of tools and
technologies to make the transition to Industry 4.0 more straightforward and
cost-effective for companies and more successful for workers. Examples of
possible research topics include road maps for transitioning from conventional
manufacturing systems to Industry 4.0 systems; tools for ergonomic design of
workstations and assembly lines; cognitive virtual assistants for workers;
guidance for human interface design; and automated generation of knowledge and
skill “crosswalks” to help companies identify existing skills that will still be
needed and new skills that workers need to learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed planning grant aims to develop a research agenda related to the
implementation of Industry 4.0 within the manufacturing industry. The work
domain is manufacturing; sub-domains could include smart design, smart
machining, smart assembly, smart monitoring, smart control and smart scheduling.
The workplace is the factory, which could include production lines, engineering
design, and inspection and testing areas. The workers include the engineers and
operators who work in these areas. The proposed planning activities will focus
on gaining a better understanding of industry needs which, together with a
convergent research approach, will lay the groundwork for development of tools
and technologies that can enhance the human-technology partnership and augment
human performance in Industry 4.0 manufacturing work. Major tasks will include:
(1) survey Industry 4.0 manufacturing system development, applications, and
constraints; and (2) develop a convergent research agenda in close collaboration
with representatives from a variety of manufacturing sectors and researchers
with expertise in manufacturing engineering, human factors, human resource
development, sociology, and computer science. Intellectual merit: Although
Industry 4.0 has many potential benefits, at this time, the process of
transitioning from a traditional manufacturing system to an Industrial 4.0
manufacturing system is expensive and fraught with risk to both the company and
its workers. The proposed convergent approach will allow scientists to learn
from plant technical managers about the operational challenges of implementing
Industry 4.0 within their companies. Involving researchers with diverse areas of
expertise will provide a richer understanding of the issues and convergent
approaches to problem-solving. Broader impacts: Industry 4.0 is projected to add
$2.2 trillion to domestic GDP by 2025. The value of the operational
transformation to the global manufacturing industry is estimated to be
$3.7T/year. To remain competitive, manufacturers need to be able to rapidly
adapt to changing markets, which requires having a well-prepared workforce. The
proposed planning activities will identify tools and technologies that could be
developed to enable successful implementation of Industry 4.0, and thereby
enhance work environments, position workers to be successful at their jobs, and
increase competitiveness of U.S. companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.