* 2026652
* FW-HTF-P: A Socio-technical Approach to Help the HR Function of the Future: Identifying and Preventing Discriminatory Recruitment Practices in the Technology Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Winfred Arthur, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Despite greater awareness of the value of broadening participation in STEM
fields and movements to do so, discrimination in hiring remains a problem. The
high technology sector is particularly notable for the very low numbers of
women, African American, and Hispanic American computer scientists and
engineers. A key reason for the low participation is that implicit biases at
different stages of recruitment perpetuate the inequitable status quo. To begin
to solve this problem, discrimination in recruiting must be understood in
detail. This work aims to work toward improving human resources (HR) practices
by improving training that uses state-of-the-art technologies to help people
avoid unconsciously falling into discriminatory behavior. A potential long-term
societal benefit of this work would be more equitable hiring processes. Such an
improvement could increase hiring of diverse teams, thus increasing creativity
and innovation in the workplace. In addition, more diverse teams can help to
reduce stereotype threat, since sterotypes break down as more people from
underrepresented groups are included. Toward these goals, the research team
plans to conduct an interdisciplinary workshop with industry representatives and
experts from HR management, the social sciences, and computer science to
identify sources of bias and propose solutions to address them. This workshop is
expected to lay the foundation and the research agenda necessary to submit a
full Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging the expertise of HR management, psychology,
and sociology professionals, in partnership with computer scientists and
engineers, this convergent research team plans to gain a deep understanding of
where and what kinds of bias occur in the recruitment process for high
technology workers. Participants will explore potential interventions to
identify or prevent bias through the use of future technologies such as virtual
reality, augmented reality, and artificial intelligence-powered tools. The
research team will attempt to answer the following questions through this
project: What are the standard practices of the technology industry's
recruitment process? How much do practices vary from company to company? In what
phases of the recruitment process does bias occur, and what types of biases
occur? What types of evidence are produced by biased recruiting practices? What
technologies are useful for identifying and preventing bias? This project has
been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-
directorate program to facilitate convergent research to promote deeper basic
understanding of the interdependent human-technology partnership to advance
societal needs by advancing design of intelligent work technologies that operate
in harmony with human workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.