* 2026776
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Data Capabilities: Rapid response to existing community demand through next generation web infrastructure to integrate Argo and GO-SHIP
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sarah Purkey, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 231,182.00

Hydrographic measurements of physical and biogeochemical properties in the ocean
support broad research, including carbon content and uptake; ocean heat content,
fluxes, and transport; surface and deep current calculations and modeling. At
present, two separate data facilities are serving global hydrographic data for
their respective programs. Argovis provides access and tools for data from the
global array of Argo floats, which profile the oceans to record temperature,
salinity, pressure, and an emerging set of biogeochemical measurements. The
CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data Office (CCHDO) serves vessel-based data from
the global Global Ocean Ship-based Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-
SHIP), providing reference-quality temperature and salinity data from repeated
visits to the same locations, plus a large set of tracer, nutrient, and chemical
data from analyzed water samples. The proposed work will create interoperability
across these two systems, allowing scientists to search, access, and work with
data from both facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on past and
current investments in Argovis and GO-SHIP technologies, informed by the SeaView
EarthCube Integrative Activityâ€™s experience integrating across ocean data
facilities. As part of the proposed infrastructure, the databases will deliver
dynamic data selection via new API capabilities and allow visualizations, co-
location, and comparison on web applications otherwise not possible with simple
file archives. The project will be aligned with contemporary web standards and
practices. Interoperability will allow Argovis users to continue using the
interface they are familiar with, with the added ability to search and integrate
GO-SHIP data from a user-defined proximity to data in Argovis. GO-SHIP users
will similarly be able to transition seamlessly to the new tools from the GOSHIP
website and access Argovis data near GO-SHIP lines or profiles of interest.
Project outcomes will be inherently sustainable: after development, the long-
term maintenance of some of the tools will be covered by the ongoing GO-SHIP
core support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.