* 2026866
* NSFGEO-NERC: Quantifying evolution of magmatism and serpentinisation during the onset of seafloor spreading
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 495,131.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
ivestigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean basins form
when continents break up and rift apart, allowing mantle rock beneath to rise up
between the continental margins, melt, and form new oceanic crust. When there is
abundant melting, this process looks like the formation of oceanic crust at mid-
ocean ridges. However, in some magma poor margins, the continental crust
stretches and thins by faulting and allows mantle to rise beneath the crust and
be exposed to water penetrating down faults. Combined with water, mantle forms a
rock called serpentinite, rich in hydrated talc minerals and magnetite, a
magnetic and electrically conductive mineral. It is important to understand more
about the process of continental rifting but the seismic method, the most
commonly used geophysical tool, has trouble differentiating between lower
crustal rocks and serpentinized mantle. Electromagnetic (EM) geophysical methods
allow the electrical conductivity of the crust and mantle to be imaged, and this
project will use a combination of seismic methods and EM methods to study a
magma poor margin southwest of the UK. From this a better understanding of the
fundamental tectonic, chemical, and thermal history of continental breakup will
be gained. The thermal history is important to the generation of hydrocarbons in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The breakup of continents involves a complex
interplay of extensional tectonics and magmatism. The final stages of this
process, resulting in the initiation of seafloor spreading, remain poorly
understood. One common end-member involves hyper-extended continental crust and
broad regions of exhumed and serpentinized (hydrated) mantle. Serpentinization
at mid-ocean ridges, rifted margins and subduction zones mediates geochemical
exchange between the lithosphere and the hydrosphere. There is evidence that
normal faulting plays a key role in supplying fluids driving serpentinization
beneath hyper-extended continental crust and possibly in regions of exhumed
mantle. However, the seismic P-wave velocities of mafic crustal rocks and of
serpentinized mantle rocks are similar, so interpretations of seismic data are
uncertain. Serpentinized mantle rocks are generally more conductive, often by
about an order of magnitude, than mafic crustal rocks, so controlled source
electromagnetic (CSEM) and magnetotelluric (MT) techniques provide a promising
route to resolve controversies around lithospheric structure. This project will
focus on the magma-poor Goban Spur rifted margin to (i) acquire coincident high-
quality CSEM, MT, and wide-angle seismic datasets along two carefully chosen
transects; (ii) use these data to obtain coincident high-resolution seismic
velocity and resistivity models for the upper few kilometers of the lithosphere,
and lower-resolution models to tens of kilometers depth; (iii) interpret the
resulting models to quantify regional and local variations in mantle
serpentinization and magmatic addition; (iv) reconcile these observations with
numerical models of lithospheric extension, mantle hydration, and decompression
melting as seafloor spreading is initiated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.