* 2026074
* SBIR Phase II:  Redefining Air Conditioning: Commercializing Hyper-Efficient Rotary Heat Exchanger for Residential and Commercial HVAC Energy Reduction
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthew Miller, Nativus Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will develop a room air conditioner (RAC) that reduces
electricity consumption and decreases carbon dioxide and other emissions. The
need for space cooling is expected to increase both in the U.S. and globally.
With current technologies achieving only incrementally better energy efficiency,
consumer costs and grid loads will worsen. The proposed technology will lead to
an estimated 67% reduction in energy costs for consumers and a higher quality of
life through improved indoor air quality. Billions of RACs are predicted to be
sold in the next 30 years, requiring $1.2T in power generation capacity;
investments that can be significantly reduced by improved efficiencies such as
the proposed RAC. Internet-of-things (IoT) IoT functionalities for RACs will
allow further energy efficiency as the units will respond automatically to grid
demand signals. The additional benefits are improved indoor air quality through
the RACâ€™s air filtration functionality, improved external air quality from
emissions reductions, reduced noise pollution from more efficient system
operation, and reduced solid waste generation from longer product life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to finalize and
validate prototyping through bench-top and third-party laboratory testing,
demonstrate and verify air conditioner performance through field pilot testing
and evaluation, and finalize design-for-manufacturability (DFM) and IoT
integration of field-ready prototypes. Within these tasks, this project will
perform component-level optimization of the heat exchanger, compressor, magnetic
linkage, and housing assembly. The testing phase will collect verification and
validation data in multiple relevant real-world
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.