* 2026863
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Data Capabilities: Project Pythia: A Community Learning Resource for Geoscientists
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Brian Rose, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 379,311.00

Project Pythia will provide a public, web-accessible training resource that will
help educate current, and aspiring, earth scientists to more effectively use
both the Scientific Python Ecosystem and Cloud Computing to make sense of huge
volumes of numerical scientific data. Numerical simulations run on
supercomputers are used in the study of climate, weather, atmospheric chemistry,
wildfires, space weather, and more. Similarly, a tremendous volume of digital
data produced by numerical simulations, or observations made with instruments,
are analyzed with the help of powerful computers and software. Scientists thus
need to be able to effectively analyze, manipulate, and make sense of
potentially vast volumes of data. This project focuses on two technologies that
have emerged and are being adopted by scientific communities relatively
recently: Cloud Computing platforms and a software ecosystem of scientific tools
built around the open source programming language called Python.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Pythia will construct and deploy a trusted,
community-oriented education and training resource to improve computing literacy
in all areas relevant to the analysis of geoscientific data, with a particular
emphasis on moving workflows to the Cloud. Project Pythia will leverage Jupyter
Notebooks as the primary delivery mechanism for training examples, curricula,
and as an interactive computing platform. The content for Project Pythia will be
hosted on GitHub and maintained using an Open Development model that will
facilitate and encourage contributions from a broad user community, as well as
help ensure the long-term sustainability of the project. Content development and
new user growth will be catalyzed through data-intensive classroom and research
activities at SUNY at Albany. The result will be one of the world's go-to,
community-owned sites for geoscientists and students who want to know what tools
to use and how to use them to explore geoscience data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.