* 2026865
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Data Capabilities: Enabling analysis of heterogeneous, multi-source cryospheric data
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Farnoush Banaei-Kashani, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 251,816.00

Sea ice is an important component of the climate system and an indicator of
climate change. Sea ice data products are used in a variety of geosciences
including physical and biological oceanography, climatology and meteorology. As
a result of the combined effect of currents, winds, temperature fluctuations,
and local and global climate patterns, sea ice is spatiotemporally dynamic,
exhibiting a variety of evolving ice types that need classification for
scientific analysis as well as operational planning for marine activities in the
Arctic and Antarctic. The mapping and classification of sea ice, however,
remains a scientific challenge, especially at high spatial and temporal
resolutions. This project will build tools to make these data more readily
accessible and lower barriers to the usage of federally funded data, especially
by underrepresented researchers with less access to strong computational and/or
educational resources. To ensure wide adoption, the project team will also
develop related interactive tutorials and lab modules designed for students with
little to no background in data science methods applicable to geoscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase in the
volume and variety of available data, due to both increases in the number of
remote sensing instruments collecting data over the Arctic, growth in the number
of models and the number of variables output by these models, creating an
opportunity for high-resolution spatiotemporal sea ice mapping. The sheer volume
and heterogeneity of such data pose a significant challenge to efficient and
effective integration and analysis. The work will create modules for combining
heterogeneous data products (e.g., satellite-borne passive microwave, SAR
imagery from Sentinel-1, IceBridge, ICESat and ICESat-2 and the upcoming NISAR
mission) and enable featurization of these heterogeneous data products using
machine learning methods such as Restricted Boltzmann Machines and Deep
Autoencoders to reduce the data to effectively represent the data while reducing
size and dimensionality of the data. The project will build a modularized, semi-
automatic, and interactive visual labeling platform utilizing the features
generated by deep learning models for scalable labeled dataset creation, and
integrate these products into the ecosystem of EarthCube services and user
communities, and make the products available to the broader geoscience
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.