* 2026575
* FW-HTF-P: Collaborative Research: Wearable Safety and Health Assistive Robot Collaboration for Skilled Construction Workers
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Chao Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 05/31/2022
* USD 60,000.00

The research objective of this FW-HTF planning project is to build a synergistic
team and provide symbiotic solutions to develop and deploy wearable safety and
health assistive robots for skilled construction workers. Currently,
construction workers suffer intense physical effort, and serious safety and
health risk in hazardous working environments. As a result, construction
industry becomes one of the highest-risk private sectors in the US. Shortage of
skilled workers brings additional challenges and pressures to construction
industry to improve workers' safety and health. Wearable robotic technology
provides promising potentials to prevent work-related musculoskeletal disorders,
assess and assist physical and fatigue, and learn and train worker skills in
construction trades. The project will enable the development and deployment of
personalized wearable assistive robot collaboration for skilled construction
workers. The researchers will also develop a number of integrated research and
education programs to attract students from underrepresented groups into
engineering and involve undergraduate students into
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although robotics technologies have been
increasingly used in construction applications, most focus on the use of robots
to help conduct construction tasks and few discusses the use of industrial
exoskeletons for improving workers' safety and health. In this planning project,
the team of researchers plan to build a synergistic team and identify potential
topics and symbiotic solutions to achieve the above research goal. Specifically,
this project will emphasize on: (1) develop light-weight, flexible, high-
performance, personalized wearable exoskeletons for construction workers; (2)
develop machine learning-based human skill modeling and training in
construction, and (3) initiate new cross-disciplinary collaboration and foster
engagement with industry partners and stakeholders. The proposed robotic
development and pilot study will provide deep understanding of technical and
socio-economic challenges for integrating robotic technologies into existing
socio-technical ecosystems of work. The planning grant will also study the
effects of the significant shifts in human work on individual, organization and
industries with a focus specifically on construction work. The ultimate goal of
this project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research
infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying
future technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.