* 2026945
* RAPID: Tracking and Evaluation of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Epidemic Propagation by Finding and Maintaining Live Knowledge in Social Media
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Accurate situational awareness becomes an increasingly difficult challenge in
rapidly changing environments. With currently exponential growth of COVID-19
confirmed cases, timely and reliable information becomes extremely important for
informed decision making. Official reports based on confirmed test results are
reliable, but widely considered to be a subset of the real situation. In
contrast, social media provide broad coverage, but they have low reliability due
to significant misinformation and disinformation or inaccurate news. With the
gradual opening of businesses in the US, while the prospect of an effective
vaccine remains uncertain, the need for reliable and accurate situation
awareness becomes paramount, since the decisions for further business openings
and practices of social distancing will depend on the information and perception
of risks of contagion and the need for economic recovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the technical challenges of finding
new, verifiable facts from noisy online media and social networks in a timely
manner. Social media contain the necessary timely information, but they also
carry significant challenges represented by misinformation, disinformation, and
concept drift. Traditional machine learning (ML) models trained from closed data
sets have been unable to meet these challenges when faced with true novelty in
evolving new data, beyond the fixed training data. To handle these challenges,
the Evidence-Based Knowledge Acquisition (EBKA) approach automates the
integration of noisy social media data such as Twitter and Weibo with
recognized, respected authoritative sources to detect verifiable facts timely
and reliably. The project build on the LITMUS software tools to provide timely
and reliable information com complement physical test result data, and enable
better informed decision making by government officials, first responders, and
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.