* 2026607
* FW-HTF-P: Understanding the Social and Ethical Implications of Algorithmic Decision Making by Nurses Using the Rothman Index in a Large-Scale Hospital Setting
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Shion Guha, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 12/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

With a shift towards value-based care, healthcare organizations are seeking
innovative ways to improve the quality of care while reducing costs. The next
several decades will see a rise in algorithm-driven patient care and the
widespread use of data-driven warning systems such as the Rothman Index. The
Rothman Index is an algorithmic system that uses patient information, lab
results, and other health-related data to predict health deterioration.
Algorithmic systems such as the Rothman will undoubtedly change what it means to
daily work in the field of healthcare, demanding new kinds of expertise and
communication from an already over-extended workforce. While such systems may
reduce staffing needs, they do not eliminate the need for human oversight and
intervention. Understanding how traditionally trained healthcare practitioners
interact with such systems is, therefore, vital for the successful
implementation of algorithmic patient care. To accomplish this goal, this
project seeks to expand our understanding of how nurses in the Virtual Intensive
Care Unit (VICU) make algorithmically informed workplace decisions using the
Rothman Index. More broadly, the project examines how healthcare workers mediate
between algorithms and patient interaction. Consequently, it informs future
training protocols, system redesign and revision, and overall optimization of
similar futuristic algorithmic tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
employ a participatory and worker-centered design process for implementing
algorithmic patient care through close collaborations with healthcare workers to
advance the technical design of the Rothman Index. It will focus on the
experiences of the virtual nurses, the providers who currently mediate between
the Rothman Index alerts and health practitioners on the floor, in making actual
algorithmic decisions. The project’s foundation is relationship-building with
relevant hospital stakeholders followed by collecting and analyzing preliminary
data about experiences with the Rothman Index in the VICU work environment,
including observations and interviews with virtual nursing staff and
deidentified quantitative usage data extracted from the Rothman Index system.
Drawing on preliminary findings, hospital stakeholders will be engaged in
participatory design to improve workplace protocols and practices around
algorithmic decision making. Subsequently, this project will inform three
fundamental research challenges: (1) technical communication research on how
cognition and memory facilitate workplace writing processes and the impacts of
electronic systems on patient-provider and provider-provider communication; (2)
organizational research on the synergistic mechanisms that successfully enable
VICU; and (3) computer science research on the social and ethical implications
of algorithmic interventions such as the Rothman Index. Furthermore, this
research will open door to studying many related problems: (a) feasibility of
algorithmic patient care for preventative population outreach programs; (b)
predictions of job displacements caused by algorithmic patient care
implementation and anticipatory workforce training; (c) future algorithmic
design for healthcare workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.