* 2026026
* SBIR Phase I:  Wear and Corrosion Resistant Engineered Surfaces for Lightweight Metals
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Brandon Strahin, PRECISION SURFACE SCIENCE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the ability to improve fuel efficiency and
reduce carbon dioxide emissions in transportation. Lightweight metals, such as
aluminum, magnesium, and titanium, are particularly desirable for alloys used in
automotive and aerospace components, as they could reduce the weight of
components by 30%-70%. However, it is difficult to coat these materials because
the high temperatures required for the coating processes weaken the alloys. This
project will develop a new process to conduct the coating process at lower
temperatures, offering high load capacity and enhanced wear and corrosion
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project utilizes a high-pressure gas nitriding medium to enable surface
reactions for coating lightweight metals, allowing for lower treatment
temperatures at or below 450C. Traditional engineered surfaces are often
incompatible with lightweight metals because of cracking that destroys the
functional properties. Furthermore, coating these alloys presents challenges
because they distort at relatively low temperatures. This novel approach of
nitriding at high pressures provides a chemically converted surface layer that
prepares the surface for a secondary surface treatment, such as diamond-like
carbon coatings or metal oxides, that typically fail on lightweight metals. The
multi-layer approach also provides enhanced corrosion resistance by disrupting
diffusion pathways of corrosive media. Combining a hard and stiff sublayer with
a softer top layer with lower elastic modulus provides a multi-layer surface for
lightweight metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.