* 2026027
* SBIR Phase II:  AI-Driven Orientation and Mobility System for the Blind
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Cagri Zaman, VIRTUAL COLLABORATION RESEARCH INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2023
* USD 999,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to advance computer vision for navigation to
support independence for individuals with visual impairment. Roughly eight 8
million individuals in the US live with blindness or visual impairment, which
severely reduces a person’s ability to independently navigate in new spaces and
consequently limits participation in social and economic life. The lack of
independence directly leads to disadvantages in completing formal education and
joining the workforce. This project is aimed at creating a breakthrough
orientation and mobility system as an application narrating environments and
providing the ability to record and retrace routes in indoor environments. The
core technological innovation is a multimodal neural network architecture
capable of learning robust spatial representations and efficiently operating on
mobile devices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will introduce a
novel artificial intelligence (AI)-driven Orientation and Mobility System to
assist individuals with visual impairment in crucial navigation tasks. This
proposal will generate contextually relevant, task-oriented spatial information
from smartphone cameras. The research tasks include: (1) Development of
optimization and data augmentation techniques for improved runtime performance
for a broad range of mobile devices; (2) Development of verbal narration of
environments as well as route creation and tracking, (3) Co-design and testing
with potential users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.