* 2026345
* The Big Data Revolution and Oceans Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Lisa Campbell, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 414,248.00

This project is about the role of science and “Big Data” in ocean management.
The Big Data revolution is increasing knowledge about oceans and human impacts
on them. This knowledge both fuels and is fueled by interest in development and
conservation opportunities in oceans. Ocean data science initiatives (ODSIs) use
new data and technologies to support government and non-government
organizations’ work to extend, reform and create new policies for ocean
management. The project brings together a diverse team of human geographers,
marine ecologists, geospatial data scientists and information scientists. A
postdoctoral researcher, doctoral student and master’s student will gain
experience in transdisciplinary science collaboration. Results will be widely
disseminated to state, private and non-profit organizations. Research outputs
will include an open access catalog of ODSIs and ODSI
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many new initiatives using Big Data to
influence and improve environmental policy generally. This is particularly true
in oceans, where government and non-government initiatives include using new
technology to support seafood traceability and satellite imagery to detect
illegal fishing activities. This project examines the role of ODSIs in improved
ocean management, at global and regional scales, focusing on two key questions:
1) What kinds of new policies are possible based on knowledge that ODSIs
generate? 2) How can ODSIs inform policies for ocean management in ways that
that support environmental sustainability and human well-being? This research is
timely as more ODSIs will likely emerge through the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science. Results will make theoretical contributions to the geographies of
Big Data and environmental management. In addition to academic publications and
conference presentations, user-friendly products will be shared with the general
public via the Monterey Bay Aquarium’s public outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.