* 2026344
* Conformable systems for spatiotemporal decoding of facial strains
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Canan Dagdeviren, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,997.00

Many neuromuscular disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), often
manifest themselves through physiological changes including gradual loss of the
ability to exercise fine motor skills and to vocalize intelligible speech.
Predictable methods for continuous tracking of dynamic skin strain on the face,
therefore, can enable new forms of communication for individuals with such
disorders. Present methods for in vivo characterization of facial deformations
involve electromyography (EMG), skin impedance measurements, or camera tracking.
Yet these typically result in high uncertainties or have bulky structures with
highly visible interfaces to soft skin, presenting difficulty for continuous use
in daily life, especially for individuals with neuromuscular disorders. The aim
of the proposed research is to realize conformable sensors and systems that can
translate patterns of facial soft tissue biomechanics in vivo into interpretable
electrical signals to enable new forms of non-verbal communication. The
concepts, materials, system design and characterization methods to be introduced
in this project can offer new routes for rapid, in vivo biokinematic assessment
of epidermal surfaces during dynamic movements. Such systems can help for
continuous clinical monitoring of a wide range of neuromuscular conditions,
where variations are anticipated due either to (i) time-dependent alterations in
muscle movements, and thus measurable epidermal deformations due to
neurodegeneration progression, or (ii) a response throughout medical therapy.
The proposed interdisciplinary project will be integrated with educational and
outreach activities, including interdisciplinary classes on the microfabrication
of conformable sensors and the development of lower-power, computationally light
paradigms for medical sensing for underrepresented students all the way from
K-12 to graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precise measurements of soft
tissue biokinematics, such as skin strain during facial deformations, can be
used to computationally recognize distinct facial motions, and thus facilitate
nonverbal communication for patients who lack the ability to speak or interact
with traditional electronic communication interfaces. However, existing
nonverbal communication systems are unsuitable for use on curvilinear regions of
the body, such as the face. A widely deployable system for real-time detection
of facial motions, when combined with the use of low-cost materials, easily
manufacturable processes, and a seamless pipeline for fabrication, testing, and
validation, offers unprecedented potential for clinically realizable nonverbal
communication technologies. The primary goal of the proposed research is to
introduce a set of materials, device designs, fabrication steps, theoretical
calculations, simulations, and validation protocols that realize robust,
mechanically-adaptive, predictable, and visually-invisible in vivo monitoring of
spatiotemporal epidermal strains and decoding of distinct facial deformation
signatures through the use of conformable devices comprised of piezoelectric
thin films on compliant substrates. The challenges that will be addressed during
the course of the project include: 1) Development of a conformable Facial Code
Extrapolation Sensor (cFaCES), 2) Three-Dimensional Digital Image Correlation
(3D-DIC) for spatiotemporal assessment of soft tissues under dynamic
deformations, and 3) In vivo Real-Time Decoding (RTD) on both healthy and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) subjects during various facial deformations.
The proposed work will build upon the PI's interdisciplinary expertise and
experience in piezoelectric, microfabricated biomedical devices and conformable
systems. The proposed system will introduce a novel device design and
microfabrication strategy, along with a framework and advanced algorithms that
will be a key enabler to reconstruct spatiotemporally accurate strain maps for
any human body soft tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.