* 2026210
* Ecological and environmental determinants of epigenetic aging
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Kristen Navara, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 853,295.00

Because of its near universal occurrence, understanding the causes and
consequences of aging is central to broad biological, ecological, and
evolutionary questions. Recent advances demonstrate a central role of the
epigenome in mediating biological aging as it provides a molecular context for
integrating both intrinsic and extrinsic forces. The purpose of this project is
to discover fundamental mechanisms by which the environment directs epigenetic
aging trajectories to ultimately impact organismal function. The project will
utilize the tractable and ecologically relevant fish, Japanese medaka as a model
system as much of their genome and physiology are broadly conserved across the
animal kingdom. The study will support the training and mentoring of a
postdoctoral researcher, two graduate students, and an undergraduate researcher,
with recruiting efforts aimed at under-represented groups in the sciences. The
project will develop a primer that introduces fundamental concepts in life
history ecology and evolution, and will highlight variable life histories
observed across the animal kingdom. The primer and project findings will be
presented to students at area schools as part of an established outreach
program. Together, this work will advance current understanding of how
interactions between organisms and their environment affect biological aging and
will provide training opportunities for the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will focus on recently developed epigenetic aging
clocks to advance an ontogenetic- and endocrine-based understanding of how
ecological and environmental challenges shape biological aging and attendant
variation in the timing of live history events (e.g., age at maturity).
Epigenetic aging clocks are based on age-dependent DNA methylation patterning
and summarize the readout of age-associated hyper- and hypo-methylation from a
selection of loci across the genome which are collectively capable of predicting
chronological age with high accuracy. Despite their unprecedented accuracy, the
age indicated by epigenetic clocks can differ from an individualâ€™s actual age.
This is referred to as epigenetic-to-chronological age discordance, and the
magnitude and directionality of this discordance are associated with
physiological function and life history traits. The origins of epigenetic-to-
chronological age discordance are not resolved, and this project aims to
investigate the role of ecological and environmental dynamics in driving this
discordance. The project will also test the role of specific endocrine signaling
pathways in mediating the influence of the environment on epigenetic aging.
Interactions between organisms and their environments can result in different
outcomes depending on when during life they occur. Age-dependent epigenetic
patterning appears especially dynamic during early life and experiments will
test if environment-organism interactions exert disproportionate influences
during specific life stages. Collectively, project findings will provide a novel
perspective regarding the proximal mechanisms by which environmental factors are
translated into aging trajectories to affect organismal function and produce
variable life histories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.