* 2026965
* RAPID: Glycocalyx engineering to probe the role of mucin structure in coronavirus transmission and infection
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Jessica Kramer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,276.00

Project Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry are funding Dr. Jessica R.
Kramer from The University of Utah to study the role of mucus composition in
coronavirus (COV) transmission. COV-related diseases have emerged as a serious
public health threat. Airborne droplets from an infected person’s cough, sneeze,
or even talking are a major source of viral spread. These droplets stem from
virus-laden mucosalivary fluid and land on the mucus membranes of the next
potential host (mouth, airway, eyes) or on hard surfaces. There, the virus is
dispersed for the next infection. Mucus is produced in hundreds of forms that
vary between species, and even person-to-person. The forms present could affect
how easily the viruses pass through the mucus membrane, especially since some
types bind directly to COVs. Mucus forms could also affect the concentration and
viability of COVs in airborne droplets. The goal of this project is to identify
the forms of mucus that result in increased airborne COV transmission and
infection. This will be accomplished by simulation of cough droplets produced
from varied mucus and using human cells coated with varied mucus. This knowledge
could lead to development of new therapeutics that disrupt COV-mucus binding, or
identify populations more vulnerable to COV transmission and infection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project undertakes study of the role
of mucin glycoprotein structures in coronavirus (COV) transmission via airborne
particles, fomite objects, and in cellular entry through the glycocalyx.
Epithelial tissue is coated with protective mucins that are secreted to form
mucus and also tethered to the cell surface to form the glycocalyx. COVs must
traverse these layers before entry into host cells for replication. Viral
transmission through expelled airborne mucosalivary droplets is a major mode of
transmission. Mucins are produced with a variety of attached glycans specific to
each host. These glycans alter the viscoelasticity of mucosalivary fluid and
directly bind to COV spike proteins. These factors could affect virus loading
and viability in airborne particles and could affect docking and diffusion at
the cell surface. However, such questions have been challenging to answer
because native mucin glycosylation is poorly-defined and not tunable by current
biological methods. The PI’s lab will synthesize mucin analogs with tunable COV-
binding glycan patterns and will use them to engineer the glycocalyx of live
cell surfaces. Coughs will be simulated and the role of mucin structure in
airborne respiratory droplet COV transmission will be examined by
characterization of droplet morphology, and viral loading and viability. Docking
and diffusion at the cell surface, as well as replication, will be quantified on
live epithelial cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.