* 2026559
* FW-HTF-P: Investigating Acceptability in the Workforce of Collaborative Robots that Provide and Request Assistance on an As-Needed Basis
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Zhaleh Semnani-Azad, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 10/31/2022
* USD 149,999.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the social acceptability of
collaborative robotic assistants, as-needed, amongst human workers in
manufacturing and warehousing to address fear of workplace robots. The project
investigates the perception of robotic assistants that attempt to preserve
independence, recognition of worker contribution, and emotional well-being,
while ensuring safety. This is done by contributing artificial intelligence (AI)
that enables robots to intervene for assistance in simultaneous physical
interactions such as object lifting only when necessary, i.e., on an as-needed
basis. The work has the potential to revitalize manufacturing in rural North
America, where fear of robots taking over human jobs is prevalent. The research
team will be extensively involved in developing connections with the St.
Lawrence County Industrial Development Agency, targeted toward supporting small
businesses in the North Country Area. Through these connections, the research
team will collaborate with local workers and managers to understand perceptions
of robotics in the workplace. They will also provide demonstrations of proposed
AI technology that provides assistance only when necessary, in order to preserve
worker independence and job security while ensuring safety. The project will
involve researchers at the confluence of robotics, organizational psychology,
and physical therapy, and provide multi-disciplinary research and curricular
opportunities to students from 2-year and 4-year colleges with limited
technological opportunities in the North Country region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
part of this planning grant, two objectives will be accomplished. First, the
researchers will engage in strengthening collaborations in the area of socially
acceptable robotics by forging partnerships with companies contributing and
using work-place AI, and by organizing a workshop on large-scale concerns for
socially acceptable workplace robotics. Second, a novel prototype AI system will
be created that automatically predicts need for assistance from multi-viewpoint,
multi-modal sensor captures of subjects participating in attempts to lift
cartons of varying sizes, masses, and mass distributions. The research team will
conduct studies on the effectiveness of the AI system in predicting assistance
need by recruiting human participants from the workforce. The planning phase
will advance knowledge in future technology and future workers through the
contribution of the intelligent need for assistance algorithms, and the
assessment of social acceptability of assistance predictors for workplace
robotics. Discussions through the workshop are expected to contribute novel
lines of thought on multiple fronts: (a) design of AI algorithms for workplace
robots that are mindful of large-scale concerns such as assurance of emotional
well-being and job-security of large employee groups across several levels; (b)
balancing perceptions of safety versus independence from viewpoints of multiple
stakeholders, e.g., workers, managers, business owners, and end-users; (c)
effect of demographic, geographic, and socioeconomic factors; and (d) long-term
economic impact of varying levels of robot autonomy. The ultimate goal of this
project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research infrastructure,
and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying future
technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.