* 2026512
* FW-HTF-P: The Future of Workplace Wellness
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Dosun Shin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,343.00

Workplace wellness programs are on the rise. In a recent report by the US
Chamber of Commerce, it was reported that a large majority of employers are
committed to workplace wellness. Recent research shows that broad participation
by employees, across the full spectrum of income levels, is a large factor for
the effectiveness of workplace wellness programs. Studies have found that
participation from employees on the lower end of the income distribution was
low, while participation from higher income employees with good health practices
was high. This suggests that workplace wellness programs shift costs onto low-
income employees with high health care spending and poor health habits. In this
context, to address future corporate wellness need, there is a significant
opportunity for using inexpensive sensing technology, new workplace designs, and
artificial intelligence (AI) tools that together can deliver new solutions into
employeesâ€™ workspaces, and help address the growing need for scaling wellness
practices. This project envisions the future of workplace wellness as embedded,
engaging, empowering, and economical -- embedded into daily routines, empowered
via AI enabled insights, engaging via powerful real-time media-based feedback
approaches, and made economical by a comprehensive design approach spanning
sensors, algorithms, product, and industrial design. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Our
interdisciplinary project brings together disciplines as wide as engineering,
health sciences, economics, design, and media-arts. We integrate emerging
technologies like low-power sensing using wearables to develop measures of
subject activity to improve personalized wellness protocols. We will develop AI
methods to convert low-grade sensor data, to surrogates of clinically relevant
features that correlate with health metrics. New ergonomic designs of workspaces
will be developed, with wellness relevant instrumentation, aimed at reaching
higher compliance with wellness recommendations. Biofeedback using real-time
media-based ambient auditory and haptic-based methods will be developed for
long-term joyful engagement with wellness. At the same time, wellness coaches
will participate in the design and development of the technology solutions; not
just to understand how they work, but to appreciate their strengths and
weaknesses, and help structure their development in close collaboration with
designers and technologists. Finally, we will develop new measures and metrics,
including economic impacts of AI techniques on potential gains from increased
productivity. The future development of our project will lead to corporate
wellness programs based on experience-based knowledge of human behavior and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.