* 2026484
* Electrically Injected Ultraviolet AlGaN Photonic Nanocrystal Surface Emitting Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Zetian Mi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 375,000.00

This project is related to the demonstration of surface emitting semiconductor
lasers operating in the mid-ultraviolet (UV) spectrum, which will enable many
revolutionary applications, ranging from replacing bulky and toxic excimer
lasers in the production of integrated circuits to ultra-high-density optical
storage to high-resolution spectral analysis and biomedical diagnosis. To date,
there have been no demonstration of surface emitting laser diodes operating in
the mid and deep UV spectra, which has been limited by the presence of extensive
defects and dislocations of conventional aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN)
materials, poor current conduction, and low reflectivity of AlGaN-based
distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs). Consequently, the current mid and deep UV
light sources are based on mercury and xenon lamps, which are power hungry,
bulky, and expensive and often contain toxic substances. In this project, by
utilizing aluminum gallium nitride nanostructures, the researchers will address
these fundamental challenges and will design and develop a new generation of
surface emitting laser diodes that can operate efficiently in the UV spectrum.
Success of this project will open a new paradigm for achieving efficient solid-
state UV light sources, which may enable the only likely alternative technology
to replace conventional excimer lasers and mercury lamps for water purification
and disinfection. This project provides the opportunity to educate students in a
broad range of topics, ranging from nanomaterials, photonics, nanotechnology,
and optoelectronics. The highly interdisciplinary nature of the proposed
research also allows the investigator to provide research and training
opportunities to involve undergraduate, underrepresented minorities, and K-12
through various planned activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigator proposes to develop all-semiconductor based, electrically injected,
low threshold surface emitting laser diodes operating in the UV-B band (280-315
nm). Surface emitting lasing will be achieved by exploiting the two-dimensional
resonance modes of dislocation-free aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN) photonic
nanocrystals, instead of using conventional resistive and dislocated AlGaN
distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs). Moreover, efficient p-type conduction, that
was not previously possible in wide bandgap aluminum nitride (AlN) and Al-rich
AlGaN, will be achieved by exploiting the formation of a magnesium (Mg) acceptor
impurity band in defect-free AlGaN nanocrystals. (Al)GaN dot-in-nanocrystal
heterostructures will be grown and characterized, which will overcome the
challenges associated with nonradiative surface recombination, as well as the
large transparency carrier density of wide bandgap semiconductors, thereby
enabling low threshold UV lasers that were not previously possible. A detailed
understanding of the laser performance, including threshold, wall-plug
efficiency, near and far-field profile, stability and reliability will be
performed. Success of this project will open a new paradigm for developing low
threshold surface emitting laser diodes operating in the UV spectrum, wherein
the device performance is no longer limited by the lack of high quality DBRs,
large lattice mismatch, and substrate availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.