* 2026961
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Solutions for Paleobotany: a web client hosting novel content and its integration with existing databases
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ellen Currano, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,199,960.00

Fossil plants provide the best record of how Earth’s environments have changed
through time. However, plant fossils present unique challenges that previously
made this record inaccessible for large scale studies of Earth History. Plant
organs, like leaves, wood, fruits, seeds are rarely preserved attached to each
other, and it can be difficult to associate different organs as part of the same
plant and assign formal taxonomic names to the isolated organs. None of the
major paleontological databases can accommodate the informal names that are
commonly used for isolated organs, and the necessary tools to coordinate such
fossil plant data across institutions, researchers, time periods, and geography
do not exist. This project will create the integrative Paleobotany Database
(PBOT), an online public database of fossil plant descriptions for both
informally and formally-named fossils, work-bench software, and community
discussion forums. PBOT will integrate with existing online database resources,
including museum specimen and occurrence records, to enable research on past
plant diversity and evolution at scales not previously possible. PBOT will
advance NSF’s mission of transparency in science, by making paleobotanical data
and the scientific process more open and accessible to a broad range of users.
For example, the database will make fossil plant data available to the public
and educators at all levels for use in hands-on educational activities and for
citizen science initiatives. Furthermore, the online workbench will provide a
standardized resource for fossil plant description and data entry that will
benefit students and professionals, as well as fossil enthusiasts. Overall, the
PBOT infrastructure and platform will revolutionize the way paleobotanical data
is shared and used, allowing for a myriad of scientific and societal uses, and
charting a sustainable, long-term digital future for paleobotanical data
management and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleobotanical data is severely
underrepresented in major publicly accessible databases, even though fossil
plants represent the best record of ancient terrestrial environments. A major
impediment to the inclusion of paleobotanical data in databases at meaningful
levels of taxonomy is that plant parts are most often preserved separately, with
varying potential for taxonomic resolution. Paleobotanists therefore commonly
use morphologically-based, informal taxonomies (morphotypes) rather than
traditional Linnaean classifications. The names given to a particular morphotype
are inconsistent among research groups, and currently there is no data-
management infrastructure that allows comparison and synonymizing of morphotypes
among regions or time periods or with published formal taxonomies. As a result,
a large proportion of the millions of fossil plant specimens housed in museums
worldwide are, together with their spatio-temporal occurrence data, inaccessible
for inclusion in studies of paleobiology, paleoclimatology, Earth system
modeling, macroevolution, and macroecology. This project will provide a long-
needed solution to these problems by extending the Paleobiology Database (PBDB)
with a Paleobotany Portal (PBOT) web client and database for (1) creating novel,
dynamic, community-sourced character schemas for morphotypic plant descriptions;
(2) entering and browsing informal and formal taxonomies via morphological
characters; (3) applying these formal and informal taxonomies to digitized
fossil plant specimens in Integrated Digitized Biocollections (iDigBio); and (4)
maintaining a community forum for expert commentary on PBOT contents. As a part
of this project, the researchers will use PBOT to populate PBDB with
paleobotanical leaf fossil datasets from the Cretaceous through Eocene and
analyze diversity and climate variation across the warmest intervals of the past
100 million years. Overall, data made available by PBOT will enable synthetic
analyses of paleoclimate and plant macro-ecology and -evolution that have not
been possible to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.