* 2026035
* SBIR Phase II:  Performance and Feasibility Evaluation of Electrochemical Advanced Oxidation Technology for Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Julie Mullen, ACLARITY INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a cost-efficient and comprehensive water
treatment solution that destroys water contaminants on contact, enabling on-site
advanced water treatment in many industries with the potential for zero-liquid
discharge/reuse operations. The proposed technology uses an innovative
electrochemical design for water treatment. This practice reduces costs (e.g.,
transport, treatment, permitting) associated with hazardous waste and fresh
water supplies, while safeguarding communities and the environment from
potential contamination through accidental release, incomplete treatment, or
non-secure storage. Industries adopting zero-liquid discharge can reduce
freshwater demand and redirect it for other critical uses, such as agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will advance the development of an electrochemical oxidation and reduction
destruction technology for industrial and municipal water treatment. The
proposed technology destroys contaminants in a single step using a reactive
electrochemical membrane easily customized to the appropriate voltage and
amperage to efficiently oxidize or reduce target contaminants in the water. This
project will address the following objectives: 1) optimize efficacy and
efficiency to destroy PFAS, 1,4-dioxane, nitrate, and perchlorate, 2) finalize
large-scale device design, 3) develop a pilot system and explore the
performance-cost trade space, and 4) iterate on system design. The impact of
process conditions on treatment efficacy will be explored to optimize for low
cost and energy efficiency. Verification and validation will take place with on-
site brine treatment pilot testing, while characterizing performance relative to
state-of-practice and exploring potential economies of
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.