* 2026789
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Invisible Floods on the Mississippi River Floodplain: Unravelling the Causes of Urban Flooding in a Community-Centered Approach to Geomorphology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jose Constantine, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 135,071.00

Stretching for over 80 miles along the Illinois bank of the Mississippi River,
the area of Mississippi River Floodplain known as the American Bottom is home to
over 130,000 people who depend on infrastructure that controls and curtails
flooding. Although the Mississippi River is the most the significant threat to
floodplain communities in the American Bottom, a system of floodplain channels
has triggered some of the most widespread and damaging incidents of flooding. In
some cases, substantial infilling with sediment and woody material has caused
these channels to literally pour into some of the most economically vulnerable
communities in the US. In this EAGER proposal, the investigators will apply a
new model in the practice of geomorphology, in which scientists and community
members collaborate in inquiry and data collection. They will focus their
initial efforts in the community of Centreville, Illinois, where the impacts of
flooding have been the most damaging. They will work directly with the community
to better constrain the causes and impacts of severe flooding, and to broaden
their engagement with communities of the Greater St. Louis region, they are
partnering with Harris-Stowe State University to offer four summer internships
to rising seniors of the university. Their goal is to build meaningful and
empowering undergraduate research experiences for underrepresented minorities by
designing those experiences around civic engagement and environmental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim to demonstrate how
community-centered research that is applied to managed and inhabited landscapes
can, at the same time, lead to novel and impactful insights into landscape
evolution. In their case, the focus is on floodplain channels of the American
Bottom. Floodplain channels have been a focus of research in geomorphology for
some time, but these previous efforts have largely focused on floodplain
channels whose very forms are produced and controlled by lowland rivers.
Floodplain channels whose forms and function are largely independent of lowland
rivers, but instead are a product of upland drainages, are much less understood.
The investigators will provide the first geomorphological assessment of the
floodplain channels of the American Bottom, including both natural and modified
reaches. By integrating field surveys, sediment coring, and numerical
experiments the investigators will: 1) calculate sediment supply rates from
bluff drainages into floodplain channels; 2) determine how and why sediment
transport capacity varies along floodplain channels; and 3) identify flood risks
associated with channel infilling for Centreville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.