* 2026467
* FW-HTF-RM: Collaborative Research: Supervise It! Optimizing Intelligent Robot Integration Through Feedback to Workers and Supervisors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Waldemar Karwowski, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,042,683.00

Limitations in achievable performance and programmability are obstacles to
realizing productivity gains from the full automation of manufacturing
operations requiring a large variety of low-volume tasks. The use of
collaborative robots to assist human workers is a promising approach to
overcoming these obstacles, without displacing human jobs. Current efforts in
this area focus on the worker-robot partnership and overlook the critical role
of the supervisor in managing workloads and allocating tasks. By considering the
larger context of supervised work teams, this Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) research aims to enhance productivity and improve
worker quality of life by increasing the effectiveness of workers operating in
partnership with robots. It provides a framework for analyzing readiness,
assessing adoption, and evaluating performance of collaborative robotics in
industrial settings. Partnerships and interactions with companies in the
Southeastern USA will promote realistic research efforts that translate to
practice, benefitting small-to-medium manufacturing companies in the USA.
Efforts and findings will be promoted to the public to attract the next
generation of workers and researchers to science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores two hypotheses. The first
working hypothesis is that, when workers view robots as partners, imperfection
will be tolerated if the worker can successfully manage the robot to complete
the task faster than their self-conceived rate. The determining factor regarding
the value of a worker-robot collaborative partnership is hypothesized to be the
workerâ€™s ability to allocate the task workload between the robot and themselves
towards an optimal partnership. The second working hypothesis is that the
introduction of a supervisor to guide and promote task allocation will further
contribute to enhanced worker-robot performance. This hypothesis builds on the
observation that line supervisors interact with multiple workers, and thus are a
repository of holistic institutional knowledge regarding good practice. To
confirm these hypotheses and arrive at the anticipated framework, called the
Worker-Robot Supervisor Effectiveness Model, requires a mixed-methods research
design. First, a grounded theory study will establish assessment criteria
related to worker, robot, and supervisor technology adoption and performance to
develop an instrument for measuring both. Second, within a simulated
manufacturing work cell environment, a set of experiments will investigate
factors linked to successful technology adoption and work cell performance.
Third, the findings from these studies will inform the creation of the model,
which will provide guidance for effective integration, adoption, and supervision
of worker-robot partnerships. Fourth, to confirm the applicability of the
derived model, it will be used to field and integrate a robot within the
existing processes of a real-world company. Field deployment will provide
empirical evidence to validate and refine the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.