* 2026416
* The Origins of Numerical Concepts from Nonverbal Perception
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Jessica Cantlon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 01/31/2023
* USD 366,853.00

Modern human mathematical cognition is shaped by evolutionary, developmental,
and environmental influences. Researchers seek to understand how those influence
affect the development of numerical concepts in human children at the cognitive
and neural levels. This research program at the University of Rochester tests
the hypothesis that children's early numerical concepts originate from a
primitive cognitive and neural system for spatial
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research takes an interdisciplinary
approach by combining animal cognition, cognitive development, neuroimaging, and
mathematics education measures into an integrative analysis of the origins and
basic structure of numerical concepts in human children. This interdisciplinary
approach is powerful because it allows researchers to test a single hypothesis
in a systematic fashion, using a consistent set of methods and across different
levels of analysis. The experiments test: 1) the degree to which numerical and
spatial perception overlap in the developing brain using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) with 4- to 6-year-old children; 2) the degree to which
numerical and spatial perception become distinct as children receive cultural
input from counting education; and 3) the degree to which human children exhibit
similar levels of perceptual integration to non-human animals in their
representation of numerical and spatial properties. These experiments speak to
whether spatial perception gives rise to mathematical cognition in the
developing human brain and so reveals the evolutionary and cultural influences
on the developmental trajectory of human numerical
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program contributes widely to
cognitive science, neuroscience, and mathematics education. The cognitive and
neuroimaging data from human children advance our knowledge of the developing
human brain and provide critical input for early childhood education practices
and assumptions about individual differences and gender differences. The
comparative data from human children and non-human animals allow researchers to
identify fundamental principles that give rise to human mathematical concepts
and intrinsic perceptual biases that young children bring to numerical concept
learning as they enter school. Together, these data are critical for
understanding how humans successfully develop mathematical concepts.