* 2026976
* Towards Quantifiable Evaluation of Contributors to the Electromechanical Signal in Piezoresponse Force Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 507,757.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Coupling between electrical and mechanical impulses
underlies the basic behavior of many sensors and actuators. At macroscale,
identification of the physical phenomena resulting in electromechanical coupling
is often straightforward. At smaller length scales (i.e. tens of nanometer and
below) a multiplicity of contributors can emerge even in otherwise well-
identified materials. However, separation of such contributors is not achievable
except through costly and time-intensive experiments, not always viable due to
time or resolution constraints. The resulting dearth of understanding of
functional materials at the nanoscale has often limited miniaturization of
engineering devices. This project leverages and integrates big data analytics
approaches into advancement of the scientific discovery in functional materials:
specifically, data science is used to analyze multi-dimensional datasets of
complex and coupled parameters. The approach ultimately identifies different
“signatures” for the different contributors to the electromechanical response of
materials at the nanoscale. The strategies developed could be equally impactful
for understanding and design of next-generation microelectronic, photovoltaic
and quantum computing materials; miniaturized sensors, actuators, and healthcare
transducers; organic semiconductors and rechargeable batteries among others. The
students trained through this project gain expertise in data science, materials
science and microelectronics, typically finding employment in high-tech
companies, space industry, and data analytics across different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research aims to probe
and quantify the different contributions to the nanoscale electromechanical
response of dielectric materials (including piezoelectric, electrochemical, and
charge transport effects), and identifying the respective electro-chemo-
mechanical and viscoelastic “fingerprints”. The approach is based on a
combination of resonant, voltage-modulated atomic force microscopy (VM-AFM)
techniques, resulting in multi-dimensional data sets tracking different
functional parameters, and use of big data analytics approaches to analyze the
above. The methodologies developed are applicable to polarization switching
mechanisms (ferroelectricity), piezoelectricity, electrochemical deformations,
and electronic/ionic flows in a wide range of materials. The work is of
significant importance for probing of any material where interplay of multiple
physical and chemical phenomena results in a measured surface displacement.
Hence, the strategies developed are particularly impactful for materials with
small electromechanical signatures or particularly reduced dimensions, i.e.,
two-dimensional, organic and/or biological ferroelectric and piezoelectric
materials, organic-inorganic photovoltaics, organic semiconductors, and Li-ion
batteries. An integral part of this project is the recruitment and retention of
women and minorities in science and engineering. This objective is achieved
through outreach, mentorship, and research and education activities targeted for
graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge research techniques at the
interface of data and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.