* 2026516
* FW-HTF-P: Future Telemedicine Technologies and Multidisciplinary Workforce Readiness
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Damla Turgut, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 10/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

In the current healthcare environment, medical expertise is not evenly
distributed geographically, and it is not possible to control the number or
specialty of healthcare providers. Patients may need to travel a long distance
or be on a lengthy waiting list to receive routine check-ups or specialty care.
Delayed diagnosis can lead to higher cost and decrease quality of life. Hence,
timely access to medical expertise must be provided regardless of location. To
overcome the fundamental limitation in healthcare, a paradigm-shifting concept
of medical expertise pooling has been identified to utilize existing medical
expertise through the network. To materialize the idea, an advanced telemedicine
system will be developed which can provide near in-person contact between
patients and providers virtually in any distance. This research will encourage
preventive or proactive healthcare for rural especially elderly populations and
also help improve healthcare services for underserved populations suffering from
disparities. Its educational integration will promote students to be biomedical
workforce to support modern technology-intensive healthcare
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the integrative research is to
enable a near in-person telemedicine system that can connect healthcare
providers and patients via a communication network to increase healthcare
accessibility and optimize medical expertise resources. This will change the
paradigm of public healthcare, routine check-ups, and early diagnosis from a
per-request service to preventive and connected healthcare. The main goal of
this planning project is to identify and establish key components of future
telemedicine technologies and plan multidisciplinary education and workforce
training. The telemedicine system development consists of three future
technology fields: soft robotics for tele palpation, bioacoustics for tele
auscultation, and network communication for integrating the system and managing
data including cybersecurity. The technical objective of the project is to
establish the core telemedicine technologies i.e., identification and proof-of-
concept prototyping of tele tactile display, body sound sensing, and network
communication. As a multidisciplinary effort, the College of Nursing will
provide potential user feedback for the telemedicine system development and help
design a user training plan. For educational integration, the project materials
will be utilized as undergraduate course materials in each discipline and
multimodal evaluation methods will be established. Subsequently, this planning
project will lead to a well-established multidisciplinary research program that
will advance knowledge and support education for future
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.