* 2026933
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Expanding the Ocean Protein Portal Capabilities for Use in Biochemical Research and Education
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Danie Kinkade, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,989.00

This project aims to expand the functionality of the Ocean Protein Portal (OPP)
for use in research and education on ocean biochemistry. The Ocean Protein
Portal prototype was designed to allow a broad range of scientists and students
to discover answers to the questions: 1) “Where is my protein of interest in the
oceans”, 2) “Who makes the protein?” through least common ancestor analysis, and
3) “How much is there?”. By making ocean protein datasets accessible and
searchable to broad multi-domain communities including biological and chemical
oceanographers, geobiologists, microbiologists, biochemists, and bioinorganic
chemists, our understanding of the oceans and of microbial biochemistry will be
improved. Moreover, these large datasets have the potential to provide future
scientists with an important record of environmental change, and hence the
portal is serving to capture, organize, and share these data to enable long term
ocean change capabilities. Additional benefits of this project include
contributing to community building within the ocean metaproteome community by
providing a data repository and motivating ongoing efforts to improve data
quality and standards. Educational use will be developed through collaborations
with teachers and professors by the creation of educational modules for students
learning about chemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical goals of this
project include specific improvements to the Ocean Protein Portal such as
expanding search capabilities, adding the ability to serve new metaproteomic
data types, implementing a Knowledge Graph system for increased interoperability
and sustainability, creating an API for machine accessible searches, furthering
connections to external data and enhancing visualization capabilities, creating
reproducible and citable search results, and development of automated ingestion
with immediate QC capability. The transition of the OPP to a Knowledge Graph
will further facilitate connections with domains outside marine ecology, as the
graph will link out to other data resources in the environmental sciences and
biology. In addition, an OPP Knowledge Graph would also provide a data structure
useful to the field of computer science as this data structure is immediately
available to applications of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence thus
advancing the potential for novel machine-assisted scientific discovery. The
researchers will conduct tutorials (virtual or in person) for participants to
learn about the ocean metaproteomics datatype, how to use the OPP interface, and
how to pull data from the OPP and plot it within the Jupyter notebook
environment (using Python, Matplotlib, Bokeh, and
Binder).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.