* 2026874
* RAISE-SitS: Designing models to forecast how biogeochemical fluctuations in soil systems govern soil development, terrestrial water storage and ecosystem nutrient fluxes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Pamela Sullivan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 648,574.00

Managing water resources requires a full understanding of the water cycle. The
current understanding may, however, be missing a fundamental factor of the water
cycle-soil structure. Soil structure, the arrangement of soil particles and
pores, was recently discovered to be changing faster than previously thought -
over a few decades - in response to shifts in precipitation patterns.
Fluctuations in soil structure alter the amount of water that can be stored near
the surface and the ease with which water moves through the soil. Although
plants, animals, and microbes may have dominant roles in altering soil
structure, it is unclear how these processes work together or are modified by
soil properties. New mathematical models are needed to study the causes of these
observed alterations in soil structure and to examine plant-soil-water responses
to varying environmental conditions. The research may fill this need by
developing the next generation of models to include biological, physical, and
chemical interactions from local soils in the US. Through the development of
these models, five faculty from minority groups underrepresented in STEM fields,
four postdoctoral scholars, and ten undergraduate researchers will be trained.
The discoveries will be disseminated to the community through webinars, online
tools, and local presentations as well as integrated into current curricula
across four universities. The models will allow the effects of soil structure
fluctuations on ecosystem processes to be evaluated at diverse spatial and time
scales. The research may improve forecasting of future availability and quality
of water resources, soils, and associated ecosystem services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil ecosystem models (empirical and process-based) will
be developed at multiple spatial scales to link soil structure and function in
order to enhance the prediction of water and biogeochemical fluxes on timescales
of decades to centuries. These models will be parameterized using soil, plant,
and aquatic microbiome data collected across a strong precipitation gradient in
the central USA (part of NSF Kansas Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research, EPSCoR) and continental-scale soil databases (e.g., the National
Cooperative Soil Survey Soil Characterization Database, United States Department
of Agriculture). Structural equation, 2-D pedon, watershed and continental scale
models will be developed to examine and account for the interaction between soil
hydraulic properties (e.g., macropores and Ksat) and terrestrial biogeochemical
fluxes. Products from this work will include: a mechanistic understanding of
macropore evolution with climate; development of climate-dependent pedotransfer
functions for pedon, watershed, and continental-scale models; predictive
capabilities for soil microbial community responses to changing soil structure;
a mechanistic understanding of soil macropore-topography-hillslope structure-
climate interactions; and quantification of climate-induced macropore changes to
biogeochemistry and water cycles from the pedon to the continental scale. The
modeling tools proposed here are expected to address environmental
sustainability over time and enhance the ability to predict land-atmosphere
dynamics, subsurface water storage, water table fluctuations, and flood events.
These models will provide community-accessible tools to examine how soil,
hydrologic and biogeochemical feedbacks govern nutrient fluxes, and will
ultimately be useful toward alleviating nationwide problems such as managing the
nitrogen cycle and the Gulf of Mexico dead zone. Finally, this work will test a
new Rule of Life (RoL): Life's responses to climate driven changes in the soil
fabric which prompt the emergence of integrated terrestrial responses that are
more rapid than typically considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.