* 2026966
* Upgrade of Computing Facilities to support Geodynamics and Tectonics Research at UC Davis
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Magali Billen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 74,981.00

This award will fund the acquisition of compute nodes to add to one of UC Davis'
community clusters in order to support both currently funded and future NSF
research projects. With this funding, 8 nodes (384 cores) with 128 TB of storage
will be added to the community cluster providing computing resources needed to
carry out numerical simulations related to several different research projects.
The compute nodes will support projects for both current and future graduate and
undergraduate students and postdocs conducting research within the Department of
Earth and Planetary Sciences. Having direct access to these resources helps
students to learn about high performance computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulations are a powerful method for testing
hypothesis about how various aspects of subduction occur, including the
interplay between dynamics, material properties and mineralogy. This funding
will provide the infrastructure needed to conduct models on: 1) currently funded
NSF projects including the development of lattice-preferred orientation in
subduction zones and its connection to seismic anisotropy and the coupling
between, slab and mantle deformation and surface deformation in the present-day
Cascadia subduction zone, 2) other current projects on the role of the plate
boundary shear zone in controlling trench retreat, and modeling thermal shear
instabilities within the deep slab, and 3) planned research projects, including
the link between strain-rate variation in subducted lithosphere and the
distribution and triggering mechanism for deep earthquakes, the mechanism by
which fluids enter the oceanic crust in the bending region of the outer rise,
and the interaction between rising mantle plumes and subducting
slabs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.