* 2026225
* RAPID: Multiphase flow physics driving respiratory infectious disease transmission
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Lydia Bourouiba, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The current COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak vividly demonstrates the acute global
danger emanating from a local event in a hyperconnected world. A key public
health challenge is the immediate reduction in host-to-host transmission events,
particularly in front-line healthcare workers taking direct care of COVID-19
patients. Such patients often have to undergo medical procedures that induce
respiratory emissions and thereby put healthcare workers at risk. This RAPID
project aims to reduce the host-to-host transmission of COVID-19 during such
“aerosol” emission-producing medical procedures by developing, testing, and
deploying fluid-dynamics-based solutions at the patient’s bedside that can
essentially syphon off the emissions coming from a patient and protect
healthcare workers and other personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project
seeks to develop such non-pharmacologic containment approaches by first
visualizing and quantifying the multiphase nature of respiratory emissions
during exhalations, coughs, and aerosol-generating medical procedures pertinent
to COVID-19 patients. Based on that quantification, the project will model and
quantify the impact of locally applied multiphase flow control for containing,
diverting, and collecting the pathogen-laden emissions from the patient and thus
reduce exposure to healthcare providers. Finally, the project will develop rapid
prototype systems for deployment at the patient’s bedside in clinically relevant
settings. The benefits of the project to healthcare professionals and the public
rest with the rapid development of concrete and actionable non-pharmacological
interventions to curb host-to-host transmission of respiratory infectious
diseases and in particular protection of healthcare workers at the frontline of
this historic pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.