* 2026875
* RAPID: Developing Advanced Modeling and Analysis Tools to track Human Movement Patterns and Coronavirus / Infectious Disease Spread Dynamics in Geographical Networks
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Christopher DeFlitch, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact of this RAPID proposal is to to inform policy associated with
pandemic viruses, such as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), as they
significantly impact the national health and economy. To safeguard society from
viruses, each country/state/locality needs to dynamically adjust health
policies, plan near-term health care capacity, and control population movement
with little time latency. Accurate real-time prediction of virus spread is
essential for making the health system respond in a fast and proactive manner to
disease variations and disruption events (e.g., staffing and supply shortage).
This project pursues fundamental research to develop simulation models of human
movement and virus spread dynamics, prediction of real-time positions of
infected population in the spato-geographic network, and development of decision
support tools for the design of healthcare policies under disruptive events and
processes. The proposed research is at the interface of engineering and public
health to gain a better understanding of disease spread dynamics from both
perspectives. Effective simulation analysis and prediction of virus positions in
geographic regions will not only help optimize the design of healthcare policies
to control the propagation of infectious diseases, but also help safeguard the
US population and make health systems more resilient to disruptive
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will leverage data analytics and
simulation models to gain a better understanding of virus spreading dynamics.
The objective of this research project is to develop continuous flow simulation
modeling and analysis of human movement/traffic and virus spread dynamics in
spatial networks. Specifically, we will investigate the derivation of health
policies and infectious disease control so that the healthcare system can
respond expeditiously and effectively to disruptive events. The proposed project
will study three sets of policy-relevant characteristics that are central to the
understanding of the impact of public interventions on virus spread, namely
regional infrastructure of health care delivery, regulatory measures to slow
down the virus spread, and effectiveness of information transparency. As the
dynamics of infectious diseases often change over time, simulation models and
analytical algorithms from this project help support decision-making in real
time. The proposed methodology is generally applicable to a wide range of
infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.