* 2026334
* Pattern preferences, information theory, and the evolution of signal design
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tamra Mendelson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 865,296.00

Courtship behavior in animals often involves elaborate visual signals, so
understanding the forces that shape signal design is a central question in
animal behavior. The central hypothesis of this project is that courtship signal
design is driven by pattern preferences that are in turn shaped by patterns in
the local habitat. This is an expanded version of sensory drive, a robust
hypothesis that describes how the environment influences animal sensory systems
and therefore preferences. To date, sensory drive has emphasized the
detectability of courtship signals, whereas the proposed research emphasizes the
efficiency with which signals can be processed by the visual system. The
research plan combines behavioral studies and leading-edge computational image
manipulation to test the central hypothesis that signal patterns and pattern
preferences are shaped by local habitats. The focal animal is the Rainbow Darter
(Etheostoma caeruleum), an abundant and visually striking fish species in
eastern North America. Broader impacts of the project include international
collaboration for students and a postdoctoral associate, training of students
from underrepresented groups, a workshop for signal design researchers, and
development of upper-level laboratory modules in animal behavior at
UMBC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses a novel hypothesis
for signal design, framing the powerful model of sensory drive in the broader
context of information theory rather than signal detection theory alone. Whereas
traditional sensory drive posits detectability as the driving constraint on
animal signaling, sensory drive based on information theory emphasizes more
broadly the efficiency with which patterns are processed by sensory systems. A
bias for efficiently processed information has been demonstrated in humans, who
generally prefer patterns that match the spatial statistics of natural scenes.
Sensory drive based on processing bias therefore predicts that animals will
prefer signaling patterns that match the statistics of local habitat.
Importantly, an alternative hypothesis of camouflage makes the same prediction.
Camouflage and sexual signaling traditionally epitomize the antagonistic
relationship between natural and sexual selection; however, from an information
theoretic perspective, the designs that serve these functions can be mutually
reinforcing. Experiments will use generative artificial intelligence, a rapidly
developing field of deep machine learning, to empirically test mutually
inclusive, alternative hypotheses of animal signal design. This method offers an
exciting technological innovation that could dramatically improve our ability to
explore receiver psychology and signal preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.