* 2026744
* CAREER: Wearable, self-powered biosensors for disease detection and health monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Peter Lillehoj, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 12/31/2020
* USD 145,865.00

The proposed research aims to develop innovative wearable, self-powered textile
biosystems for in situ health monitoring and disease detection. This technology
will be integrated directly onto fabrics and garments to provide lightweight,
unobtrusive wearable sensing systems that do not compromise wearer mobility,
comfort or attention.

Intellectual Merit: The current capabilities of wearable senosr technology are
limited to measuring physiological parameters (e.g. heart rate, blood pressure,
respiratory rate) and little attention has been directed toward wearable sensors
for biomolecular detection. This proposed research will realize new wearable,
self-powered textile biosensors offering innovative paradigms in BioMEMS,
wearable sensing and point-of-care diagnostics. Textile batteries activated by
body fluids for on-demand electricity generation is a fundamentally innovative
concept which will provide new scientific insights into the design and operation
of novel batteries based on nontraditional materials (i.e. fabric, urine,
sweat).

Broad Impact: The proposed project has a broad impact and will potentially
transform healthcare and improve human well-being by (1) providing an economical
means for continuous health monitoring, (2) supporting preventive medicine
through early disease detection, (3) reducing healthcare costs and its burden on
world economies, and (4) offering low cost diagnostics suitable for use in
resource-limited countries. The PI will develop new educational and outreach
activities that will enhance BioMEMS research at MSU, promote STEM disciplines
to K-12 students and teachers, and increase participation by women and
unrepresented minority students. Activities will include: 1) Developing a new
undergraduate/graduate course (ME 491: BioMEMS Sensing and Integration) that
will strengthen the existing MEMS curriculum at MSU; 2) Recruiting and mentoring
engineering students, particular women and underrepresented minorities, in
biomedical research; and 3) Developing new outreach programs for middle/high
school teachers and students to promote STEM fields to future generations of
K-12 students.