* 2026444
* FW-HTF-P Shaping Technology and Institutions for the Work of the Future
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Julie Shah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) project will
enable the MIT Work of the Future initiative to advance into a second phase of
its research agenda, focused on specific emerging technologies within several
industries, and worker experiences in the workplace. The resulting studies will
shed light on how technology might be shaped to augment workers and how workers
can be best supported when confronted with technological change. Currently,
there is a paucity of international comparative analysis of how emerging AI
technologies are being developed and adopted, how they impact firm performance
and how they are changing the nature of work, the organization of work and the
skills required for workers to succeed and advance. This research will address
this need for robust data and insights in a cross-country comparative context on
the changing nature of work, skills and training in the face of the introduction
of new AI-related technologies in the workplace. At the same time, the research
will further the collective understanding of workers’ perspective on new
technology in the workplace, as well as the types of education and training
incumbent workers are receiving today in the workplace. These cross-national
comparative data and insights will ultimately support industry, government and
labor among others, in developing policies and strategies that both promote
innovation and investments in workers and shared
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on two AI-related
technologies in the workplace and the implications for work and workers: one
that is more relevant for more traditional manufacturing-related work; and
another that will be around software-based artificial intelligence, largely in
the application of machine learning. With respect to the former, the research
will focus on collaborative robotics, which promote a vision of “augmented
intelligence” rather than artificial intelligence. Collaborative robots, which
we define in the industrial context as robots that can safely operate in close
proximity to humans without being required to stop, provide an opportunity to
leverage the relative strengths of humans and robots to do what neither can do
alone. This planning grant will enable researchers to develop robust research
methodologies and tools (semi-structured interviews, surveys, case studies) that
examine the use of collaborative robotics as one case within an industry across
multiple geographies. This can then be expanded in scope and scale across
technologies, industries and geographies through the creation of a cross-
national network of research partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.