* 2026057
* SBIR Phase II:  Production of Biocidal Enzymes for Antimicrobial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Erika Milczek, Curie Co. Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,199,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II is to replace chemical preservatives with sustainable
alternatives in everyday products. To date, manufacturers have had few
alternatives to the preservatives critical for preventing microbial
contamination of water-containing products. However, enzymes are biodegradable
and have a low risk of penetrating the skin, making them an appealing
alternative to traditional chemical preservatives. The proposed project will
advance the translation of sustainable antimicrobial enzymes as replacements for
chemical preservatives by developing a scalable manufacturing process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SBIR Phase II project will advance the
translation of biocidal enzymes to replace chemical preservatives in consumer
products. The focus of this project is improving production of the active
biocidal enzyme and potentiating its antimicrobial properties. These enzymes are
highly toxic to bacterial and yeast, making them attractive alternatives for
chemical preservatives, but creating a challenge for manufacturing at scale.
This project incorporates a suite of chemical and genetic switches to tightly
modulate the enzymes' biocidal activity during production to allow for high
enzyme titers during production in a microbial host organism. The research
objectives are two-fold: 1) optimize production strains and genetics for
overexpression of the biocidal enzyme, and 2) optimize downstream processing of
the final enzyme product to maximize biocidal activity. These objectives will be
fulfilled using a combination of a novel directed evolution platform and
established strain engineering infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.