* 2026313
* Manufacturing of High Strength, High Ductility, Rare Earth-Free Magnesium Alloy Plate and Sheet Materials by Differential Speed Rolling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jagannathan Sankar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2024
* USD 584,337.00

This award supports US manufacturing needs, industries and future workforce.
With its lightness, strength, castability and damping capacity, magnesium alloys
offer significant opportunities for lightweight applications in transportation,
armor, biomedical and others. The use of magnesium alloys as lightweight
structural materials is one of the most effective ways to overcome the
challenges in energy conservation. Sheet metal is one of the most used forms of
metal alloys in many industries such as automobile, aerospace, and consumer
goods. Sheet metals are typically manufactured with rolling technology. However,
due to the crystal structure of magnesium, sheet metals made with conventional
rolling are brittle and low in strength for warm-to-room temperature forming
thereby limiting their use. To unleash the potential of magnesium alloys, there
is a need to improve their formability. This project meets this need through
integrated alloy design and processing with focus on differential speed rolling
in which the two rolls of a rolling mill run at different, predetermined speeds.
This approach demonstrates a capability to produce magnesium plate and sheet
with high strength and high ductility, and good formability. The research
involves several disciplines including materials engineering and processing,
mechanics of materials and advanced manufacturing. This convergent approach
helps promote diversity and culture of inclusion as well as facilitates
workforce development in manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential speed
rolling (DSR) in which two rolls of a rolling mill run at distinct speeds can
produce Mg alloy plates and sheets with textures dominated by basal plane
orientations tilted in the rolling direction. This texture change leads to
strong activation of basal slip and thus to higher fracture strains. DSR
advances conventional rolling by providing additional controllable shear
stresses which enhance dynamic precipitation and grain refinement via dynamic
recrystallization leading to higher strength and ductility of Mg alloys.
Compared to other thermomechanical processing technologies based on severe shear
deformation, such as, equal channel angular extrusion and high-pressure torsion,
DSR is scalable due to its continuous nature. However, there is a lack of
understanding of the relationships between alloy composition, initial
microstructure, rolling parameters, final microstructure (grain refinement,
precipitates, texture) and thermomechanical properties of the processed alloys,
and the appropriate rolling strategy for their warm-to-room-temperature
formability. The team plans to perform experimental investigations driven by
finite element simulations (FE-DEFORM) of plastic deformation in the rolling
process. This research is expected to define the role of dynamic
recrystallization, dynamic precipitation, twinning, texture evolution and grain
growth in processing-microstructure-property relationships that lead to
discovery of new approaches to improve formability and increase strain-hardening
of Mg alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.