* 2026877
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the carbon emission and sequestration rate after a large CO2 pulse from the Siberian Traps volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Ying Cui, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 321,205.00

The end-Permian mass extinction event (EPME) resulted in the loss of more than
90% of marine and 70% of land species. During the EPME (252 million years ago),
one of the largest known volcanic events, the Siberian Trap (ST) volcanism,
occurred and released massive quantities of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
The impact of this volcanic event on the EPME and the subsequent recovery of
life remains poorly understood. Therefore, it is critical to develop a better
understanding of the dynamic climate and biogeochemistry of the end-Permian
Earth. This project will use Earth system modeling to explore the CO2 emission
rates from ST volcanism, weathering and the long-term buildup of greenhouse
gases in the Early Triassic. This project will include the training of
underrepresented students at Montclair State University and develop summer
outreach programs to educate the general public at Yale University. New
knowledge from this research will be integrated into educational and outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the mechanisms of the
EPME and subsequent recovery, the project aims to produce new tropical ocean
lithium and boron isotopic records spanning the one million year interval across
the EPME and to improve quantitative understanding of the extent to which boron
isotopes reflect pH changes and lithium isotopes reflect weathering intensity.
These geochemical proxies will provide new insights into carbon emission and
sequestration rates following the large pulse of CO2 emission associated with ST
volcanism. The project will increase understanding of tropical paleoclimate
history, including the role of extreme carbon emission and sequestration on the
fate of ecosystem demise and recovery. The project team will also develop new
modeling tools needed to produce reliable quantitative biogeochemical records
spanning the EPME for model-data comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.