* 2026763
* RAPID; Information and Implications for Protection Motivation and Action During  the COVID-19 Outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Carol Silva, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The current spread of, and alarm about, the COVID-19 virus provides a unique and
ephemeral opportunity to obtain meaningful time-series survey data on public
beliefs, attitudes, behaviors, and the receipt of information of various kinds
about the disease and its effects on taking protective action. The National
Institute for Risk and Resilience (NIRR) utilizes its on-going Twitter data
collection associated with coronavirus (collected since January 2020), and
undertakes a series of monthly nation-wide surveys on public views to test the
broader publics’ receipt of, trust in, and use of information about the virus
posted on social media. The surveys will include questions about protective
action behavior, trust in key actors, perceptions of risk associated with the
outbreak, and perceptions of information accuracy/inaccuracy. The complementary
survey and social media data streams will allow tracking the spread and
penetration of information over time and as the disease spreads in order to
match various narratives as they emerge on social media along with beliefs
measured in the contemporaneous survey data. The time sensitive data will permit
testing of hypotheses about the dynamic relationships between the spread of
information in social media, broader public beliefs and behaviors, and effects
on protective behaviors that may influence the spread of contagious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to measure and track
the influence of information about the COVID-19 pandemic on Twitter among
members of the broader US public. The study integrates two complementary streams
of data to systematically examine the impact of information bubbles and various
forms of information on protection motivation and actions in response to the
COVID-19 outbreak in the US. First, since January 2020 ,the research team has
collected all messages on Twitter that relate to COVID-19, by establishing a
connection with the Twitter streaming API. The team obtains all posts and
metadata that include any of the following key words: coronavirus, COVID-19,
SARS-CoV-2, #coronavirus, #2019_nCov, and #COVID-19. From January 27 to Feb 24,
the team collected more than 31 million different messages about the virus. The
Twitter posts provide a continuous flow of data about the evolution of
information networks and the promulgation and spread of information, but they do
not provide information on the extent to which these factors are affecting
protective motivations in the broader public and shaping the perceptions that
drive them (such as trust in perceived risk). Second, the team collects online
rolling nationwide surveys of the broader public’s understanding of COVID-19,
with special attention to beliefs about the information that appears on Twitter,
over the span of the next year. There are 10 nationwide surveys in all, one each
month (time-series cross-sections), with collections timed to obtain 250
responses each week to increase the ability to quickly identify changes in
beliefs, perceptions and associated protective behaviors. The surveys are
designed to allow pairing the changing pattern of information of various sorts
on social media with the receipt and belief of that information among the
broader public. The experiments draw from the rise and spread of different kinds
of information on Twitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.