* 2026439
* FW-HTF-P: Exploring Creative Design at the Human-technology Frontier Through the Emerging Artist-technologist Occupation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Mark Bocko, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 149,674.00

Creative skills have been identified as most valuable for future workers across
domains, given the expectation that intelligent machines will increasingly
replace routine tasks currently performed by people. The creative design process
also is changing due to advances in technology, in particular, artificial
intelligence (AI) and augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR). What are the
creative skills needed for the future workforce, and how can these be best
developed and nurtured? This project addresses this question by exploring how
advances in AI and AR/VR technology are changing the emerging occupation of
artist-technologist. As experts in both arts and technology who see no barriers
between these two fields, artist-technologists are in a unique position to
design previously inconceivable media products with relevance and applications
not only for the arts and entertainment, but many other fields such as
education, health care, marketing and new product development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a diverse group of researchers and
practitioners with relevant expertise in the arts, AI, AR/VR, engineering,
learning sciences, education, business, entrepreneurship, career education,
ethics, and disability in an exploratory study of how specific applications of
AR/VR and AI may affect artist-technologists’ creative process, professional
identity, overall work experience, preparation, and related equity and inclusion
issues. The initial focus of the project is on musicians and composers, and will
expand to other artistic endeavors. At the core of the study are exploratory
conversations with key stakeholders (conducted in the tradition of customer
discovery interviews promoted by NSF's Innovation Corps program), followed by
three task forces drawing implications and identifying issues worthy of further
research for enhancing future artist-technologists’ design process at the human-
technology frontier (future technology focus), effectively preparing future
artist-technologists to make best use of AI and AR/VR in their work (future
workers focus), and increasing access to this occupation by underrepresented
populations (future work focus), respectively. A series of team learning
experiences and touch-point events informs this collaborative work, while also
supporting the project team in developing the needed cross-disciplinary
expertise and strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.