* 2026537
* FW-HTF-P: Building a Skilled Technological Workforce in the Hospitality Service Industry of the Future
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Chinmay Kulkarni, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 146,000.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology frontier planning grant focuses on
creating new ways for hospitality workers to shape how automation will affect
their industry and their jobs. It has been widely predicted that the hospitality
industry will experience significant job shifts in the coming decades.
Automation plays a key role in causing these shifts, with examples including
self-service kiosks, various applications of robotics, customer-facing AI,
automated operations, and food preparation technologies. Such automation is
already displacing many jobs in the hospitality industry. Although new jobs will
be developed in the future, many others will be eliminated, and the need for new
skill sets is rising. In the hospitality and service industries, automation has
already affected hotel room check-in, cashiering, cleaning processes,
bartending, and food service. This situation is changing even more rapidly as
the work shifts in response to new standards around COVID-19 safety. Nearly 90%
of hospitality workers lost work at least temporarily during the pandemic and
they lack ways to envision and reap the positive impacts of technology
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team of experts in robotics,
policy, economics, human-computer interaction, and organizational dynamics seeks
to mitigate this growing problem by allowing hospitality workers to partner with
and benefit from the future of automation and to maximize opportunities and
positive outcomes for all of its stakeholders. The project will create
generalizable knowledge through a series of workshops that bring together
researchers, policy experts, union leaders and members, and stakeholders from
leading hospitality schools. Specifically, the research team will assess the
current state of hospitality services through a broad literature review, conduct
workshops with key stakeholders, collectively explore technology innovations,
and develop a strategic roadmap for future collaboration around automation
technologies in the hospitality industry. This project has been funded by the
NSF Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to
promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology
partnership in work contexts by advancing design of intelligent work
technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.