* 2026294
* Collaborative Research: LTREB: Experimental determination of trophic dynamics and energy flows in a semiarid habitat in Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Tyler Kartzinel, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2025
* USD 194,241.00

Long-term environmental research provides context that shorter-term efforts
lack. Data collected over extended periods allows researchers to quantify the
influence of fleeting or episodic factors that simply elude short-term efforts.
This project started in 1989 as an experimental investigation of the importance
of biotic interactions in a semiarid thorn scrub community in Bosque Fray Jorge
National Park, Chile. While a role of predation was documented in early years,
the overwhelming role of episodic rainfall (especially El Niño-associated rains)
became clear in the first decade of work. Through the second and third decades
the study focused on the relative role of biotic vs. abiotic influences, the
role of invasive plans and rabbits, and the impact of extended drought
conditions. Now the longest-running experimental field research program of its
kind, this project has documented significant but limited effects of small
mammal herbivory, and significant effects of invasive species and rainfall (and
its absence) on populations of both plants and small mammals. The current
research adds novel and sophisticated assessment of energy flow (from plants
through consumers to predators) as a function of rainfall and hydrologic
conditions, and advanced modeling of long-term population dynamics to identify
mechanisms underlying changes in community stability observed in this highly
variable system. Data collected at this site will be used to improve outreach
efforts on the natural history and ecology of the National Park and the
surrounding region, and will also be included in IsoCamp (isocamp.org), a two-
week short course on stable isotope biogeochemistry and ecology for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
centered on 20 experimental grids (75x75 m) in which the following activities
occur: (1) small mammals are sampled monthly (4 days/month); (2) cover by shrubs
is measured every three months, and that of ephemeral plants monthly during the
growing season; (3) soil samples are taken every 4 months to estimate seed
density; and (4) fox scat and owl pellets are collected monthly from the site
and nearby roosts to characterize their diets. Whereas exclusions of one small
mammal herbivore (the degu) had limited effects, installation of all‐small
mammal exclusions in 2002 demonstrated strong effects on several plant species.
Superimposed on these effects were dramatic responses of plants, small mammals,
and predators to increased precipitation during 8 El Niño/high rainfall events.
North-central Chile has experienced severe drought conditions for over a decade,
but forecasters predict more frequent and intense El Niño events, suggesting
extreme temporal variation in abiotic conditions. This project will continue to
track the interactive roles of environmental change and invasive species, but
adds novel integration of stable isotopes, fecal DNA metabarcoding, and
empirical dynamic modeling to better characterize how trophic structure is
influenced by temporally varying energy flows. Key foci over the next 5 years
include: (1) How are plants and small mammals influenced by the presence and
abundance of invasive lagomorphs?; (2) How does variation in the availability of
fast-growing ephemeral herbs and slow-growing perennial shrubs influence dietary
breadth and niche partitioning among small mammals?; (3) Does omnivory
facilitate individual- and population-level niche partitioning during boom-bust
population cycles?; (4) How does multichannel energy flow and temporal variation
in trophic structure affect small mammal community stability? These goals are
being pursued through extensive collaboration with multiple investigators at
multiple institutions in Chile and the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.