* 2026583
* FW-HTF-P: Planning to study automation and the future of news production
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Andruid Kerne
* 09/30/2021
* USD 130,854.00

This planning grant supports multidisciplinary teambuilding and the refinement
of a research plan for convergent research on the future of work involving
humans and technology. The specific focus is the work of journalists who create
articles, videos and other content to inform the public. Journalism has long
been affected by new technologies, including printing, internet distribution,
and automated curation, in the form of social media news feeds. Emerging
artificial intelligence technologies capable of creating texts, statistics,
videos, diagrams and data-driven animations are anticipated to further impact
the profession. Understanding these impacts is important because journalists
perform the socially important function of informing the public about events and
activities that affect their decision making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
convenes an interdisciplinary team of scholars to a develop a proposal for
sustained research addressing the future of news production, considering
technologies such as natural language processing, crowdsourcing, information
visualization, and artificial intelligence, taken broadly. The team members’
backgrounds span a range of disciplinary areas, including information science,
computer science, economics, sociology, communications, and design. The planned
work includes refining the project vision and theoretical framework, recruiting
field sites and an advisory board, conducting pilot research to identify
relevant technologies and impacts and planning of convergent research
activities. Pilot research will include observation, interviews and focus groups
with journalists to understand the impact of current technologies and
possibilities for future technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.