* 2026657
* RAPID: PHYSICS OF CORONAVIRUS SARS-COV-2 SURVIVAL OUTSIDE A HOST AND IMPLICATIONS FOR SEASONAL DEPENDENCE OF COVID-19 OUTBREAKS
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Saveez Saffarian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 03/31/2022
* USD 238,975.00

There is currently a lack of information on SARS-Cov-2 particle stability in
varied environmental conditions. This project will create mechanistic insight
which will estimate the persistence of infectious particles and is critical for
predictions of viral spread as well as informing public health. Two graduate
students will collaborate during these experiments. This work will form a
substantial part of the graduate thesis for these students. Measurements of
structural limits of viral particles using atomic force microscopy and
holographic optical tweezers will also inform our general knowledge of the viral
envelope stability as applied to other enveloped
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2
(2019-nCoV) virus poses an acute and novel public health crisis. The knowledge
gained from the proposed work will immediately inform the projections of viral
survivability under various environmental conditions. The measurements will also
establish complete and efficient workflow for handling SARS-CoV-2 particles with
advanced optical trapping and atomic force microscopy techniques. The technical
expertise gained will be valuable in case similar measurements would be required
under the highest bio-safety environments (BL4 condition) with live
virions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.