* 2026801
* Design and Synthesis of Sustainable Dielectric Materials for Flexible Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Seonhee Jang, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2024
* USD 374,882.00

Flexible electronic materials exhibiting high electrical and mechanical
performance are required in the emerging field of flexible devices. There are
many potential materials which are required in the fabrication of flexible
electronics. These materials range from organic materials, like polymers and
other carbon-based molecules, to metals and dielectrics. Among them, the use of
dielectric materials has been restricted due to limiting electrical properties
and insufficient mechanical durability. The research here establishes highly
transparent, strong, and flexible dielectric materials developed through the
understanding of the relationship between the physicochemical structure of the
dielectric thin films, and their other material properties, under mechanical
stress. These flexible dielectric materials would find use in the existing
semiconductor device manufacturing as well as in future, more demanding
applications. This technology is critical for the continued United States
prosperity and security which increasingly employs lightweight flexible devices
in consumer and national security applications. This research crosses multiple
disciplines including materials science, mechanics of materials, electrical
engineering, semiconductor device physics, and chemistry, and will offer to
students both knowledge and hands-on experience working within a
multidisciplinary research environment. The education activities includes the
course development in advanced materials and provision of research opportunities
for a diverse group including women and underrepresented students. This project
is jointly funded by Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division
(CMMI) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to achieve highly transparent,
strong, and flexible dielectrics with electrical and mechanical stability for
broad application in flexible electronics. The project will complete three
objectives to establish sustainable flexible dielectric materials, with superior
material and mechanical stability and durability, based on amorphous oxides
derived from the siloxane (Si–O) and methyl-derived silicon compounds (Si–CH3)
(OSMs): (1) determine the growth mechanism of flexible dielectric thin films and
optimize the polarizability and density in the microstructure as related to the
specific deposition parameters, (2) identify the relationship between
physicochemical changes and the dielectric film properties, and (3) evaluate the
effect of post-curing process, using thermal annealing and ultraviolet
irradiation, on the microstructure and the films’ optical, electrical, and
mechanical performance. The research outcomes will not only significantly
advance manufacturing processes for flexible dielectric materials, but also
generate new knowledge in a fundamental framework relating synthesis, structure,
property, and performance of materials for flexible electronics. This project
will develop flexible dielectric materials with good optical, electrical, and
mechanical performance useful for a wide array of flexible electronics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.