* 2026068
* ECA-PGR:  Transcriptional Regulation and Gene Networks Underlying Viral Recognition of Insect Vectors in Host Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Clare Casteel, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,622,833.00

Viral infections in crop plants can cause major losses in crop productivity.
Despite more than a century of research on plant-virus interactions, control of
viral infection remains a challenge to plant health. Unlike most bacterial and
fungal plant pests, most viruses depend on insects who serve as "vectors" to
transmit the virus to the plant cell, often through sucking mouthparts. Thus, a
complex three-way relationship develops in which the host plant mounts an immune
response that is countered by the virus and its insect vector. Understanding how
and when this three-way interaction occurs is thus essential to identify control
points of the viral disease. The goals of this research program are to
investigate plant responses to infection and to uncover unique collections of
genes and biochemical pathways that drive plant-virus-insect interactions in
tomato. The results will provide candidate genes for engineering new strategies
of virus management, and will establish the tomato-Potyvirus-aphid system as a
model for studying three-way disease interactions. The research also provides
novel insight into how the natural variation of viral disease is mediated within
and across domesticated and wild tomato. High school and undergraduate students
will participate directly in research to learn about the genomic-level science
underlying viral disease in plants. The project will also encourage cross-
disciplinary communication in plant genomics by hosting a summer discussion
group at the University of California-Davis focused on plant genomics
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly every major cropping system
faces threats from plant-infecting viruses, and most plant viruses rely on
insect vectors for transmission. Although numerous studies have shown that
viruses can manipulate plant metabolism to promote viral acquisition and
transmission by vectors, few have examined the underlying molecular mechanisms
mediating plant-virus-vector interactions and none have developed a system-level
understanding of this process. This work builds on the recent discovery that
plant viruses respond actively to the presence of insect vectors via host plant-
derived signals, promoting insect performance and transmission through changes
in plant chemistry. The aim of this project is to develop a detailed
understanding of the genes and pathways that underlie viral "recognition" of
insect vectors and activation of processes within the host plant that facilitate
transmission by insect vectors. Transcript profiling, metabolomics, and
bioinformatics will be used to develop a co-expression network and identify key
regulators of this phenomenon. Introgression-mapping lines in combination with
knockouts will be used to functionally characterize key regulators mediating
plant-virus-vector interactions within and across plant species. All data and
resources generated in this project will be made accessible to the public
through the project website and through long-term data repositories.