* 2026102
* SBIR Phase I:  A Powerful Clinical Aid in the Diagnosis of Vaginitis to Prevent PTB and Stop STI Transmission
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Peggy Robinson, CAZA HEALTH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,726.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide fast, accurate diagnosis of
vaginal infections. Vaginitis results in 10 million office visits a year
representing 10% of all US womenâ€™s health visits, is known to dramatically
increase susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections. External testing is
expensive and can take from a day to weeks for results. For current in-office
tests, 40% of all yeast infections and 30% of bacterial infections are
misdiagnosed and require further visits. More importantly, vaginitis can lead to
a large fraction of spontaneous preterm births - a major cause of neonatal
mortality, emotional distress and lifelong disability worldwide. In the US, PTB
results in healthcare costs of $26 B/year, motivating a fast and accurate test.
This project will develop an advanced test that uses artificial intelligence
(AI) to study samples quickly and accurately in the doctor's
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project advances a novel test for vaginitis upon clinical presentation. This
project leverages Artificial Intelligence (AI) image analysis with a high-
quality fluorescence microscope to rapidly scan specimens in the doctor's office
for fast diagnosis. This project will validate preliminary studies suggesting
higher image accuracy compared to viewing similar samples under a microscope.
Phase 1 of this project will examine prepared samples from diverse patient
populations of up to 500 women to optimize analysis and characterization of VHA
automated digital pathology system. All samples will be compared to manual
assessment currently used clinically. Additionally, user testing in multiple
types of clinical research environments, such as medical schools and health
networks, will be undertaken to diversify patient sample
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.