* 2026772
* Collaborative Research: ARTS: Integrating phylogenomics and taxonomic training to overcome the taxonomic impediment in the genus Nylanderia
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Andrea Lucky, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 10/31/2024
* USD 871,630.00

Ants are among the most ubiquitous and ecologically important animals on earth.
Their sociality has led to the evolution of diverse life histories and
morphologies, yet half of the estimated 30,000 ant species remain undiscovered
and await description by scientists. Antsâ€™ outsized impacts extend to invasive
species, which rank among the most ecologically and economically damaging taxa
worldwide. One of the primary obstacles to effective management of invasive ants
is taxonomic uncertainty, that is, many species cannot be reliably distinguished
from one another or associated with stable scientific names. For example,
hundreds of species of ants in the genus Nylanderia closely resemble one
another, but only 15 species are known to be problematic. Although these ants
are difficult to identify, their ubiquity makes them impossible to ignore;
Nylanderia specimens fill museum drawers of unidentified ants, and the genus
comprises up to 20% of unidentified ant specimens intercepted at US ports of
entry. Taxonomic revision of this important but taxonomically chaotic ant genus
is urgently needed to define species boundaries of globetrotting taxa, as well
as to name the many species that currently lack description. Because many
invasive ant taxa present similar problems, this project focuses also on
training the next generation of ant taxonomists and professional insect
identifiers, which is essential to overcoming the taxonomic impediment in this
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project sidesteps a historical reliance on ant
worker morphology by generating an unprecedented molecular genomic dataset,
using ultraconserved elements (UCEs), to reconstruct the global evolutionary
history of Nylanderia. This phylogeny will form the basis of an exhaustive
taxonomic revision of the genus, which will clarify existing nomenclature,
describe 100 new species, and resolve species boundaries in 15 widespread
invasive species complexes. By focusing on the value of internal and external
male morphology to species delimitation and practical identification, the
researchers will introduce unexplored character sets into the study of
Nylanderia and test the phylogenetic value of these characters against currently
used worker-caste ants and queens. The project will train early career
taxonomists through undergraduate courses involving new species descriptions and
invasive ant identification workshops, and a public art-science exhibition about
invasive ants will illustrate the ecological importance of
ants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.