* 2026331
* Deep Learning in Geospatial Uncertainty Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Guofeng Cao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 265,058.00

This project will contribute new statistical methods and tools for the analysis
of complex and incompatible geospatial data to advance uncertainty-aware, data-
driven geographic knowledge discovery. As geospatial data become increasingly
available, the complexity of geospatial data marked by complex patterns and
sources of uncertainty increases dramatically, and goes well beyond the
capabilities of conventional methods. This project will develop an uncertainty
framework to support statistical learning of incompatible geospatial data for
complex spatiotemporal patterns. This framework will be used to characterize and
quantify the geospatial uncertainty in scientific modeling and practical
applications. This project will offer novel solutions to fundamental analysis,
modeling, and integration problems involving geospatial data, and advance the
understanding of the nature of geospatial uncertainty. This project will enhance
the proper and cost-effective utilization of geospatial data, and will have
broader impacts on disciplines that geospatial data are involved. Furthermore,
with a public outreach on uncertainty-aware spatial thinking, this project will
advance the public good by increasing the public awareness of the geospatial
uncertainty and critical map reading and usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
geostatistics perspective, this project will address the long-standing unsolved
challenges in spatial analysis dealing with complex spatiotemporal patterns,
heterogeneity and uncertainty of geospatial data. First, the developed framework
will provide a comprehensive and practical approach to seamlessly integrate
heterogeneous sources of geospatial data. Secondly, capitalizing on recent
advances in deep learning technologies, the developed framework will
characterize and model the complex spatiotemporal patterns implied in
heterogeneous data. Thirdly, the developed framework will enable the
characterization and modeling of geospatial uncertainty and the impact
assessment in domain fields. The performances of the developed methods will be
evaluated in two domain applications: spatiotemporal disease mapping in public
health and modeling uncertainty of land cover changes and the impact on
atmospheric models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.