* 2026742
* RAPID:Effects of mass-flowering and die-back of a large cane forming bamboo on nutrient cycling, seedling recruitment, and oak dominance in a tropical montane forest
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* James Dalling, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 06/30/2023
* USD 82,655.00

Many mountains around the world share a characteristic vegetation. This consists
of a forest canopy dominated by oaks or related species, and an understory layer
that is filled by dense thickets of bamboo. The deep shade cast by these bamboo
thickets, coupled with competition from bamboo for water and nutrients, greatly
limits the regeneration success of tree seedlings. However, most bamboos also
share an unusual trait – they flower once in their lives and then die. At
intervals of between 20 and 120 years, depending on species, an entire bamboo
population at a site flower together. Following this episode of mass-flowering
and mass mortality, light penetrates to the forest floor stimulating tree
seedling growth for a few years before the bamboo returns. The decay of dead
bamboo, however, also stimulates the growth of soil bacteria and fungi which
compete with plants for nutrients in the soil. This competition reduces the
availability of nitrogen, a key resource for plant growth. This project will
examine how a bamboo die-off that began in 2020 in western Panama affects the
regeneration of oak forest, an endangered ecosystem of critical conservation
value. Specifically, it will test the hypothesis that bamboo mortality
preferentially favors the regeneration of oaks, because these tree species form
a specific type of association with fungi in the soil called ectomycorrhizas.
Ectomycorrhizal fungi benefit oaks by providing access to a source of nitrogen
that is unavailable to other competing plant species. Understanding how mountain
oak forests function is essential to their management, and to predicting whether
lower elevation tree species will be able to migrate upslope in a warming world.
In addition, this project will provide training in forest ecology and plant-soil
interactions for US undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take advantage of an existing
network of plots established in oak-bamboo forest on the slopes of Volcan Barú
National Park. Bamboo, oaks and other tree species have been mapped in these
plots, tree growth rates are being monitored annually, and soil nitrogen
availability has already been measured. In addition to determining how bamboo
die-off affects seedling recruitment, and juvenile and adult tree growth in
these existing forest plots, a nitrogen addition experiment will be established
to test whether oak recruitment is selectively favored due to their
ectomycorrhizal association. Replicate patches of forest will be located that
have similar tree community composition, but that have three classes of
understory bamboo: live bamboo, dead bamboo, and no bamboo. Seeds and seedlings
of the two locally dominant ectomycorrhizal oak tree species Quercus salicifolia
and Q. costaricensis, and four similar non-ectomycorrhizal tree species will be
transplanted into plots in these patches. Additionally, nitrogen fertilization
and control treatments will be established in each plot and seedling growth
monitored for one year. If ectomycorrhizal nitrogen supply favors oaks during
bamboo decay then the seedling growth advantage of oaks versus non-oaks will be
greatest in plots with dead bamboo and no additional nitrogen, and smallest in
the nitrogen fertilized no bamboo plots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.