* 2026814
* RAPID: Urban Resilience to Health Emergencies: Revealing Latent Epidemic Spread Risks from Population Activity Fluctuations and Collective Sense-making
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Ali Mostafavi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

COVID-19 outbreaks have had dire societal and economic impacts across the globe,
and its spread has become a major societal threat in the United States. The
majority of epidemic spread models, however, do not fully consider the
tremendous uncertainty associated with human response behaviors (both
populations and individual actors) and perturbations in urban system supply
chains during an epidemic outbreak. For this project, the research team collects
and analyzes time-bound data to better understand and predict and to more
effectively respond to the risk of infection disease outbreaks in urban areas.
These data can be used to help identify the underlying processes that influence
urban-scale population response behaviors, collective sense-making in online
social media, disruptions in urban system supply chains, and collective
information processing and coordination among actors across different urban
sectors. These finding can advance the fundamental understanding of the
complexities of epidemic outbreak threats, which would extend beyond standard
outbreak models and purely clinical research. The outcomes suggest new ways for
better prediction and offer novel insights regarding ways to conduct urban-scale
surveillance of epidemic spread risks. The findings inform strategies and
possible data-driven tools and methods to prevent, help contain, and mitigate
the effects of future epidemics and pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
project tasks are threefold. First, the project will identify and collect data
that could provide weak signals about population response behaviors in response
to epidemic threats. For example, anomalies in traffic patterns can suggest
reduction in demand due to telecommuting. Mobility data, which informs about
patterns of population fluxes, facilitates monitoring of the effectiveness of
social distancing measures. Second, the project collects social media posts,
such those in as Twitter, to examine how epidemic risk is processed and encoded
in online social networks. Third, through organizational interviews and surveys,
the project uncovers collective information processing and coordination actions
among different actors across various urban sectors responding to epidemic
spread risks and urban system perturbations. The data are analyzed through
spatial modeling, network analysis, and data analytics techniques. In analysis
of these datasets, a particular attention are given to population activity
patterns in neighborhoods with vulnerable populations (e.g., elderly, low
income, and racial minorities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.