* 2026947
* Novel Phases of Quantum Matter in Numerical Simulations, Field Theory and Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Ribhu Kaul, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 03/31/2023
* USD 386,918.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research that covers a selection of topics at the forefront of
condensed matter theory and materials science with a focus on magnetism and
systems in which electrons interact strongly with each other. Magnetism is a
striking example of a phenomenon which arises in crystal materials entirely due
to the subtle laws of quantum mechanics. Even though magnetism has been observed
and studied since ancient times, modern experimental studies have found time and
again this phenomenon to be surprisingly diverse and rich, inspiring a whole new
range of intellectual problems for theoretical physicists. For example, it is
now well known that one can destroy magnetism by heating any magnetic material
above a certain temperature, but studies during the last several decades have
indicated that it is also possible to destroy magnetism at the absolute zero of
temperature. The mechanisms by which this destruction occurs are subtle, and
their fundamental origin is being intensely studied and debated. This research
project will contribute to this important scientific endeavor by developing new
computational algorithms to study special models of magnetism that can be
simulated on a supercomputer and providing an unusual window to this fascinating
phenomenon. In addition to this research, the PI will study how magnetism and
other quantum mechanical effects arising from strong electron-electron
interactions can be created and controlled in specific materials in a
laboratory, such as in few layers of carbon atoms stacked on top of each other.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major part of this project involves the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in materials science and computational
algorithms. The PI will continue to deliver advanced lectures for graduate
students and researchers at various institutions and training schools, and make
his lecture notes available on his website. The PI will develop his outreach
activities outside the University of Kentucky, by visiting four-year colleges
(Morehead State University, Centre College, and Berea College) in the state of
Kentucky, where he will give pop-science level lectures on quantum physics and
lead discussions with students on future opportunities in graduate school.
Finally, the PI will continue to organize international conferences that bring
together condensed matter and high energy physics researchers that use similar
theoretical and computational tools in their respective research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research that covers a selection of
topics at the forefront of condensed matter theory and materials science with a
focus on quantum many body effects, from the study of basic models of many body
physics with numerical and field theoretic methods to the analysis of
experimental data. Specific projects include quantum phase transitions of two
dimensional spin models with S&gt;1/2, quantum criticality of Dirac fermions,
algorithmic development for unbiased studies of lattice models of quantum spins
and correlated fermions, effects of strong correlations in multi-layer graphene
systems and the study of frustrated magnetism and heavy fermion behavior in the
family of R2T2X materials. The overarching theme is to identify new phenomena
both theoretically and in experiment that involve strong electron-electron
interactions that cannot be analyzed by perturbative
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major part of this project involves the training
of graduate and undergraduate students in materials science and computational
algorithms. The PI will continue to deliver advanced lectures for graduate
students and researchers at various institutions and training schools, and make
his lecture notes available on his website. The PI will develop his outreach
activities outside the University of Kentucky, by visiting four-year colleges
(Morehead State University, Centre College, and Berea College) in the state of
Kentucky, where he will give pop-science level lectures on quantum physics and
lead discussions with students on future opportunities in graduate school.
Finally, the PI will work to forge collaborations and connections between the
lattice gauge theory and condensed matter communities, through organization of
conferences and symposia, at national and international
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.