* 2026049
* Regulation of self-renewal of pluripotent stem cells by integrin signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Luis Villa Diaz, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 622,951.00

Stem cells are cells with the unique ability to divide into identical daughter
cells or to differentiate into specialized cell types. A better understanding of
stem cell biology will advance knowledge of how organs and tissues are formed
and maintained during the life of an organism, as stem cells are responsible for
those functions. In particular, this project will elucidate the role of three
different components of a signaling pathway preventing the differentiation of
pluripotent stem cells, which translates into how stem cells are maintained
during an individualâ€™s life span. In addition, it will provide training
opportunities for two graduate students and multiple undergraduates, who will be
directly involved in the research activities of this project. Furthermore,
dozens of graduate students will be trained in methods to effectively
communicate scientific knowledge to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of the principal investigator is to elucidate the molecular signaling
mechanisms regulating quiescence, self-renewal, and differentiation of stem
cells and their connection with the microenvironment in which they reside. In
this project, the investigators will determine the role of specific spliced
isoforms of the transmembrane protein integrin alpha6 in the inactivation of its
heterodimer partner integrin beta1, which results in signaling that sustains
self-renewal of pluripotent stem cells. For this, the investigators will use
cell-sorting of stem cell populations containing the specific spliced isoform
and their genetic manipulation to determine their molecular regulation. In
addition, the molecular function of two protein kinases involved in integrin
signaling: Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) and Integrin-Linked Kinase (ILK), will be
determined. The hypothesis that both kinases play key roles as scaffold proteins
promoting the degradation of transcription factors related to cell lineage
determination, and therefore sustaining self-renewal of pluripotent stem cells,
will be tested. For this, the investigators will verify the complexation of
these scaffold proteins with specific ubiquitinase proteins and targeted
transcription factors by immunoprecipitation assays, and chemical/genetic
manipulations of these interactions. The potential findings from these
experiments may have significant implications as they could provide a better
understanding of how integrin signaling pathways mediate the interconnection
between stem cells and their microenvironment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.