* 2026599
* RAPID: Viral structure-function-activity in the engineered wastewater cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Kartik Chandran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2022
* USD 198,388.00

The current global COVID-19 pandemic is caused by SARS-CoV2, a coronavirus.
While human coronaviruses are highly infective and responsible for the majority
of respiratory tract infections, the novel SARS-CoV2 is particularly virulent.
These viruses can survive under a variety of conditions and environments
including within human waste streams. Wastewater treatment systems are widely
used as a final barrier to protect water bodies from the impacts of human
pollution. However, the fate of coronaviruses during the wastewater treatment
process is poorly understood. The goal of this RAPID project is to develop a
science-based understanding of the fate of SARS-CoV2 and other viruses during
the treatment of human waste in wastewater treatment plants. Results of this
research will inform the scientific community and relevant stakeholders of the
impact of waste treatment on SARS-CoV2, as well as other potential threats and
agents. If successful, this approach will provide urgently needed information to
help respond to the current global pandemic and form the basis of a global
database for future pandemic events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses a current pressing need to understand the abundance, activity and
transmission of SARS-CoV2 and other viral determinants in engineered wastewater
treatment systems. The emergence of increasingly frequent and especially potent
microbial pathogens like SARS-CoV2 presents an urgent challenge to public
health. The extremely rapid global spread of SARS-CoV-2 infections as well as an
asymptomatic latency period in subjects suggests significant gaps in our
understanding of potential reservoirs and transmission pathways of SARS-CoV2.
One such reservoir and potential transmission pathway is the engineered
wastewater cycle. Wastewater treatment serves to reduce pollution and minimize
exposure of human populations to microbiological threats. The goal of this
project is to determine if wastewater treatment systems serve as a reservoir in
the current COVID-19 pandemic. This will be achieved by conducting a worldwide
environmental surveillance study using massively parallel high-throughput
systems biology approaches to characterize viral structure-function-activity
measures in the engineered wastewater cycle. The results of this study will
provide a database of SARS-CoV2 and other viruses in a broad spectrum of waste
streams, treatment systems, and disinfection processes. A second aim of this
research is to develop -omics based biomarkers and quantitative assays for SARS-
CoV2 to track fate in engineered wastewater treatment systems. Successful
completion of this research will provide urgently needed information on SARS-
CoV2 behavior in the environment that will inform efforts to manage and mitigate
the impacts of the global pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.