* 2026704
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  III:  Exploring Physics Guided Machine Learning for Accelerating Sensing and Physical Sciences
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Anish Arora, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 50,194.00

As machine learning (ML) continues to revolutionize the commercial space
including vision, speech, and text recognition, there is great anticipation in
the scientific community to unlock the power of ML for accelerating scientific
discovery. However, black-box ML models, which rely solely on training data and
ignore existing scientific knowledge have met with limited success in scientific
problems, particularly when labeled data is limited, sometimes even leading to
spectacular failures. This is because the black box ML models are susceptible to
learning spurious relationships that do not generalize well outside the data
they are trained for. The emerging paradigm of physics-guided machine learning
(PGML), which leverages the unique ability of ML algorithms to automatically
extract patterns and models from data with guidance of the knowledge accumulated
in physics (or scientific theories), aims to address the challenges faced by
black box ML in scientific applications. Significant exploratory efforts are
needed to formulate and assess sound PGML approaches for particular scientific
problems.

For data science, PGML has the potential to transform ML beyond black-box
applications by enabling solutions that generalize well even on unseen input-
output distributions that are different from those encountered during training,
by anchoring ML methods with the scientific body of knowledge. PGML makes a
distinct departure from the conventional view that physics-based models and ML
models are developed in isolation but seldom mixed together. The proposed
project is fundamentally different from existing body of research that attempts
to combine ML and domain sciences, e.g., by making use of domain-specific
knowledge in ML algorithms in simplistic ways, or making use of data in the
physics-based modeling process albeit without allowing data to change the
functional forms of existing physics-based models. The tight interplay between
data science and the domains of physics and sensing in the project lends itself
naturally to diverse education activities that complement the research tasks
outlined by our team. Over the duration of this one-year project, the team will
develop an integrative course at the graduate level on "ML meets Physics", which
explores topical, emerging themes in this interdisciplinary area. Offerings of
the course will draw upon course modules shared between the four universities,
such as shared guest videos and case studies. The physics department at BU has a
well-developed "Physics Outreach Project" that annually performs science
exhibitions for elementary schools in Binghamton metropolitan area, for which
the team will create a new exhibition about neural networks and ML. In follow-on
work, similar outreach events will be replicated at schools (Robinson Middle
School in Lowell and Metro STEM Middle School in Columbus). The PIs are
committed to increasing the diversity of involvement at various levels of the
training ecosystem impacted by this project, and have planned various
coordinated broader impact activities for inclusion of female and
underrepresented minority students as well as faculty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.