* 2026737
* RAPID: Impact of Coronavirus Understanding, Trust, and Other Public Beliefs and Attitudes on Behavioral Responses
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2020,08/31/2020
* Thomas Pepinsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2020
* USD 53,040.00

The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has been described by the World Health
Organization as a pandemic that will threaten lives the world over. Since first
diagnosed in the United States in February 2020, coronavirus has spread rapidly
across the country. The objective of this RAPID project is to collect a wide
range of public opinion data from a representative sample of Americans to track
the public reaction to coronavirus. Information on contemporary health scares
typically lead individuals to favor health policy measures, such as vaccines and
quarantines, and high levels of government trust to support coordinated
responses to epidemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study factors
that shape the public reactions to coronavirus in the context of this rapidly
unfolding public health emergency. Data will be collected in two waves from a
large random sample of Americans using YouGov. The PIs will measure public
understanding of coronavirus as well as public support for various policy
responses to contain or manage the severity of the crisis. The study's findings
will help to provide guidance on how public health authorities can best
communicate with Americans, and can assist in targeting public health responses
to those communities that may be most vulnerable to the virus but not aware of
the danger that it presents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.