* 2026208
* SBIR Phase II:  Flexible Printed OLED Displays
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Whitney Gaynor, Sinovia Technologies
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,199,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the creation of low-cost, flexible displays
allowing smart objects to better communicate with their users. Researchers
estimate that in 2017 there were 20 billion devices connected to the Internet
that were not computers, estimated to grow to 125 billion by 2025. These
Internet of Things devices are already used in many applications for
transportation, health and wellness, factory production, public safety, retail,
agriculture, homes, and offices. These devices can enable better resource
allocation, predictive maintenance, operations management, worker training, task
automation, energy management, and safety; they will require displays that are
thin, low power, flexible or curved, and easy to read. A near-term need is
autonomous transportation, which will need a method of visual communication
between vehicle and rider. This project will develop organic light emitting
diode (OLED) displays; just this initial transportation application will help
improve mobility for the elderly and disabled, traffic safety, and related
needs. In the longer term, this project will enable manufacturing of improved
displays with reduced processing waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop roll-to-roll printed
passive matrix (OLED) displays. These displays are built upon a patterned
transparent conductive anode that defines the pixels. To date, the only method
used in industry to create this anode is photolithography, a slow and expensive
process. The high-resolution printable anode developed here replaces both the
incumbent material and the lithographic process, laying the foundation for fully
roll-to-roll printed displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.