* 2026478
* FW-HTF-RM: Human-Robot Collaboration for Manual Work
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Timothy Smeeding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) project advances
the vision of robots that work alongside workers to augment human activities,
create better working conditions, provide more job satisfaction, open new
employment prospects, and result in greater productivity than manual labor or
automation alone. Existing principles and methods for work design and automation
often use robots to displace human workers and are inherently limited in their
economic and social benefits. This research advances a model of robots as
physical assistants, working in partnership with human workers to redefine human
work. The objective is to create a "matchmaking" process to identify human-robot
pairings that can significantly improve productivity, health, and safety, while
maximizing human labor resources. A multidisciplinary approach is applied to
existing manual tasks in the manufacturing sector that show high potential to
benefit from the integration of collaborative robots, in order to gain a better
understanding of the impact of teaming humans and intelligent robotic assistants
at the individual, operations, and socioeconomic levels. Finally, the insight
gained from investigating current job characteristics, worker skills, and robot
capabilities, is applied to enhance the benefits of the next generation of
manufacturing robots for the strength of the economy and the quality of life of
the workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to provide an increased
understanding of how human capabilities can be augmented and enhanced using
collaborative robots for physical or cognitive work; a new computational
framework to optimally match work characteristics and skills, human
capabilities, and robot augmentations; innovative economic models of, and policy
recommendations for, the transformation of human employment across industries
through human-robot collaboration; and insight into how the next generation of
robot systems should be designed. Existing manufacturing sector jobs and tasks
that show high potential to benefit from the integration of collaborative robots
will be studied to understand how human-robot pairings can significantly improve
economic productivity, and worker health and safety. The technical challenges in
human-robot teaming are considered in the larger context of worker wellbeing and
production as well as the substitutability between labor and robotics, changes
in demand for labor skills, and the response in labor demand and supply when
technology changes for a specific process. The project includes laboratory
simulations and expert review to validate the optimized human-robot work plans,
and recommendations on how the next generation of robot systems should be
designed to further augment human capabilities and productivity in
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.