* 2026205
* SBIR Phase I:  Models to predict soil and plant water status from continuous in-plant measurements
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Santiago, FloraPulse Co
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,544.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help fruit and tree nut growers minimize
environmental impacts and improve profitability. This project will use data from
implantable microchip sensors that directly measure tree hydration to develop
precision models of tree and vine needs for water. These models require no
hardware installation and are packaged in a user-friendly format. They will
automatically provide growers with affordable advice tailored to their field and
crop, enabling accurate 24/7 water status data, forecasts, and recommendations
for large-scale improvements in irrigation management of tree
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will explore plant health
via continuous variation of water status or drought stress within the tissues.
This data stream will be used to build dynamical models of plant water stress.
The project's technical aims are to: 1) Characterize the spatial (due to plant
position in the field) and temporal variations; 2) Develop a framework for
iterative development of predictive models of water stress dynamics from the
single-plant to the whole-field scale; and 3) Develop a system optimized for
industrial modeling of the spatial and temporal dynamics of water across the
full orchard or vineyard, diagnostics of high- and low-performing cultivars,
irrigation blocks, and decision support to optimize field design and crop
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.