* 2026099
* Collaborative Research: Revealing interseismic crustal deformation in the fold-and-thrust belt in western Taiwan from geodesy and seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mong-Han Huang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 302,585.00

Taiwan is one of the most active tectonic plate boundaries in the world. The
high collision rate between the Philippine Sea Plate and the Eurasian Plate has
built up a series of hills and mountains called a fold-and-thrust belt in
western Taiwan. There have been at least 10 powerful earthquakes in this belt in
the last 100 years. Every year, more than 1.6 inches of plate shortening is
accommodated by this fold-and-thrust belt, making western Taiwan an ideal
natural laboratory for understanding how mountains are built and earthquakes are
generated. This three-year proposal supports two tenure-track early career
faculty members and a female graduate student to broaden diversity in the
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. Some of the
products can be integrated into an outreach package for the Maryland Day open
house event. This package is designed for the general public for learning active
plate tectonics, earthquake cycles, and natural hazard in different tectonic
environments. Additionally, this project promotes collaboration between several
institutions in the US and Taiwan. The analyses and results of this work are
directly relevant to seismic hazard assessment in western Taiwan.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The team is merging geodetic and seismologic measurements in order to
answer scientific questions such as: (1) What are the characteristics of surface
deformation in the fold-and-thrust belt in Taiwan? (2) Is the orientation of the
principal crustal shortening consistent at different depths in a fold-and-thrust
belt? (3) Can we use seismology, geodesy, and numerical modeling to identify
active faults and calculate slip budget in different parts of the fold-and-
thrust belts in western Taiwan? The team uses more than 15 years of continuous
Global Navigation Satellite Systems (cGNSS) and interferometric synthetic
aperture radar (InSAR) displacement in order to estimate three-dimensional
surface deformation with about hundred-feet spatial resolution in the Western
Foothills in Taiwan. They also take advantage of the high-resolution seismic
data from the Taiwanese seismic catalog to compare with GNSS and InSAR
measurements. With these measurements combined, they can comprehensively analyze
tectonic stress at different depths and investigate how aseismic and seismic
fault motions with depth in an active fold-and-thrust belt. These joint surface
deformation and crustal stress analyses bring further insights into the behavior
of tectonic stress near the main detachment of a fold-and-thrust belt, and
characterize earthquake potential below the main
detachment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding to support this project is provided by
the EAR Tectonics and EAR Geophysics Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.