* 2026932
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: A Cloud-Native Data Repository for the Geoscience Community
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Naomi Henderson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,599,889.00

The Pangeo Project’s overall goal is to make scientists more productive by
making it easier, more efficient, and more cost effective to work with very
large datasets. This project focuses on using cloud computing to transform
scientists’ relationship with data. While most traditional data repositories
provide download services, this project will create a “cloud native data
repository” to instead allow scientists to do computing in the cloud, where the
data are already present and ready for analysis. Software tools and
infrastructure will be developed to enable scientists and data providers to
extract data from its original location and store it in the cloud in an
optimized format. Partnerships with industry will help ensure that this
innovative technological approach helps enhance US economic
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a new type of data
and computing facility for the geoscience community using cloud technology.
Central to this will be a repository of analysis-ready data stored in cloud-
native formats such as Zarr. The Pangeo cloud data repository will enable
scientists to create analysis-ready copies of existing datasets while fully
tracing their provenance to the original source repository. This new virtual
facility will transform how scientists work and collaborate, leading to massive
leaps in productivity for the entire field. The infrastructure will be built
using modular, reusable, sustainable individual software components, including
Pangeo Forge–a tool for automating the production of analysis-ready data–and a
cloud-native data catalog and accompanying website. Partnering with existing
data providers and science communities in the areas of ocean observatories,
coupled climate modeling, satellite observations, and weather reanalysis will
ensure that the repository is maximally useful to the research community. This
award by the Directorate for Geosciences is jointly supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.