* 2026797
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: RTEM: Rapid Testing as Multi-fidelity Data Collection for Epidemic Modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Gerardo Chowell-Puente, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2022
* USD 67,000.00

The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic is generating significant social,
economic, and health impacts and has highlighted the importance of real-time
analysis of the spatio-temporal dynamics of emerging infectious diseases.
COVID-19, which emerged out of the city of Wuhan in China in December 2019 is
now spreading in multiple countries. It is particularly concerning that the case
fatality rate appears to be higher for the novel coronavirus than for seasonal
influenza, and especially so for older populations and those with prior health
conditions such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Any plan for stopping
the epidemic must be based on a quantitative understanding of the proportion of
the at-risk population that needs to be protected by effective control measures
in order for transmission to decline sufficiently and quickly enough for the
epidemic to end. Different data collection and testing modalities and strategies
available to help calibrate transmission models and predict the spread/severity
of a disease, have variable costs, response times, and accuracies. In this Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) project, the team will examine the problem of
establishing optimal practices for rapid testing for the novel coronavirus. The
result will be the Rapid Testing for Epidemic Modeling (RTEM), which will
translate into science-based predictions of the COVID-19 epidemic's
characteristics, including the duration and overall size, and help the global
efforts to combat the disease. The RTEM will fill an important gap in data-
driven decision making during the COVID-19 epidemic and, thus, will enable
services with significant national economic and health impact. The educational
impact of the project will be on mentoring of post-doctoral and PhD researchers
and on curricula by incorporating research challenges and outcomes into existing
undergraduate and graduate classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational models
for the spatio-temporal dynamics of emerging infectious diseases and data- and
model-driven computer simulations for disease spreading are increasingly
critical in predicting geo-temporal evolution of epidemics as well as designing,
activating, and adapting practices for controlling epidemics. In this project,
the researchers tackle a Rapid Testing for Epidemic Modeling (RTEM) problem:
Given a partially known target disease model and a set of testing modalities
(from surveys to surveillance testing at known disease hotspots), with varying
costs, accuracies, and observational delays, what is the best rapid testing
strategy that would help recover the underlying disease model? Several
scientific questions arise: What is the value of testing? Should only sick
people be tested for virus detection? What level of resources should be devoted
to the development of highly accurate tests (low false positives, low false
negatives)? Is it better to use only one type of test aiming at the best
cost/effectiveness trade off, or a non-homogeneous testing policy? Naturally
these questions need to be investigated at the interface of epidemiology,
computer science, machine learning, mathematical modeling and statistics. As
part of the work, the team will develop a model of transmission dynamics and
control, tailored to COVID-19 in a way that accommodates diagnostic testing with
varying fidelities and delays underlying a rapid testing regimen. The
investigators will further integrate the resulting RTEM-SEIR model with EpiDMS
and DataStorm for executing continuous coupled simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded through the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases program (Division of Environmental Biology) and
the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation program
(Engineering).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.