* 2026192
* SBIR Phase I:  Cyanobacteria Metabolic Engineering for Dye Stability
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Pierre Wensel, SPIRA INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 275,416.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to produce a replacement for petroleum-based colors used in the food,
cosmetic and textile industries. The genetic engineering techniques developed in
this project can change the global natural color industry. Companies in these
industries are seeking to use natural dyes as a replacement for petroleum-based
dyes, but have been unable to find a suitable replacement for the color
blue.Most colors used today are made from petroleum and non-renewable materials
that can pollute. This project addresses the sustainable production of blue dye
by using special microbes. By successfully engineering a stable natural blue dye
through microbial production, virtually any product produced by the food,
cosmetic and textile industry will be able to replace artificial and synthetic
dyes in the supply chain. This technology establishes a novel scalable
production platform for the new natural manufacturing techniques for high-value
products beyond natural colors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
addresses the problem of synthetic, unsustainable, unhealthful petroleum-based
blue dye that is currently used in food, cosmetic and textile products. This is
due to how natural blue pigments degrade and fade in color after prolonged
exposure to high temperature and acidic environments during normal manufacturing
processes. This projectâ€™s research goal is to use genetic and screening methods
to enable photosynthetic manufacture of a blue dye tolerant of acids and high
temperatures for an extended period of time. The objectives are to characterize
the stability and economics of an existing natural blue dye produced by
cyanobacteria, express the parts of that natural blue dye in another microbe,
engineer the stability of those parts via directed evolution, rational design,
and a controlled engineering approach through an iterative process to test for
growth and stability. Lastly, the engineered genes will be expressed in the
original cyanobacterium via a novel CRISPR-based gene editing technique, and the
novel natural blue color will be tested for acid and high-temperature
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.