* 2027582
* RAPID: Examining the Impacts of Transitioning to Remote Teaching of Undergraduate Physics Labs Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Heather Lewandowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 122,199.00

Undergraduate laboratory instruction in STEM disciplines usually involves
special equipment, materials, and hands-on interactions. As a result, they are
the most difficult courses to translate from an in-person learning environment
to an online learning environment. Approaches that have achieved some success
include web-based simulations of traditional lab exercises and remote access to
laboratory equipment. Nevertheless, it is challenging for faculty to design
online replacements to their laboratory courses and most never attempted it
until forced to do so by the COVID-19 pandemic. In spring 2020, to maximize
student safety and provide continued instruction, colleges and universities
shifted all courses, including lab courses, to an online format. At this time,
fully online teaching and learning will extend through spring semester, and it
is possible that it will be necessary for even longer. This circumstance
presents a unique, time-sensitive opportunity to measure the impact of the
sudden, forced transition on teaching and learning in undergraduate physics lab
courses. This project will apply qualitative and quantitative approaches to
study impacts of the shift on students and identify strategies used to develop
online versions of in-person physics lab activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will use both quantitative and qualitative methods to explore how
online labs affect studentsâ€™ understanding of physics and identify the
approaches used by physics laboratory instructors to shift to an online learning
environment. The project has two specific aims: (1) to measure the effects of
the transition on students' learning and knowledge in physics and their
expectations about how experimental physics works; and (2) to identify and
categorize the strategies taken by physics instructors to enable students to
remotely experience laboratory-like learning. For the quantitative component of
the study, the Investigator will use the Colorado Learning Attitudes about
Science Survey for Experimental Physics (E-CLASS), an established survey that
her research group has previously developed and tested. The 30 questions in
E-CLASS assess students' views about their strategies, habits of mind, and
attitudes when doing experiments in physics lab classes. E-CLASS assigns scores
to students based on their ratings of how closely their personal views align
with those of experts, as well as how an experimental physicist would respond.
The pre-instruction E-CLASS was administered in 51 courses involving over 6,000
students this year. Thus, this project will allow analysis of the midterm
transition to remote instruction on a large scale. The investigator will add
supplemental questions to the post-instruction E-CLASS, as well as administer an
instructor survey, to specifically probe the transition to remote labs. The
additional questions and the instructor survey will allow the investigator to:
(a) analyze which variables in remote teaching most impact E-CLASS scores; (b)
compare lab teaching using remote instruction to lab teaching during previous
semesters; (c) categorize tools used by instructors during the transition to
remote labs; and (d) find common themes, challenges, and successes that will
inform the qualitative component of the study. The qualitative component will
involve interviews with both faculty and students to develop a case study that
captures the details of the transition to remote labs. This project aims to
build a better understanding of how the physics lab environment (including
social interactions) contributes to students' views about the nature of
experimentation and what it means to do experiments. These results will help
education researchers who wish to study the advantages and limitations of
different lab environments and remote strategies. In addition, the cataloging of
different approaches to transitioning lab courses to remote learning will help
increase instructors' knowledge of creative practices that they could use for
lab courses both during an emergency and outside of one. With this knowledge,
they might, for example, be able to increase opportunities for students who have
limited access to in-person lab instruction such as students in rural areas.
This RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE:
EHR) program in the Division of Undergraduate Education (Directorate for
Education and Human Resources), using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.