* 2027746
* RUI: Chromosome organization in cellular development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Lisa Hua, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The goal of this project is to uncover how human cells regulate their chromosome
organization during cell division. During cell division, chromosomes will
duplicate and divide equally among two daughter cells. Abnormalities in
chromosome segregation that occur during cell division in humans can lead to
detrimental consequences and disease. This project supports a research group in
a Hispanic serving institution dedicated to understanding the fundamental
principles of chromosome organization. It also provides a strong foundation for
recruitment and accessibility of under-represented student populations in the
life sciences. Opportunities for engagement with life science research will also
be made available to multiple populations in the local community, including
community college and high school students as well as adult seniors, in order to
promote diversity and equity in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homologous
chromosome pairing in mitosis can lead to allelic mis-regulation and genome
instability in human somatic cells. Little is known about how homologous
chromosome pairing is prevented throughout the cell cycle during embryogenesis
and adulthood. The research project will explore this largely untouched
biological paradigm. Experiments are planned to specifically test whether
compartmentalization of one haploid set from the other is conserved at
interphase, and thus throughout the cell cycle. Two types of parthenogenic cells
will be used to further determine if this compartmentalization depends on the
parental origin of the centromere. This comprehensive study will generate new
mechanistic information of the previously unrecognized haploid set-based
chromosome organization. Further, it will reveal, for the first time, the
underlying molecular mechanisms for higher-order chromosome organization during
the cell cycle. These results should open up a new avenue to explore the
importance of higher-order chromosome organization in development that will be
critically important for elucidating new mechanisms of cellular
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.