* 2027669
* RAPID: Deciphering Within-host Diversity and Multi-strain Infections in COVID-19
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Jian Peng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

To facilitate real-time outbreak management and mitigation strategies, there is
an urgent need to understand the spread of COVID-19. Researchers reconstruct the
evolutionary and transmission history of the virus by applying algorithms to
sequencing samples of COVID-19 patients. However, a key challenge is the
presence of multiple strains of the virus within hosts, which is overlooked by
current algorithms. This RAPID project will improve the nation’s COVID-19
response by developing algorithms to characterize the ongoing evolution and
spread of the viral strains that coexist within patients. The developed
algorithms will be applicable to future disease
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project seeks to understand the
impact of within-host viral diversity on the current spread of COVID-19. The
project will identify the viral strains coexisting in patients through the
development of algorithms that deconvolve COVID-19 sequencing samples.
Subsequently, the project will assess whether or not such coexisting strains are
the result of multiple infection events. Finally, the project will quantify the
severity of the identified viral strains through a protein functional analysis
of their mutations. Results will be disseminated through an online portal that
enable labs and hospitals to upload their sequencing reads and generate
annotations and characterizations of COVID-19 viral
strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the goal of this research is to
understand SARS-CoV-2 by investigating the evolutionary origins of the virus and
its genetic variation within host species in order to determine how molecular
variation correlates with host range, and to evaluate risk of further disease
emergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.