* 2027104
* Collaborative Research: Low-Energy Tandem Process for Fractionation and Reversible Preservation of Lignocellulose Using Multifunctional Aldehyde Sulfonic Acids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Qiang Yang, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 274,124.00

Lignocellulose is a promising alternative to fossil resources for the production
of fuels, chemicals, and materials. However, most current biomass fractionation
processes face issues such as unwanted loss of carbohydrate fractions (cellulose
fibers and hemicellulose sugars) and significant structure changes of lignin
(aromatic compounds) during the process, both of which devalue the fractionated
components. The proposed project will develop an energy-efficient, inexpensive,
and value-preserving biomass fractionation system using aldehyde sulfonic acids.
The success of the proposed research will directly impact the U.S.
lignocellulose-based biorefinery, pulp and paper industries, and other related
sectors. It will also contribute to a low-carbon bioeconomy by replacing
petroleum feedstocks and reducing energy consumption in the fractionation
process. The project will promote STEM education in biorefineries, bioenergy,
and bioproducts (3B) through graduate and undergraduate student training
(particularly female and minority students) and curriculum development. This
project will also include outreach activities with K-12 students by providing
lab tours, summer practicums, and research projects for the students interested
in the 3B fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses novel
aldehyde sulfonic acids (aldehyde-containing aromatic sulfonic acids) to
accomplish a rapid and near-complete fractionation of lignocellulosic biomass
without the need for significant biomass size-reduction pretreatment. This
process not only maximizes the production of cellulose, hemicellulose, and
lignin but it also reduces process energy consumption relative to existing
methods. Using a model-based molecular design approach, aldehyde sulfonic acids
with tunable structure, physical properties, and reactivity will be synthesized
from inexpensive aldehyde-containing aromatics by sulfonation. Mechanistically,
aldehyde sulfonic acids fractionate lignocellulose through the sulfonic acid
group and then protect carbohydrates and lignin from degradation and
condensation by interaction with the aldehyde group. Because of their
multifunction nature as a catalyst, solvent, and preserver, aldehyde sulfonic
acids are expected to fractionate centimeter-sized lignocellulose feedstocks
rapidly and nearly completely under mild conditions into cleavable and
upgradable lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose. This research will test the
central hypothesis that aldehyde sulfonic acid would be more effective and
selective than current combinations of mineral/organic acids and aldehydes in
fractionating lignocellulose. Mathematical models will be developed using
quantitative structure-performance analysis to predict structural properties and
performance of a range of aldehyde sulfonic acids. The tandem depolymerization
and reversible preservation of lignin and hemicellulose will be mechanistically
elucidated through these modeling studies to understand the cleavage reaction
kinetics of the acid-labile linkages and the formation of protective chemical
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.