* 2027091
* Collaborative Proposal: Feedback Control Theory, Computation, and Design for Scheduling and Blending
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* James Rawlings, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 298,560.00

The objectives of this project are to develop new theory, design methods, and
computational algorithms to improve two essential chemical manufacturing
operations: (i) chemical production scheduling; and (ii) raw material and final
product blending. New theory is needed to establish the level of performance
that can be achieved using automatic feedback and rescheduling as process
measurements become available and when large process disturbances occur, such as
equipment breakdowns and scheduled task delays. Computationally efficient
algorithms are required to ensure the calculations can be carried out in real
time; because these fast solutions may be suboptimal, a means of assuring the
performance guarantees of the optimal, but slower solution, must be developed.
Finally, because of the wide variety of scheduling problems that exist in the
chemical processing industries, a corresponding range of optimization methods
must be investigated to achieve required performance goals under process
uncertainties and disturbances. While this research will target applications in
both traditional and new classes of chemical production scheduling and material
blending operations, the modeling, design, and solution methods developed in
this research will be sufficiently general to be applied to scheduling problems
arising in any manufacturing facility having production targets and constraints
on materials, workflows, and inventories. A significant innovation of the
proposed approach is to enable automatic rescheduling with minimal disruption on
the arrival of new measurement information. This automated use of corrective
feedback is absent in almost all manufacturing scheduling approaches in use
today, and so this work will provide a transformative opportunity for improved
business performance across many industrial sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intuitive notion of online, repeated optimization of a model-based forecast as a
means of designing an automatic feedback control system has now taken hold in
most advanced control technologies applied in the chemical process industries as
well as many other industrial sectors such as robotic motion control, flight and
land vehicle guidance control, etc. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research is to advance the state of the art in designing such systems and
linking the design parameters to the performance and robustness properties of
the closed-loop operating systems. The target applications in this proposal are
characterized by discrete decisions (scheduling) and nonlinear models
(blending). Designing the objective function and constraints, and demonstrating
the performance under significant model uncertainty for this challenging class
of applications will enhance both the underlying fundamental control theory as
well as the application of these technologies to complex industrial
manufacturing facilities. In batch scheduling, the assumption that all events
(both decisions and disturbances) take place at an integer multiple of the
sample time is often inaccurate. Therefore, a state estimation method tailored
to batch scheduling that can automatically infer the state of the process from
the available measurements, regardless of when an event occurs, will be
developed. Finally, in the area of raw material and product blending, we face
the problem of mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) models that must be
solved repeatedly in real time. To develop reliable online operational
capabilities for this challenging class of problems, better solution methods are
required. Efforts will focus on solution methods that exploit a known, nearly
feasible/optimal solution because, in the context of real-time operations, such
a solution is typically available. Moreover, unlike previously proposed solution
approaches, this research program will build upon tightening and reformulation
methods that have been developed for MILP scheduling
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.