* 2027755
* RAPID: Curbing the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Alison Galvani, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2021
* USD 199,993.00

This project will produce a practical mathematical modeling framework that will
assess pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical intervention strategies in the US,
over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the midst of this current
unprecedented crisis, public health decisions must be made quickly when there is
a large level of uncertainty about the burden of COVID-19 in the community.
Research to evaluate intervention strategies can help decision-makers to
identify the proper control measures and intensity needed for containment and
mitigation of COVID-19. To accomplish these goals, the researchers will develop
a mathematical framework that will provide estimates of healthcare demands and
effectiveness of various containment and mitigation approaches at state and
county levels in the U.S. An open-access, interactive dashboard will provide
vital insights that policy makers can use to make and adjust informed decisions
during the course of the pandemic depending on available resources as well as
under various scenarios and locales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A stochastic modelling
framework will be used. The framework will follow the natural history of the
disease, with a compartmentalization of susceptible-exposed-infected-removed
(SEIR) and stratified by 16 age groups. The model will be parametrized useing
data representing contact patterns, demographic variables, hospitalizations,
deaths, incidence, disease characteristics, and capacity of critical healthcare
infrastructure (e.g., hospital beds) in US states and counties. To determine an
optimal deployment strategy of diagnostic tests tailored to the stage of the
COVID-19 outbreak, the researchers will simulate transmission dynamics of
COVID-19 to project relevant outcomes of disease. Strategies will account for
the available number of testing kits. As the symptoms of COVID-19 are difficult
to distinguish from influenza, historical data trends will be used to adjust the
number of cases of influenza-like-illness seeking medical treatment. The
researchers will explore strategies ranging from testing of individuals
presenting in hospitals with COVID-19 symptoms to age and risk dependent
surveillance where individuals from high-risk areas would be tested. To assess
the impact of various non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 transmission
and the accompanying healthcare surge capacity, the researchers will explore the
consequences of different public health measures such as contact tracing, self-
quarantine, and self-isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.