* 2027024
* Collaborative Research: A Dynamic Disruption Prediction System for Transportation Networks at a Road-Segment Level of Granularity
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mostafa Reisi Gahrooei, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 247,015.00

This grant will develop theoretical foundations and empirically test the
feasibility of a novel framework for real-time monitoring and disruption
prediction of road transportation networks during extreme events at a road-
segment level of granularity. Recent natural disasters have shown that road
transportation networks mainly fail due to unexpected gridlocks resulting from
unusual traffic patterns. These disruptions adversely affect emergency
management processes such as evacuations, rescue, and recovery operations.
Prompt prediction of disruptions is vital for a successful emergency management
system, but despite this critical need, emergency management processes still
lack real-time network monitoring and prediction methods for transportation
systems. Real-time monitoring and disruption prediction of road networks creates
opportunities to develop proactive emergency management systems that lead to
efficient, fast, and successful rescue and recovery operations. The benefits of
more efficient and successful emergency management operations will be passed
down to the public and will result in enhanced quality of life, health, and
well-being for commuters and other infrastructure users. Ultimately, this
project will contribute to developing sustainable and resilient cities and
communities that can function properly even under the stress of extreme events.
In connection with this project, educational and outreach efforts are envisioned
for integration into undergraduate and graduate courses. This grant will provide
an opportunity for project-based learning for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students, especially minorities and under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to conduct fundamental research
to create a methodology and framework that dynamically predicts disruptions in
road transportation networks based on unusual traffic patterns detected during
extreme events. The method designed in this project offers a holistic network
approach with a road segment level of granularity that, while it considers the
entire network, is also able to monitor and predict traffic flow in each road
segment. The specific research objectives are to 1) discover and model temporal
traffic flow interdependencies, 2) efficiently monitor traffic flows on a real-
time basis at a road segment level of granularity using instantaneous traffic
data to detect unusual traffic patterns, and 3) predict disruptions by
integrating network interdependencies and the identified unusual traffic
patterns. The outcomes of this project will set the stage for development of
proactive emergency management systems that will result in more efficient and
successful rescue and recovery operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.