* 2027764
* SYMPOSIUM: XR Access 2020
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Shiri Azenkot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 47,110.00

The XR Access 2020 Symposium will convene researchers and other stakeholders in
the area of accessibility and XR to share research and devise a plan for making
these technologies accessible to persons with disabilities. This funding will
support attendees from academic institutions and nonprofit groups whose work
touches accessibility and XR (collectively mixed, augmented, virtual, and
extended reality, and 360 video). This year's event, to be held at Cornell
Tech's Verizon Executive Education Center in New York City on July 20-21, builds
on work begun at the 2019 Symposium that brought together over 120 researchers,
advocates, and industry leaders to discuss the state of XR accessibility and
plan for a more accessible future. The scope of the 2020 Symposium spans the
content creation, software development, and hardware aspects of the XR industry,
and it is a key aspect of the XR Access Initiative which aims to address the
needs of users with speech, motor, vision, hearing and age-related impairments,
with cognitive limitations, and with emotional and learning disabilities. There
are currently 27 million Americans with low vision, 41 million who are Deaf or
hard of hearing, and 18 million with limited mobility. For many of these people,
using XR devices and consuming XR content is not possible. The research, design,
and advocacy needed to include these users in the 18-billion-dollar XR market is
still nascent. This Symposium will have broad impact by catalyzing new research
into the specific mechanisms for improving XR accessibility. It will also serve
to connect scientists to advocates, educators, and business leaders to ensure
that advances in the science of accessibility are implemented with input from
people with disabilities and are viable at scale. Persons with disabilities from
academia and nonprofits will be encouraged to attend, because no conversation
about increasing accessibility in technology can go forward in a meaningful
manner without including disability advocates and users with disabilities at the
table from the beginning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XR technologies are on the cusp
of becoming mainstream. They will soon reshape the way we work, learn and play.
However, today XR technologies are not accessible to the millions of people with
disabilities around the world. By their nature, they introduce a completely new
set of challenges for people whose abilities are not typically considered in the
technology design process. The Symposium will stimulate discussion and
collaborative research to address questions such as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-&gt;
How can people with different perceptual abilities experience XR
applications?&lt;br/&gt;-&gt; How should XR hardware be designed to consider the
needs of people with different abilities?&lt;br/&gt;-&gt; What accessibility
features can enhance immersion, enjoyment, and learning through XR for all
users?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Symposium will also address deeper questions
about the nature and future of accessibility for emerging technologies more
broadly. Unlike prior work that develops assistive technology in XR to support
people with disabilities, the Symposium aims to foster research that makes XR
technologies themselves accessible. To ensure the impact of the research begun
at the Symposium, the event's agenda will include meetings of cross-industry
working groups, each focusing on increasing the XR Access Initiative's impact in
a specific area. The Guidelines and Practices group will synthesize existing
accessibility policies and practices in the XR space, and create new ones that
are applicable to other emerging technologies. Similarly, the Outreach group
will focus on creating strategies for bringing awareness of the need for XR
accessibility to key corporate stakeholders and to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.