* 2027990
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Agent-based Modeling Toward Effective Testing and Contact-tracing During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 04/30/2023
* USD 161,124.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will support research that will
improve our understanding of the spread of COVID-19 and potential mitigation
strategies at the city level, promoting scientific progress and contributing to
national health and prosperity. As COVID-19 continues to spread, the
effectiveness of different testing strategies and predictive models are brought
into question. Testing strategies include the use of drive-through facilities
that have found success elsewhere but may prove impractical for elderly and low-
income sections of the population, and the use of hospitals, which adds further
burden to the healthcare system and may carry the risk of higher contagion.
Mathematical models that forecast the spread of the disease are of paramount
importance to inform local and global policy makers on the course of action that
should be undertaken to mitigate the outbreak and give relief to the population.
However, such models are often confounded by the absence of symptoms in early
stages, complex mobility patterns, and limited testing resources. This award
supports fundamental research toward a mathematical model that will overcome
these confounding factors, through advancements in dynamics and control. By
explicitly modeling social and mobility constraints, this research will help
increase the general well-being of communities and reduce disparities across the
population. The model will afford the simulation of critical what-if scenarios
and will include the evaluation of different testing policies and mitigation
actions, thereby constituting a valuable support to policy makers involved in
the containment and eradication of the epidemic. Research outcomes will be
presented to the public, including health professionals and authorities to
inform public policy in the ongoing crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will respond to COVID-19 outbreak in real time through a fine-resolution agent-
based and data-driven model that aims at providing unprecedented insight in the
spread and potential mitigation strategies of this virus at the city level. The
approach will afford thorough what-if analysis on the effectiveness of ongoing
and potential mitigation strategies. The agent-based model will include COVID-19
specific features, such as the type and timing of testing, asymptomatic
occurrence, and hospitalization stages. The framework will be grounded in
publicly available census and geo-referred data from New Rochelle, New York.
Social behavior associated with rational and irrational factors will be included
in the mobility patterns of the agent-based model at multiple spatial and
temporal scales to increase the granularity of the predictions. Network-
theoretic and data-driven control strategies will inform enhanced testing
protocols involving active trials on the basis of available contact databases
collected at testing sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.