* 2027203
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Biofilm Resource and Information Database (BRaID): A Tool to Fuse Diverse Biofilm Data Types
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Thiruvarangan Ramaraj, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 138,321.00

The "Biofilm Resource and Information Database (BRaID)" project is a
collaboration between the Center for Biofilm Engineering (CBE) at Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT and the Gianforte School of Computing at MSU and the
National Center for Genome Resources (NCGR), Santa Fe, NM. Biofilms are
microbial communities that have important impacts on water quality, food
production, energy-making processes, and various aspects of human and animal
health. BRaID serves as a community resource, containing both data and the
metadata (where or how data was collected, processed, and interpreted). Some
examples of metadata include: a geographical location, such as the Bozeman Water
Reclamation Facility; microenvironments such as water chemistry; environmental
factors such as changes in temperature, perturbations such as adding corrosion
inhibitors; and interventions such as antibiotic treatments. BRaID has utility
to a broad range of stakeholders in basic and applied research, as such it is
expected to enhance the competitiveness of US industry, basic research, and
defense, as well as assist with advancements in human health, environmental
health, and energy production. Outreach activities will include (1)
dissemination of research outcomes to local community members and industry
stakeholders at conferences and legislator engagements; (2) involvement of
underrepresented Native American students from high schools and tribal colleges
in summer research activities as well as undergraduate researchers at MSU-
Bozeman; and (3) educational activities in undergraduate and graduate courses at
MSU, as well as summer internship, outreach and training activities at the
NCGR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Awareness of the importance of microbial biofilms -
microorganisms growing as aggregates attached to surfaces, interfaces, or each
other - has exploded in the past decade. Diverse microbial communities grow as
biofilms in such settings as dental plaque, heart valves, natural watercourses,
wastewater treatment processes, cooling systems, oil and gas pipelines, and
persistent infections. Biofilms can have significant impacts on human health,
industrial productivity, and natural resources, spanning natural, engineered,
and medical systems. Despite the importance of biofilms, there is no public web
portal and database dedicated to storage, analysis, and communication of
biofilm-specific data. Part of the reason for this is the sheer breadth of data
types used to describe biofilms, including nucleotide sequences, images, video,
chemistry (water, surface, and extracellular polymer matrix), remediation
history, clinical outcomes, and geospatial data. BRaID will complement existing
microbial databases by developing a data representation paradigm that solves the
problems posed by the challenge arising from the unique combination of data, and
will implement new metrics and algorithms for the formal description and
analysis of biofilms data. This project aims to provide the premier resource
that offers users the ability to ask complex questions (including those
currently impossible to answer), permitting quantitative comparisons among
biofilms, supporting remediation efforts, and enabling predictions about
outcomes. Results of the project can be found at: http://ncgr.org/braid.