* 2027849
* I-Corps: A Smart Sensing System for Online Machine Health Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a smart sensing system capable of real-time, continuous condition
monitoring of a machine’s health status. The goal is to reduce operation costs
by optimizing the maintenance schedule and eliminating the need for costly
shutdowns for inspection, while also avoiding catastrophic component failure
during operation. Its comprehensive monitoring of both debris and multiple oil
properties with real-time analysis is expected to transform condition monitoring
of rotating and reciprocating machines used in the wind farm, transportation,
manufacturing and defense industries. Along with high sensitivity and compact
size, it will be a powerful instrument for online health monitoring and life
prognosis for bearings, turbomachinery gearboxes, and even combustion engines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
smart sensing system for online machine health monitoring. The technology uses a
unique inductive pulse sensing technology combined with a multiplexed
microfluidic device enabling the detection of individual wear debris (20+
microns), enabling continuous monitoring of the entire wear progression from
inception. In addition, real-time big data processing is used to significantly
reduce the data size to be analyzed and stored, enabling real-time online
monitoring. The system also uses a property-sensing array enabling accurate
lubricant measurement of multiple characteristics. The artificial neural network
is used to pinpoint individual oil properties from the overlapped sensor
responses with high accuracy and speed, eliminating cross-sensitivities and
providing complete machine health information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.