* 2027013
* RAPID: Fast Holographic Assay for Viral Infection with Application to COVID-19
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* David Grier, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Conventional diagnostic tests for viral
infections focus on the biochemical properties of pathogens; they require costly
reagents and multiple processing steps by highly trained personnel. This RAPID
program instead uses fast and inexpensive optical techniques to
detect&lt;br/&gt;the physical properties of viral pathogens. The breakthrough
that enables this new approach to medical diagnostics is a technique called
holographic particle characterization (HPC). HPC creates laser holograms of
specially prepared test beads and uses those holograms to monitor small changes
in the beads’ properties that occur when molecules or virus particles bind to
their surfaces. Originally developed for fundamental research in soft condensed
matter physics, HPC already has been demonstrated to provide fast and sensitive
immunoassays in model systems. These measurements are fast, inexpensive and can
be performed automatically with minimal human intervention. The next step is to
create libraries of test beads for different target diseases and to demonstrate
that HPC can diagnose those diseases - first in the research laboratory, and
then in a clinical setting. The anticipated product of this work is a new
platform for diagnosing viral infections that can meet the need for fast,
accurate and cost-effective testing under the strains imposed by public health
crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent
need for new technologies to detect viral pathogens. Holographic binding assays
can detect the presence of virus particles and antibodies in fluid media through
their influence on the optical properties of functionalized probe beads. The
micrometer-scale beads that will be developed for this program will incorporate
chemical groups on their surfaces to selectively bind specific targets, such as
the SARS-CoV-2 virus responsible for COVID-19 or the antibodies that are
produced in response to infection. Bound targets increase the apparent size of a
bead and alter its light-scattering properties. Both of these effects can be
resolved directly by holographic particle characterization, a comparatively new
platform technology that has the demonstrated ability to measure the diameter
and refractive index of micrometer-scale colloidal spheres with part-per-
thousand precision. A statistical sample consisting of thousands of single-bead
measurements can be completed in a matter of minutes using commercial
instrumentation for holographic particle characterization. Specialized reagents
are not required. Multiplexed assays for multiple targets can be performed with
libraries of functionalized beads that are distinguished by their base diameters
and refractive indexes. Each such assay can therefore simultaneously diagnose a
viral infection both by the presence of virions, and also by the presence of
antibodies. This RAPID program will deliver scalable syntheses of probe beads
for diagnosing viral infection and automated protocols for performing
holographic binding assays, enabling high-throughput medical
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.