* 2027888
* RAPID: Children's Biological Beliefs Concerning COVID-19 Disease Transmission
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Susan Gelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In the current COVID-19 crisis, developing effective means of educating children
about disease transmission is a matter of vital concern, not only for scientific
literacy, but also for public health. Children play an important role in the
transmission of contagious illness, given how frequently they engage in risky
behaviors such as touching their faces or making physical contact with
caregivers. Public health recommendations include teaching best practice to
children to reduce disease spread, but prior research shows that children are
unlikely to engage in these practices without a firm understanding of the
underlying process of disease transmission. This RAPID award to a team of
researchers at the University of Michigan will assess what children know, what
they don't know, and what they think they know (but is scientifically
inaccurate) about the transmission of COVID-19. In conducting a comprehensive
assessment with children aged 5-12 years and their parents, the researchers will
address such questions as: At what ages do children understand aspects of viral
transmission that are non-obvious or invisible, such as asymptomatic carriers,
or the potential for objects and surfaces to carry infection? At what ages can
children go beyond isolated facts they have learned to figure out what to do in
new situations? How is children's biological reasoning influenced by non-
biological factors, such whether a potential carrier is a friend or a stranger?
How does children's reasoning about a pandemic that has already massively
disrupted their daily lives (COVID-19) compare with their reasoning about a more
ordinary and innocuous illness (the common cold)? Findings from the project will
inform parents, educators, researchers, and public health professionals about
children's understanding of the transmission of disease in general, and COVID-19
in particular. It will lay the foundation for the rapid development of evidence-
based educational interventions that target gaps and misconceptions in
childrenâ€™s understanding, thereby improving both scientific literacy and
adherence to public health guidelines. This RAPID award is made by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program in DRL, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act. ECR supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will interview children age 5-12 years and their parents, employing a battery of
measures to assess children's understanding of the biological processes of viral
transmission, comparing COVID-19 with the common cold. Study 1 will address
children's understanding of how and why viruses work and spread, with a battery
of child-friendly tasks that assess: incubation periods (lag between infection
and disease onset), asymptomatic hosts, that viruses can survive on a surface or
object (such as a doorknob), and that viruses can gain access to the body
through the eyes, nose, and mouth. Study 2 will focus on who may contract,
transmit, or suffer the consequences of viral disease, and the role of both
biological and non-biological factors (such as a person's nationality, language,
or familiarity) in these judgments. For example, children will receive a series
of vignettes, each involving two hypothetical characters of different social
identities, where disease transmission is a possibility, and will be asked to
assess the likelihood that the character will contract the illness, how sick the
character will get, and whether or not the character will transmit the illness
to another person. While in-person contact is restricted, children will be
interviewed via face-to-face remote video and a Qualtrics survey link sent to
the parent/guardian. Interviews will be recorded, transcribed, and coded.
Intercorrelations among children's performance across the different tasks will
assess whether understanding consists of piecemeal facts as opposed to coherent
understandings. Determining children's understanding of disease transmission
during this global pandemic provides an unprecedented opportunity to identify
gaps and misconceptions in children's understanding of viral transmission, to
provide a foundation for developing effective educational programming about
biology in the elementary and middle school years. It will also be a source of
theoretically significant data of central interest to STEM education regarding
the coherence of children's biological theories over developmental time, and how
children's informal biological theories may shift in the context of an ongoing
health crisis. The project will provide a foundation for improving biological
education, as well as for public health and children's understanding of and
reactions to illness in others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.