* 2027241
* Collaborative Research: CIBR: Leaping the Specimen Digitization Gap: Connecting Novel Tools, Machine Learning and Public Participation to Label Digitization Efforts
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Edward Gilbert, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 465,969.00

National efforts to digitize natural history collections have transformed
previously siloed, unstandardized resources into a networked, openly available
information nexus usable to meet grand scientific and societal challenges.
Despite these enormous strides, major bottlenecks in this digitization process
still exist, especially in areas where automation approaches have been most
challenging. In particular, capturing analog specimen data into digital format
and converting text descriptions of collecting locations into mappable
geocoordinates, have remained boutique efforts. Because of these bottlenecks, as
many as 91% of digitized specimens are missing key elements that hamper ability
to use these specimen records more effectively. This project will develop key
workflows to dramatically increase the speed at which specimen data can be
captured and made available broadly to data providers and consumers. These
workflows include novel approaches that use both computer and human intelligence
to advance our ability to capture specimen information. One key workflow focuses
on the challenge of automated conversion of imaged specimen labels into properly
formatted and usable digital text. Critical to the success of this workflow are
human validation checkpoints that will be implemented using a popular citizen
science platform, Notes from Nature. A second workflow focuses on new tools that
take advantage of previous efforts to assign mappable coordinates based on
specimen collection location to automatically add such mapping information for
specimens missing those data. Finally, this effort will create tools for easy
access to these new data in and out of common use databases, making the data
immediately available for museum providers and researchers alike. This effort
will connect public participation in science to these novel tools and
technologies. Further, it will train diverse graduate students and undergraduate
students in bioinformatics and museum science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort
has three design goals that together will dramatically reduce the digitization
gap in museum specimen data. The first design goal will combine machine learning
methods with public participation in scientific research (PPSR) via the
successful Notes from Nature (NfN) project to speed up label digitization and
facilitate obtaining locality data. A key part of the first design goal utilizes
supervised machine learning approaches and object character recognition (OCR)
when possible but also includes “humans in the loop” using the NfN platform to
gather fast quality feedback from human volunteers at key points. This approach
also provides a means to create high-quality training datasets needed for
improving automation steps, ultimately further reducing human effort. The second
design goal will integrate locality data interpretation through GEOLocate with a
Biodiversity Enhanced Locality Service (BELS), which will make it possible to
look up pre-existing localities that have been georeferenced using best
practices. A third goal is to connect these workflows and services to Symbiota,
a community digitization hub, to allow easy inflow and outflow of content back
to digitization networks. Providers will be able to easily access new data along
with associated metadata about processing steps, all returned using established
standards and best practices. The key to this effort will be engagement with the
community, including researchers, collections staff, and Zooniverse volunteers.
Engagement will focus on virtual training and working with an advisory committee
in order to grow capacity and community involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.