* 2027027
* RAPID: Changes in Social Attitudes and Behavior in Response to COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Natalie Shook, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 182,574.00

For many U.S. citizens the rapidly increasing threat of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) has led to widespread behavior change, including social distancing
and self-quarantine. Determining the social and psychological factors that
predict unwillingness to engage in preventative health behaviors is crucial to
develop strategies for reducing widespread disease. This project identifies
psychosocial factors associated with preventative behavior change, thereby
highlighting who may be at greater risk of contracting and spreading COVID-19
and future infectious diseases. The research will inform interventions designed
to increase preventative health behaviors that reduce pathogen transmission. The
threat of COVID-19 has also altered many social attitudes, including bias toward
specific groups such as people of Asian descent. This project will shed light on
the long-term consequences of such social changes for policy, international
relations, and individual decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
informs and advances basic understanding of the human Behavioral Immune System
(BIS). The BIS is theorized to encompass a variety of behaviors that humans
adopt to reduce disease infection, making this research particularly timely. The
research tests predictions regarding how fear of contagion influences health
related behaviors and social attitudes. One goal is to quantify the extent to
which social behaviors and attitudes have changed in response to the COVID-19
threat. The moderating effects of individual differences (personality traits,
demographics, disgust sensitivity) will also be tested. The research utilizes a
novel, intensive longitudinal design that follows a large nationally
representative U.S. sample for one year. Data will be collected throughout the
pandemic, decreasing in frequency as the threat subsides. Online surveys will
assess preventative behaviors (e.g., handwashing, social distancing), social
attitudes (prejudice, dangerous worldview, social beliefs), and individual
difference variables. National statistics regarding COVID-19 prevalence in each
survey respondentâ€™s locale will also be collected to determine whether changes
in social attitudes and behavior parallel changes in COVID-19 threat. The
project will inform current and future efforts for increasing preventative
health behaviors and reducing the spread of disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.