* 2027064
* Granular Electrification in Aeolian Sand Transport: Paradox or Enigma?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Douglas Sherman, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 12/31/2023
* USD 248,115.00

Wind-blown sand is a well known, natural hazard in many environments. Drifting
sand threatens settlements and infrastructure, and enhances dust emissions, with
a suite of consequential human health and environmental degradation issues. Less
understood is the generation of static electricity caused by sand transport. The
induced electric charges may be strong enough to enhance dust generation, alter
sediment transport rates; cause flashover and breakdown in transmission lines;
or interrupt signal transmission. This project aims to measure, for the first
time, details of granular electrification in a natural environment and to use
the data to develop better transport models that account for electrification.
Success here contributes to understanding and predicting the evolution and
migration of common sedimentary aeolian systems such as dune fields. Projections
of the impacts of climate change include increased desertification and
remobilization of currently stabilized grasslands, such as the Nebraska
Sandhills. Better sand transport models will be valuable tools for planning
adaptations to manage future sand drift. The project contributes to the
infrastructure of science by developing an international research collaboration
network involving six countries and training future scientists, including a
female Ph.D. student and several M.S. and undergraduate students. The project
partners with the Center for Science Education, University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research to develop teaching materials and videos for STEM training;
work with the Alabama Science in Motion program to conduct workshops for
training teachers about Earth and Space science; and deliver simple class
demonstrations of fundamentals of sand transport and electrification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a comprehensive field campaign
to elucidate the influence of granular electrification on aeolian sand transport
rates and use the results to develop better sand transport models that can be
applied to current and future terrestrial and extraterrestrial environments.
Data will be obtained to describe wind speeds; sand transport; granular,
atmospheric, and surficial electrical charges; saltation intensity; sand size
and moisture content; and air temperature and relative humidity. The data will
be analyzed with multiple regression and other statistical methods to quantify
the magnitude and direction of electrification effects. The experimental design
will ensure that the resulting data set will be of the highest standards of
quality and at a level of detail seldom (if ever) achieved. Success will lead to
more robust transport rates models that include granular electrification terms,
leading to enhanced ability to understand the dynamics of sand drift, dune
building, aeolian abrasion, and dust generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.