* 2027402
* Supporting Retention and Graduation of Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics Majors in Rural Central Louisiana
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Guoyi Ke, Louisiana State University at Alexandria
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Louisiana
State University at Alexandria, the only state-supported undergraduate
institution in Central Louisiana. Over its five-year duration, the project will
provide scholarships to 18 full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in biology, chemistry, and mathematics. These Scholars will be admitted
in two cohorts and receive four-year scholarships. The project aims to increase
persistence of the Scholars in STEM fields by linking scholarships with both
proven and innovative supporting activities, including near-peer, faculty, and
professional mentoring, supplemental instruction, early alert intervention
pathways, monthly workshops focusing on career and interpersonal skills, a
living/learning community, early undergraduate research exposure, cohort common
coursework and specialized computational and writing courses, and participation
in research conferences. With assistance of faculty mentors, the Scholars will
identify specific challenges, motivations, and successes in their STEM education
journey. The introduction of advanced computational courses such as
bioinformatics, chemometrics, and multivariate statistical analysis will enable
Scholars to gain a deeper understanding of STEM content. The University is one
of the most racially diverse institutions in the state: about 30% of the student
population are first-generation college students and 65% requiring federal,
state, and/or institutional aid. As a result, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in STEM fields and to increase knowledge about how to
improve educational outcomes for low-income, high-achieving STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The specific aims include: 1) strengthening student
support services to increase retention and four-year graduation rates; 2)
establishing and administering tier-level mentorships, research opportunities,
and enhanced career services to increase STEM career readiness; and 3)
establishing a data monitoring system to analyze student information in order to
identify STEM student needs and determine the impact of various activities on
their success. The project will implement evidence-based practices for
increasing undergraduate graduation in STEM, including academic support in
introductory STEM courses, financial assistance, faculty mentorship, and
innovative curriculum. This project aims to provide the Scholars with a holistic
program of support services and opportunities for engagement in STEM. In
addition to advancing understanding of challenges and motivations affecting
students’ retention and graduation in STEM fields, this project has the
potential to create future STEM leaders who can contribute to the economy of the
underserved rural areas of Central Louisiana. The project will be evaluated
using data from formative and summative assessments. Comparative techniques will
be used to analyze qualitative data and parametric tests will be used to analyze
quantitative data. The results of these efforts will be disseminated locally and
nationally for the benefit of other institutions with similar goals. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.