* 2027321
* Eager: Demonstration of Space-Time Surface Plasmon Polaritons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Kimani Toussaint, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 12/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Optical sensors based on nanotechnology have been an area of technological
importance because of the extreme sensitivity of these devices to changes in the
surrounding environment. However, the effectiveness of this technology is
limited to sensing these disturbances over a very limited range. The PI will
lead an investigation of a new type of phenomenon that could lead to
significantly enhanced optical sensors that can work over significantly extended
distances. The research activity will provide an opportunity to train and mentor
at least one graduate student belonging to an underrepresented group in
experimental nano-optics and associated data analysis. Moreover, the student
will assist in the broad dissemination of all results in the form of various
academic channels including technical peer-reviewed publications, conference
presentations, and seminars. Concepts in nano-optics involving exotic optical
beams will be incorporated into a new introductory, hands-on optical microscopy
course that targets undergraduate seniors and graduate students from various
engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional surface plasmon
polaritons (SPPs), which exist at a metal-dielectric interface, are based on
excitation by either an optical plane wave or Gaussian beam. As a result, SPPs
propagate along this interface up to a few hundred microns in the NIR regime
(and much shorter lengths in the visible) and evanescently decay away from the
surface. The research carried out here investigates the existence of space-time
surface plasmon polaritons (ST-SPPs), which are expected to exhibit extended
propagation along a metal-dielectric interface. ST-SPPs utilize newly developed
space-time (ST) wave packets, which have been shown experimentally to travel
diffraction-free and dispersion-free in any medium along one transverse
dimension. ST wave packets are a manifestation of ‘classically entangling’ an
optical field along (typically) two separable degrees-of-freedom, which in this
case are spatial frequency and wavelength. While traditional SPPs are confined
along only one direction in the transverse plane on the surface, which they
propagate along, ST-SPPs are expected to be confined in two transverse
dimensions. Thus, in lieu of the 1-D diffractive spreading that SPPs undergo,
ST-SPPs will remain confined and continue to propagate along the surface
essentially diffraction-free. In the presence of absorptive loss, there is the
expected reduction in intensity of the ST-SPP, but the effect of diffraction on
the ST-SPP remains unchanged. Thus, an ST-SPP could propagate long distances
limited by the metal loss only as opposed to an SPP which will be limited by
both metal loss and diffraction. Moreover, in contrast to a Gaussian-based SPP
wave packet, a ST-SPP would not undergo any temporal spread, i.e., dispersion.
In addition, unlike Airy plasmons, the proposed ST-SPPs travel in a straight
line. Thus, the characteristics of ST-SPPs would be akin to a plasmonic bullet.
In addition to confirming the existence of ST-SPPs, the fundamental studies
carried out here aims to demonstrate that ST-SPPs can travel at much greater
distances (~300x without loss, and up to ~1000x with loss and tight confinement)
than SPPs, and beam steering of ST-SPPs on a surface at femtosecond time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.