* 2027575
* CAREER: Generating Application-Specific Database Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alvin Cheung, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 518,457.00

Database management systems (DBMSs) are designed to be general-purpose tools
that support a wide variety of applications, from banking to social networking
and making scientific discoveries. To improve the performance of such
applications, researchers have leveraged the unique characteristics of
application areas to build domain-specific DBMSs that outperform traditional
implementations. Performing such specialization requires labor intensive,
complex, and error prone efforts. The intellectual merits of this project are to
advance the state of the art in application-specific DBMS design by
investigating techniques to perform such domain specialization automatically. As
part of this project's broader impacts, the lessons and techniques learned will
be integrated into programming languages and classes that the PI routinely
teaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposal aims to leverage
recent advances in programming systems and data management research to build
tools that can automatically understand database application semantics. Given
such knowledge, the goals of this project are to 1) create tools that can
automatically optimize the specific set of queries that can potentially be
issued by the application, and prove that the optimized queries are semantically
equivalent to the inputs; 2) investigate techniques to automatically select the
optimal framework (in terms of execution time, resources required, etc) to
execute the queries issued by the application, and 3) devise new languages for
programmers to express their data consistency needs when queries are to be
executed across a distributed set of nodes, and build an implementation of such
languages. All software artifacts developed in this project are released to the
public, with plans to incorporate their usage in both the undergraduate and
graduate curricula. In addition, as part of the project is to collect and study
the shortcomings of real-world database applications, the collected applications
are collected into a repository that is publicly accessible repository for
researchers and practitioners in the field to experiment and reproduce the
results.