* 2027552
* Enabling Hydrogen Gas Production from Seawater Using Electrolytes Contained by Reverse Osmosis Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Bruce Logan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The production of hydrogen gas is a significant component of global energy
consumption and carbon emissions, accounting for 1% of global energy use. More
than half this hydrogen is used to make fertilizer, and nearly all hydrogen gas
is currently produced from fossil fuels. However, hydrogen gas can be produced
from water using renewable electricity sources in a process called electrolysis,
which splits water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen gases. The relative
abundance of affordable wind energy, solar arrays, and seawater at offshore and
coastal locations make them ideal sites for hydrogen gas production by this
approach. However, the cost of hydrogen production by using a water electrolyzer
must be reduced to make it economically competitive with other methods. Also,
the production of toxic chemical byproducts from the chloride salts in seawater
must be avoided. To meet these demands, the membranes typically used in
electrolyzer systems will be replaced with the relatively inexpensive, salt-
rejecting membranes commonly used for reverse osmosis (RO) seawater
desalination. The use of RO membranes represents a fundamentally new approach to
water electrolysis for hydrogen gas production. The RO membranes can be used to
contain the seawater salts so that they do not react to form chemicals that are
toxic or that could damage the membranes. This use of these ion-size selective
RO membranes could have a large impact on methods for hydrogen gas production as
well as other electrochemical separation technologies. This project, therefore,
addresses a critical societal need for hydrogen gas production using a
sustainable process. An educational platform will also be developed to engage
the public in a conversation about energy use. The platform is expected to
enhance general understanding of how our daily energy use can be modified to
reduce fossil fuel use and carbon dioxide emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop a new seawater electrolysis approach to reduce the
cost of water electrolyzers. The objective will be accomplished by eliminating
the use of costly proton exchange membranes and containing the anolyte to avoid
chlorine gas production from chloride salts in seawater. To accomplish these
goals, the proton exchange membrane will be replaced with a reverse osmosis (RO)
membrane that can exclude ions while allowing proton ion transport between the
electrodes, balancing charge between the electrolytes. The anolyte is contained
by the RO membrane so that only oxygen gas evolution occurs in that compartment,
and hydrogen gas evolution from seawater occurs in the catholyte, enabled by
proton transport through the RO membrane. This approach, therefore, uses RO
membranes for simultaneous salt ion retention and charged ion (proton)
transport. Gas transport is avoided between the chambers and the RO membrane
enables direct pressurized production of hydrogen. Water replacement in the
anolyte can be accomplished by balancing osmotic pressure to achieve forward
osmosis or by intermittent pressure adjustments between the two chambers.
Preliminary data support this claim that some RO membranes have sufficiently low
internal resistance to support high current densities (&gt;100 Amps per square
centimeter). Methods are proposed to reduce crossover of salts and improve
membrane performance through nanoscale engineering of the membrane surface and
supporting structures. This RO membrane approach could make hydrogen gas
production from water electrolysis using renewable energy cost-competitive with
steam reforming using fossil fuels, which would have a great societal benefit.
Another project goal with broad applications is to enhance energy literacy of
the public by exploring energy use based in terms of a daily energy unit, D,
which ranges from 1 (food for one person) to 106 (energy normalized per person
in the USA per day). Materials will be developed for an undergraduate seminar
class, and a website and videos will be developed aimed at assisting STEM
students in understanding energy used based on D and the carbon dioxide
emissions unit, C (daily carbon dioxide emissions from one
person).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.