* 2027038
* Collaborative Research: Vegetation assimilation as a source of mercury in a salt marsh ecosystem and implications for soil and tidal water exposures
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Daniel Obrist, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 12/31/2023
* USD 357,602.00

The goal of this award is to determine the origin and fate of mercury in a salt
marsh ecosystem in the Plum Island Sound of Massachusetts and potential export
to near shore coastal oceans. Mercury is a potent neurotoxin and leading cause
for fish consumption advisories in the U.S and across the world. Along the U.S.
East Coast, salt marsh sparrows have shown harmful exposures to mercury with
elevated blood levels posing risks for reproductive outputs. The origin of
mercury in these salt marshes is largely unknown. Possible reasons for high
mercury exposure are contributions from runoff from adjacent watersheds or
atmospheric inputs from legacy industrial impacts. This award will study the
role of direct plant uptake of atmospheric mercury by salt marsh plants as the
mercury source for these salt marsh ecosystems. In this tidal system, an
additional focus lies on the transfer of mercury to soils by the plants and with
death of the plants its export to the coastal ocean. The award will train and
involve graduate and undergraduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to quantify mercury sinks and
sources and their relationships to plant primary productivity, tissue turnover
rates, and soil dynamics, in a salt marsh ecosystem where some of the highest
biological mercury exposures have been reported. The first hypothesis is that
that plant mercury assimilation is the dominant source of mercury in this
estuary where salt marshes dominate in areal extent (50 to 90% of surface area).
The second hypothesis is that vegetation assimilation of mercury is incorporated
into soils upon plant senesce leading to high mercury accumulation in soils,
which ultimately is mobilized to tidal water leading to net export of mercury
from salt marshes to tidal water. This is analogue to the “outwelling”
hypothesis for carbon that proposes that salt marshes produce an excess of
autochthonous carbon over what is degraded and stored resulting in net export to
the coastal ocean where it stimulates ocean net primary production. Proposed
measurements include quantification of atmospheric mercury deposition inputs via
deployment of a micrometeorological flux-gradient system that allows to measure
ecosystem-level gaseous atmospheric mercury fluxes including plant mercury
assimilation, along with detailed vegetation mercury dynamics and other
deposition processes. Spatial transect sampling of tidal water from the ocean
through the tidal water up to the freshwater headwater will be conducted and
analyzed for mercury species (dissolved, particulate, methyl-mercury and mercury
bound contained in wrack detritus) in order to assess lateral exchanges between
salt marsh and tidal water. Finally, distribution patterns of total mercury and
methylated mercury in salt marsh soils will be characterized to constrain
processes — both natural and anthropogenic — that lead to mercury accumulation
in these 2,500-to-3,500 year old soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.