* 2027096
* RAPID: Biophysical characterization of the native SARS-CoV-2 virion by atomistic simulations
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Juan Perilla, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Since December 2019, a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that emerged in China has
become a global pandemic. Research into the molecular basis of SARS-CoV-2 is now
essential to provide understanding of viral entry and infection of human cells,
a first step in developing novel drugs and vaccines to combat SARS-CoV-2. The
research supported through this RAPID award will enable the development of an
all-atom molecular dynamic simulation of the virus that includes realistic
predictions of the envelope, membrane and spike proteins of the virus, as well
as simulations of the complex surfaces of the human cells that the virus
infects. This research could have immediate impact on steps taken to halt the
spread of SARS-CoV-2. Simulation results will be broadly and quickly
disseminated to ensure impact of the research. In addition, the investigators
will use this as a training opportunity for students at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use to state of the art tools of
computational virology to provide bio-physical characterization of the SARS-
CoV-2 virion, revealing information relevant to the function and potential
targeting and disruption of the virus. The PI proposes a study of the full-size
viral envelope which can establish the effects of specific components of the
virus, including its bilayer lipid composition, shedding light on the need for
coronaviruses to remodel the host cell membrane for successful infection.
Additionally the characterization of the native SARS-CoV-2 viral surface
proteins, which represent key functional and antigenic sites, will form a good
basis for development of an infectious SARS-CoV-2 virion and a platform to
investigate a mechanism of host cell entry, in which coronaviruses bind to CD13
receptors in lipid rafts. Study of glycosylated S protein, proposed as one of
the aspects of the work, will reveal details of epitope masking by the glycan
shield, relevant to vaccine and antibody design, as well as the role of viral
glycans in host cell adhesion in a second mechanism of cell entry mediated by S
binding to ACE2 receptors. The work could have immediate impact of the current
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is cofounded by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
EPSCoR Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.