* 2027647
* RAPID:  Fine-Grained, Privacy-Responding Contact Traceback for COVID-19 Epidemiology
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Kyle Jamieson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This project, CoV-2-Traceback, enables approaches that mitigate the negative
effects of COVID-19 by facilitating the process of contact tracing during an
epidemic. The approach eschews explicit location tracking, instead using
granular signal monitoring techniques at mobile phones to infer the physical
proximity of pairs of phones. The work will also respect user privacy, by giving
users control over the data the system collects, in three ways: first, the data
the system collects will be stored on the mobile phone itself, second, users
will be empowered to clear that data from their phones, or opt-out of the system
entirely, and third, each step of the traceback will occur with individual user
consent. This automated and highly specific traceback will advance the national
health and secure the national defense, both speeding up the process of contact
traceback and extending the utility of contact traceback into the latter stages
of a pandemic when the goal is to delay and lower daily infection rates. From a
societal standpoint, the work aims to engage cellular chipset manufacturers,
cellular network providers, and state and national health authorities in the
national COVID-19 mitigation effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoV-2-Traceback
enables approaches that mitigate the negative effects of COVID-19 by automating
the identification and traceback of recent significant risk contacts of a
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 case. Instead of relying on GPS, which does not work well
indoors and in many urban settings, signal processing algorithms examine the
cellular control channel to determine whether and for how long other people are
proximal to a confirmed positive case. Current medical knowledge indicates that
the riskiest exposures involve both time and proximity of contact, but there is
a challenge in identifying such exposures with a high specificity that existing
technology does not yet meet. The project develops a traceback protocol that
resolves a newly-diagnosed user's phone identifiers and then submits phone
identifies meeting the foregoing proximity criteria to cellular providers, so
they can identify close contacts of the newly-diagnosed case. As COVID-19
surveillance efforts ramp up in each state, the project will leverage state- and
county-level background infection rates to validate CoV-2-Traceback's accuracy.
Comparing with traditional methods for contact tracing, it will also quantify
whether the approach is indeed more specific, flagging fewer patients who in the
end turn out to be COVID-19 negative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.