* 2027444
* Proactive Water Quality Management of Water Networks in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Pitu Mirchandani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 537,118.00

This grant will address water quality issues and water quantity management in
commercial and institutional buildings, which often have complex pipe networks
that provide water for human occupants’ use and building functions. Commercial
and institutional buildings can account for nearly 50 percent of municipal water
use, and water quality management must balance health risks from bacteria growth
and material impurities with efficient and sustainable use of water. With the
ultimate goal of providing guidelines for water network design and water quality
management, this research will use enhanced data-gathering approaches that are
cyber-connected to computational resources, to develop data-driven models to
proactively ensure safe water quality while delivering water with minimal
wastage. The associated educational activities span the full breadth of STEM
including water science, technology, computer science and applied mathematics,
and human interactions with technology. Within the university, there will be the
positive impacts of the integration of research and curricula of Environmental
Engineering, Operations Research, and Computer Science, and hence new
opportunities to increase the diversity of the professional workforce. The
project will also be a vehicle to stimulate interests of K-12 students and the
public at large on the use of cyber-connected technologies for better water
quality management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental contributions include
the integrative use of the sciences of chemistry and microbiology processes
within buildings’ water networks, and the physical water-flow dynamics, to
develop new data-driven models of the space-time trajectories of water parcels
as water flows through the building pipe network to its eventual uses by
occupants. The research will use statistical machine-learning approaches to
develop new macro functional models to capture the salient features of state
dynamics to estimate the state of water quality using various measurement and
monitoring techniques. In addition, the research will develop predictive models
for use in a proactive water quality management system, where available controls
at given points in the building’s water network, such as injection of chemicals
and partial flushing of water, can achieve a desired level of quality while
optimizing a given performance objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.