* 2027607
* RAPID:  A Computational Deep-Learning Approach for Fast, Accurate CT Testing and Monitoring of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Wuchun Feng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The coronavirus disease COVID-19 is now a global pandemic, causing a huge health
and economic crisis at an unprecedented scale. Despite new testing modalities,
there remains an urgent need for fast, accurate, and accessible tools to test
people of suspected COVID-19 and monitor disease progression. The
ComputeCOVID19+ project addresses this need by providing a computationally-based
screening tool that delivers much higher accuracy for screening and monitoring
than current laboratory-based technique (i.e., PCR). The ComputeCOVID19+ system
will also make analysis of Computerized Tomography (CT) scans faster to reduce
the burden on radiologists and healthcare systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ComputeCOVID19+ project addresses the challenges of COVID screening and
monitoring in (1) reconstructing super-resolution medical images from
conventional CT scanners, (2) developing novel algorithms and software for high-
fidelity image reconstruction and high-precision interpretation of COVID-19, and
(3) validating our approach with clinical COVID-19 data. The method uses CT
scans and the team’s super-resolution and deblur-based iterative reconstruction
(SADIR) algorithm. As a result, the SADIR-based neural network has better
explanation and robustness. In addition, it involves a much smaller number of
training parameters, and hence, is easier to train. Finally, SADIR does not
require any high-resolution CT images as the “ground truth” reference during
network training. The expected outcome is a computational deep learning method
that can detect and diagnose COVID-19 with high sensitivity and high
specificity. The method will also enable monitoring of COVID-19 disease
progression with better accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.