* 2027367
* Defining Multiscale, Rate-Dependent Damage Mechanisms in Blood Vessels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Monson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 589,843.00

Blood vessels can be damaged as a result of large shape changes – deformations –
that occur in both accidents (such as traumatic brain injury) and surgery (such
as angioplasty). However, little is known about how this damage affects a
vessel’s ability to continue to perform its function. This is especially true
when damage is subtle and there is no bleeding. Additionally, recent research
shows that the rate of deformation influences the type of resulting damage. The
goals of this project are to define damage mechanisms in blood vessels and to
define how damage changes vessel function. The project focuses on blood vessels
in the brain. The results of this project will provide insight about damage
mechanisms in traumatic brain injury, and may eventually lead to better
healthcare treatments. This information will improve design criteria for
automobiles, helmets, and other protective devices. It may also reveal factors
that increase the risk of stroke after brain injury. It may also improve
outcomes of balloon angioplasty procedures. Researchers involved in this project
will include students from underrepresented groups, who will gain valuable
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project are (1)
to differentiate and quantify contributions of both recoverable (e.g.
viscoelasticity) and non-recoverable (e.g. collagen unfolding) mechanisms of
vessel softening, and (2) to define the influence of strain rate on mechanisms
of damage. Microstructural damage and associated softening will be defined using
isolated blood vessels subjected to overstretch through a range of strain rates.
Experimental findings will be incorporated into a novel constitutive model that
relates multiscale damage of passive vessel constituents with mechanical
behavior. This is a critical first step toward predicting disease development
and/or recovery after injury. While the research focuses on blood vessels,
findings are expected to also apply to other soft tissues. Results will advance
injury prevention strategies and provide a foundation for optimization of design
for both interventional procedures and implantable biomaterials and devices.
These experiments will inform computer models that predict damage-induced
changes in vessel behavior. Finally, the research will further develop methods
for characterizing soft tissue damage, including collagen hybridizing peptide to
quantify collagen damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.