* 2027298
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Adaptation to Long Term Environmental Unpredictability
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Arlene Rosen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2022
* USD 31,591.00

This project investigates how subsistence strategies helped people in an arid
region manage environmental risk and uncertainty. As aridification increases
worldwide, it is important to understand the complex dynamics of local
environments and knowledge systems over long timescales to help sustain human
lifeways in arid zones. This is especially important for arable areas that are
crucial for food production within arid regions. Archaeology informs the
development of adaptive, resilient subsistence strategies by offering a deep-
time perspective on how humans and the environment shaped contemporary
landscapes. It also provides examples of the diverse ways that humans have
interacted with the environment and dealt with environmental change. Despite
traditional characterizations of drylands as static, uninhabitable, and
agriculturally marginal, many arid zones have changed dramatically over time and
have long histories of human occupation. This project builds on recent studies
contending that arid lands are fluctuating landscapes with rich natural
resources. This research focuses on human subsistence strategies, which are
important for climate resiliency because subsistence is central to risk
management systems and deeply tied to shifting climate and environmental
conditions. The project will generate research partnerships building upon a
multi-year collaborative field project that has trained both doctoral and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk management is typically
embedded in cultural practice and includes strategies like diet diversification,
food storage, intensified resource production, or resource exchange. This
project will examine how these types of risk buffering techniques operated
within a hyperarid coastal landscape, which has been impacted for millennia by
El Ni√±o climatic fluctuations and tectonic activity. The project focuses on a
small valley with a long-term occupation history. The researchers will analyze
sediment samples and various archaeological plant and animal remains to
determine local subsistence practices and the exploitation of coastal desert
microenvironments during the occupation. The work will incorporate
microbotanical analyses into this comprehensive subsistence reconstruction to
investigate how coastal villagers managed and procured diverse wild and
agricultural resources. The project will use geoarchaeological analyses of
sediments to create a paleoenvironmental record for the region, and this will
contextualize risk management and resource procurement within a long-term
history of local environmental change. The project will contribute to
understanding how different subsistence systems relate to experiences of risk in
arid regions worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.