* 2027215
* SemiSynBio-II: DNA-Based Memory for High-Density Information Storage and Molecular Cryptography with Fast Readout Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,548,000.00

The need for secured computer and internet storage has seen a rapid increase
over time. To address this challenge, this project will develop a DNA
nanotechnology-based cryptographic protocol for writing and reading digital
data. It will be developed to enable both high-capacity and highly-secured
information storage and high-speed information retrieval. DNA nanotechnology
will be utilized to encrypt information in molecular patterns formed upon DNA
folding, which is uniquely determined by a set of DNA information strands and a
special folding route of DNA strands that function as the encryption keys. The
programmability of DNA nanostructures creates a vast design space for the
encryption keys, making it practically impossible to intercept and break the
encryption. The molecular patterns on DNA nanostructures will be characterized
by a super-resolution imaging method and a low-noise nanopore device. These
methods can enable fast readout speed at 1 megahertz with a high spatial
resolution of smaller than 10 nanometers. If successful, this DNA-based storage
has a potential to be implemented on a portable platform, thus strongly
supporting the development of next-generation DNA-based memories with
significantly improved security and storage density at a low cost. Consequently,
the secured DNA-based storage will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This
research involves several disciplines including nanofabrication, materials
science, biochemistry, electronics, photonics, and data science. The project
will engage underrepresented groups in the research and positively impact STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA has emerged as a promising candidate to
store information that can rival semiconductor memory, due to its high
stability, high information density, and accompanying readout technologies.
However, the potential of DNA as a material for highly-secured information
storage has not been fully exploited. Additionally, the readout of conventional
DNA-based memories has been limited by DNA sequencing, which requires special
instruments and personnel training. This research is to fill the knowledge gap
by creating a significantly improved and high-security DNA-based molecular
cryptography and establishing a high-speed, high-resolution, and potentially
portable readout platform for DNA memory. The research team will embed encrypted
information in three-dimensional DNA origami nanostructures in the form of
nanoscopic patterns. A pool of DNA scaffold strands decorated with specific
information strands (i-strands) of different sequences, lengths, and binding
positions will be designed on the basis of a chosen DNA folding scheme out of
many possibilities, which will be used later in decryption of the pattern of
i-strands. The high spatial resolution of DNA-PAINT (DNA-based point
accumulation for imaging in nanoscopic topography) (&lt;20 nm) and sapphire-
supported nanopore sensors (&lt;10 nm) will support high-density information
decryption of intricate single-molecule patterns on the DNA origami, while
enabling a fast readout speed of up to 1 MHz. The fast readout methods will
employ deep-learning classification techniques for automated decryption and
improved accuracy. The encryption scheme, single-molecule characterization
methods, nanopore sensor designs, and data analysis algorithms will be
synergistically improved in this project to enable robust and effective
information storage and transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.