* 2027870
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Inertio-Elastic Turbulence using Measurements and Data-Infused Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Irmgard Bischofberger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 247,455.00

When polymers are added to a solvent, even in very dilute solutions, they
markedly change the behavior of the fluid in intriguing ways, such as reducing
the drag force of flow past objects. Polymer-induced drag reduction in marine
transport applications can result in 20-25% decrease in frictional energy losses
and can thus have a major impact on society in the form of reduced fuel
consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. However, the changes induced in the
time-varying three-dimensional fluid dynamics are often counter-intuitive and
poorly understood. In some configurations, the polymeric solution can introduce
new flow instability mechanisms that would not be possible in typical fluids;
yet in other regimes, the same forces can also have the seemingly opposite
effect of mitigating the energetic eddying motions of turbulence. Direct imaging
of the evolution of turbulent flow structures is needed, and it requires a
technique with very high resolution and sensitivity. The research plan to
achieve this goal is tightly coupled with an education and outreach plan that
includes both curriculum development and supplemental lectures and interactive
lab demonstrations for Engineering Innovation through summer programs for high-
school and college-level STEM students at both
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves detailed experiments
using a unique imaging system to probe how a polymeric jet injected into a
surrounding Newtonian fluid becomes unstable. These visualizations will enable a
detailed characterization of the mixing between the polymeric jet and the
surrounding fluid and the amplification rate of jet instability. The results
from the experiments will be complemented by first-of-their-kind measurement-
infused simulations of the same configuration. By directly integrating the
measurements into the simulations, computations will probe the exact same flow
and provide all the additional details that cannot be measured directly in the
laboratory. The coupled results from both the experiments and simulations will
provide an unprecedented view of the mechanisms through which polymer solutions
alter turbulent flow instabilities. Ultimately, such insights will explain how
molecular parameters such as chain extensibility and flow elasticity control
polymer drag reduction and help guide selection of novel biopolymer sourced
additives that can serve as cheap and environmentally friendly substitutes for
traditional drag reduction agents such as synthetic polymers derived from
hydrocarbon resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.