* 2027738
* SemiSynBio-II: DNA Mutational Overwriting Storage (DMOS)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Dennis LaJeunesse, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project aims to create a sustainable and scalable DNA-based digital data
storage system, in which the information bits will be written, stored and read
in the form of mutational changes in DNA. The team at the Joint School of
Nanoscience and Nanoengineering serves underrepresented cohorts of students.
Their mission is to train students, boost the local economy, and engage the
community of the central North Carolina Piedmont Triad region through the
educational and outreach programs that foster economic impacts of the
SemiSynBio. The planned activities include a new synthetic biology curriculum,
undergraduate research experiences, annual synthetic biology symposium, and
yearly science day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current data storage materials and
techniques are approaching their fundamental limits, while the demand for memory
increases exponentially. By the middle of this century, the world may experience
catastrophic shortages of digital memory. DNA is a promising alternative to
digital data storage materials when durability, information density, and
operation energy becomes critical. However, current DNA-based digital storage
technologies lack the sustainability and scalability of a viable alternative to
silicon-based memory materials. In particular, most DNA memory systems depend on
de novo DNA synthesis processes that generate large amounts of hazardous waste.
Inspired by the knowledge about handling, processing, and overwriting the
genetic information by the biological systems, this research represents a novel
approach for DNA-based memory. Similar to writing data into blank tapes, the DNA
Mutational Overwriting Storage (DMOS) will overwrite the sequence content
(state) of the template DNA domains (bits) to write the data. The DMOS does not
require de novo DNA synthesis. Therefore, it provides an environmentally
sustainable solution for DNA-based data storage. DMOS functions at the
intersection of computers, synthetic biology, and
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.