* 2027066
* RAPID:Antibody-Based Nanoplasmonic Barcode Biosensors for COVID-19 Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Jennifer Maynard, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,651.00

Recent weeks and months have seen the emergence of COVID-19 as a major threat to
health on a global scale. One major challenge associated with combating this
disease is the lack of a rapid diagnostic device. Although current tests are
sensitive, they require specially equipped laboratories and can take several
days to provide results. This project aims to identify and validate antibodies
for use in real-time, point-of-care, COVID-19 biosensor devices. Such devices
could allow doctors and other healthcare professionals to immediately diagnose
infected individuals and get them the treatment they need while more effectively
containing the spread of this pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS-CoV-2 is the
viral cause of the COVID-19 illness. An antibody-based nanoplasmonic barcode
biosensor could a provide real-time, point-of-care diagnostic device. This
project will develop such a sensor. The first objective is the discovery of
SARS-CoV-2 binding antibodies. To ensure a sufficient diversity of antibodies
are identified, three parallel discovery pathways will be pursued: 1) the
identification of antibodies that cross-react with SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV spike
proteins, 2) the rational engineering of anti- SARS-CoV-1 antibodies to bind
SARS-CoV-2, and 3) the in silico, de novo design of novel SARS-CoV-2 antibodies.
About four antibody pairs will be selected from the antibodies discovered
through the three complementary approaches. The pairs will be used for SARS-
CoV-2 detection on the basis of their affinity measured by ELISA and surface
plasmon resonance and of the selectivity of their binding to unique epitopes, as
monitored by competition ELISA. Finally, the antibody pairs will be used in the
design and evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 nanoplasmonic biosensors. Nanoparticle
signals will only be detected by the biosensors in the presence of virus. The
proposed research will enable the more rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2 compared to
current diagnostic tests, resulting in a better understanding of its spread and
more effective containment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.