* 2027195
* SemiSynBio-II: A Hybrid Programmable Nano-Bioelectronic System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Faramarz Fekri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Living cells are equipped with highly versatile built-in toolkits of DNA, RNA,
and proteins for molecular communication, computing, storage, and
sensing/actuation in response to environmental stimuli. Synthetic biology has
been successful in developing engineered cells by harnessing the same biological
toolkits with enhanced natural functions or new human-defined functions. These
engineered cells can potentially serve as a biological frontend layer that
naturally interfaces with the environment and acts as biosensors/actuators,
molecular computing platforms, and molecular memory to provide revolutionary
solutions for many global challenges such as environmental monitoring, and
healthcare. In parallel, with decades of technological advances, semiconductor
technologies, e.g., Complementary-Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) integrated
circuits (ICs), are being widely employed as a semiconductor backend layer to
achieve various integration, communication, and computation capabilities. This
project investigates the development of a hybrid programmable nano-bioelectronic
system as a first proof-of-concept demonstration that harnesses both the
exquisite synthetic functionalities of engineered bacteria as the "biological
frontend" and the full functionalities of the ultra-low-power CMOS integrated
circuit chips as the "semiconductor backend." The target application of such a
system includes in-field biological sensor for environment monitoring. The
project has potentials for long-term broader impacts on basic science,
education, and technology. It brings expertise from synthetic biology, hybrid
bioelectronics, integrated circuits/packaging, information theory, and
computing. The project directly addresses three research themes of the
solicitation: Theme-1, biomolecular memory and computation; Theme 2, interface
of biology and semiconductors; Theme-4, hybrid semiconductor-biological
microelectronic systems. It seeks to foster collaborations between industry and
academia and hence facilitates technology transfer. The team of investigators
will train graduate and undergraduate students at Georgia Tech and MIT,
including minority and under-represented students. The project will also
emphasize K-12 outreach to promote education of local minority high school
students. In particular, the research team will recruit high school teacher
interns to enhance their curricula and organize lab tours for K-12 students. The
research results will be disseminated through high-impact journals, premier
conferences, websites, and social media, and will be integrated into multiple
related courses at Georgia Tech and MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to advance the science in multiple fronts and develop an integrated hybrid
programmable nano-bioelectronic system. In such a system, a variety of bacteria
strains are engineered as sensing, storage, and computation biological frontends
to (1) perform wide-spectrum chemical sensing, e.g., heavy metal detections for
environmental monitoring, (2) provide in-bacteria DNA-based storage of
analog/digital information, (3) execute molecular computation via stochastic
computing and encode the signal for the DNA storage, and (4) support "variable
gain" reprogramming of bacteria sensors by external optical and electrical
stimuli. As the integrated semiconductor electronics backend, CMOS IC chips with
on-chip pixelated massively paralleled arrays will be developed to provide two-
way multi-modal interfaces with the bacteria frontends, i.e., for reading stored
sensory information from the bacteria and writing control signals to reprogram
the bacteria sensors. The bacteria strains and CMOS ICs will be integrated
together in 3D-printed microfluidics structures and packages with separate
chambers. The proposed components and systems will be demonstrated through in
vitro experiments using the resources at Georgia Tech and
MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.