* 2027089
* RAPID: Election Result Anomaly Detection for 2020
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Stephanie Singer, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 01/31/2022
* USD 199,827.00

In our era, with money and ideas traveling quickly over the internet, the old
saw that “all politics is local” may be less true than it used to be. But the
administration of elections in the United States remains doggedly local. As a
result, election results are published by state and local agencies in
idiosyncratic formats. Any study of election results at a national level, or
even across several states, requires painstaking assembly of disparate formats.
This project builds a system to efficiently assemble election result data sets
from several states into a single format. In addition, the project implements a
variety of algorithms for fast, broad detection and visualization of anomalies
in election results. The system will quickly flag significant anomalies in
preliminary election result data from the general election in November 2020.
This analysis will be made available publicly and to candidates, parties and
election administrators. Candidates, parties and election administrators have
the detailed local knowledge required to assess whether any particular anomaly
in their district has a legitimate explanation or whether further investigation
is appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the best of times, conducting a
trustworthy election poses many logistical challenges. In 2020, in addition to
recent changes in election technology and widely acknowledged threats of
cyberattack, there is the unprecedented complication of a raging pandemic in a
Presidential election year. The project will provide a significant tool in the
election verification toolbox by helping to identify anomalies well before
election results are finally certified. Candidates and other interested parties
will be able to use this analysis to inform timely decisions about whether to
challenge or demand investigations into election results – before the
determination of winners is set in stone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.