* 2027056
* ATD: Gaussian Fields: Graph Representations and Black-Box Optimization Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Daniel Sanz-Alonso, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 181,108.00

The increasing amount of data and complexity of models used in science and
engineering calls for collaborative and interdisciplinary research at the
intersection of computational mathematics, statistics and machine learning. This
project will develop novel computational mathematics with the aim of
facilitating the statistical analysis of large and unstructured spatial data-
sets using Gaussian field methods. Gaussian fields are standard models in
statistics and machine learning, but their application to large data sets is
notoriously difficult. The investigator will show through mathematical reasoning
and practical examples that a standard family of Gaussian fields can be
accurately approximated using graphs in such a way that the statistical analysis
scales favorably to large data sets. As a result, the benefit of sound
statistical modeling through Gaussian fields is made possible in large data
regimes of current interest. In addition, the investigator will explore new
computationally efficient methods that allow one to combine highly complex
models with data. A central part of the project will be the training of graduate
students in the Computational and Applied Mathematics (CAM) program at the
University of Chicago. To that end, the investigator will i) introduce topics of
current research interest in uncertainty quantification and spatial statistics
in CAM and Statistics courses, both at the Master’s and PhD levels; ii) serve as
PhD and Master's thesis adviser of CAM students; iii) help organize the CAM
colloquium and the CAM student colloquium, allowing students to learn from, and
interact with, leading experts in spatial statistics, Bayesian inverse problems
and graph-based learning; and iv) disseminate the accomplished work through
conference and seminar presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two
research thrusts that share a common theme of pushing forward the use of
Gaussian field methods. First, the investigator will develop and analyze graph
representations of Gaussian fields for the statistical analysis of discrete and
unstructured spatial datasets. Second, the investigator will design and
numerically explore novel black-box, derivative free optimization schemes that
combine Bayesian optimization with ensemble Kalman methods. The graph
representations to be used stem from the stochastic partial differential
equation (SPDE) approach to Gaussian fields, one of the breakthroughs in spatial
statistics in the last decade. The main idea of the SPDE approach is to define
Gaussian fields as the solution to an SPDE and represent the solution using
finite elements, a perspective that has inspired many modeling and computational
developments. The investigator will introduce and explore graph representations,
showing through rigorous analysis and numerical examples that they provide a
natural way to generalize the Matérn model to unstructured datasets. The
investigator will also demonstrate that graph representations seamlessly unify
Gaussian field methods in spatial statistics, graph-based machine learning and
Bayesian inverse problems, and will transfer several concrete computational
methods and modeling ideas across these three communities. The second research
thrust will concern the development of new black-box, derivative free
optimization schemes. The investigator will conduct a thorough numerical
comparison of existing methods, and will explore new ones. Specific objectives
of this project include i) to introduce graph-based covariance models for large
and unstructured discrete geospatial datasets, beyond Euclidean settings; ii) to
suggest graph representations of a wide family of models in spatial statistics,
providing an alternative approach to existing finite element and finite
difference representations; iii) to set forward the theoretical foundations of
graph representations of Gaussian fields and investigate their use in specific
applications; and iv) to develop and numerically test new black-box optimization
schemes, exploring their use in a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.