* 2027291
* RAPID:  Multiscale Modeling Of SARS-CoV-2 Viral Intracellular and Intercellular Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Ranjan Srivastava, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2021
* USD 130,197.00

________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent emergence of
the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the etiological agent of COVID-19, has caused worldwide
repercussions in just a few short weeks. The tremendous negative social,
economic and health impact will be felt for a considerable time around the
globe. Numerous complementary strategies must be taken to address this issue and
to ameliorate the consequences. One such strategy that is clearly required is a
better understanding of the fundamental biology of SARS-CoV-2. The objective of
this project is to create a multiscale model of the intracellular and
intercellular viral dynamics of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. A systems virology
approach is used. This project would deliver an understanding of how the virus
works and will provide the framework necessary for numerous fundamental studies
and applied efforts for developing effective drugs and therapies. The developed
model would be released under an open source license and made freely available
from the GitHub website. The project would train one graduate student in the
area of computational systems virology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
creates intracellular and intercellular models of the SARS-2019-CoV-2 virus
based on the current understanding of the virus reaction network. The reaction
network topology is translated into a mathematical model with the use of the
theory of reaction kinetics. A set of ordinary differential equations describing
the dynamics of viral replication within an infected cell is formulated with the
use of the mass action kinetics paradigm. With the use of Monte Carlo sampling
of the modelâ€™s parameter space, as well as sensitivity analysis and stability
analysis, mathematical and biological constraints are identified. Stochastic
simulation is carried out to determine whether subpopulations of infected cells
exist with potentially different phenotypes. Finally, with the use of principles
grounded in basic calculus, the intracellular model is coupled to a standard
intercellular model of viral replication dynamics. The multiscale models undergo
the same analyses as the intracellular model and is also implemented
stochastically to determine if incorporating higher scale information influences
prediction of subpopulation distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.