* 2027420
* RAPID: COVID Response: Identifying practices that minimize exposure to disinfection byproducts
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Lea Hildebrandt Ruiz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 190,337.00

To curb the spread of COVID-19, communities across the world are disinfecting
buildings and other public places. Cleaning workers wear different levels of
personal protection ranging from simple surgical masks to professional high
efficiency filtration masks. Depending on the mask type, cleaning process,
surfaces, and disinfectants used, cleaning workers can be exposed to
disinfection byproducts that form as a result of reactions between
disinfectants, the surfaces being cleaned, and the mask materials. This project
will quantify inhalation of disinfection byproducts during disinfection while
wearing different classes of masks and use this information to make
recommendations on which mask to wear and how often to change or clean the mask
or mask components. These data are directly relevant to the current worldwide
COVID-19 crisis and similar future pandemic challenges. The core project team
includes at least three graduate research assistants, one postdoctoral scholar,
and five professors with different backgrounds and at different stages of their
careers. Thus, a further impact of this project will be advancing education and
training the next generation of scientists and engineers in techniques to
respond to pandemic challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of a
two-phase approach to address potential health threats to cleaning workers
resulting from the large-scale use of disinfection in response to the global
COVID-19 pandemic. The goal of the first phase is to define possible
concentration ranges of chemicals that flow through personal protection masks
based on: 1) the type of disinfectant used; 2) the application process (e.g.
wiping, spraying, or fogging); 3) chemical processes forming byproducts (such as
reaction of cleaning products on surfaces); 4) environmental conditions (such as
ventilation/dilution rate); and 5) proximity of the cleaning worker to the
chemical source. The goal of phase two is to characterize the inhalation of
disinfection byproducts. A full-scale thermal manikin equipped with a nose and
mouth breathing simulation system will be exposed to uniform concentrations of
byproducts determined in phase one in an environmental chamber. Surface chemical
reaction processes and kinetics will be studied with different masks and
byproduct inhalation will be assessed via mass spectrometry. The manikin will be
equipped with four different classes of masks: surgical mask, dust mask without
exhalation relief valve, dust mask with exhalation relief valve, and
professional mask. It is likely that some masks decrease inhalation exposure to
disinfection byproducts while others increase exposure via adsorption of
cleaning product vapors to the mask and by addition of moisture due to
exhalation. These processes lead to a mask chemistry that produces additional
chemical products whose concentration is much greater in the mask than in the
ambient air. These secondary products are potentially more harmful than the
primary vapors of cleaning products. Successful completion of this study will
provide timely and critical data relevant to the current crisis by identifying
risks for different types of masks and cleaning products. Such information will
inform recommendations on mask use to protect the health of cleaning
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.