* 2027752
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Wastewater Informed Epidemiological Monitoring of SARS-CoV-2
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Kyle Bibby, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 153,027.00

The global COVID-19 pandemic causing considerable human health and economic
impacts presents the research community with a unique set of challenges that
must be addressed in real time. Critical to managing any pandemic is the
accurate estimation of how many people are infected within communities. SARS-
CoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19, is excreted in the stool of infected
individuals, eventually ending up in the wastewater treatment plant. The
presence of SARS-CoV-2 in human waste presents the opportunity to potentially
monitor wastewater for SARS-CoV-2 to estimate the number of infections in the
community and provide an ‘early warning system’ for future SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks.
The goal of this research is to develop methods to monitor for SARS-CoV-2 in
wastewater and to connect these measurements to epidemiology models. In
addition, the project team will coordinate wastewater monitoring efforts for
SARS-CoV-2 globally. If successful, this research could lead to other similar
monitoring efforts for other viral outbreaks and protect the health of the
Nation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SARS-CoV-2 (i.e., 2019-nCoV) is identified as the
cause of an outbreak of respiratory illness that is now a global pandemic
causing significant disruption to medical services and commerce. Significant
uncertainties about the prevalence of this virus remain. This information which
is vital to inform control recommendations and determine the case fatality rate.
The recent detection of SARS-CoV-2 in stool raises the possibility of using
wastewater-based epidemiological approaches to estimate the community prevalence
of SARS-CoV-2. In this approach, molecular quantification of SARS-CoV-2 will be
combined with epidemiological data to model outbreak dynamics and estimate the
overall prevalence of the virus in the community over time. These data will be
integrated into epidemiological models using data from public health
surveillance. Data from wastewater could inform epidemiological estimates on
finer spatial scales than epidemiological data and could provide indications of
continued community transmission following the initial wave of the pandemic. The
potential for this virus to become a seasonally transmitted endemic pathogen
like influenza and other coronaviruses would make this type of analysis
increasingly informative. Technical developments resulting from this research
include improved sample handling methods, molecular quantification approaches,
integration of the resulting data into epidemiological models, as well as
coordination with domestic and international collaborators to standardize
methodology. There is significant scientific interest in using wastewater to
monitor for SARS-CoV-2 beyond the current outbreak. This research will inform
such efforts and help respond to future outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.