* 2027105
* A Machine Learning Framework for Bridging the Mechanical Responses of a Material at Multiple Structure Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 553,581.00

The safety of structures bearing load depends upon the ability of the engineers
to predict the behavior under operating conditions during the design phase. This
means that the engineers must know the behavior of materials that are used in
these structures accurately. Damage and failure in materials start at the atomic
scale and propagate through the structural length scales to manifest itself.
Therefore, it is important to be able to predict material response through
multiple scales based on experimental observations and computational modeling.
Much effort has been put towards achieving this capability but the immense
amount of information that is obtained from advanced experimental techniques and
physics-based numerical simulations has proven intractable. This award aims to
transform the current practices in the field of mechanics of materials by
introducing machine learning to optimize the extraction and fusion of
information and knowledge from the disparate and expansive experimental and
numerical datasets. The goal is to dramatically improve the efficiency and
output compared to the current protocols of material behavior prediction, which
will also accelerate the materials discovery process. It is expected that theses
outcomes will provide significant competitive advantages to the US industry in a
broad range of advanced materials technology areas, including those related to
healthcare, energy, and national security. The award will also be a vehicle to
train graduate and undergraduate students at the intersection of materials
science, mechanics of materials, and data and information sciences. The research
outcomes and developed tools will be transferred into commercial practice
through multiple industrial collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed
to accomplish the research objective described above by developing and deploying
a novel Bayesian machine learning framework that is centered on systematically
uncovering the physics controlling the multiscale materials phenomena of
interest. The overall strategy involves establishing suitable high-fidelity
reduced-order (i.e., surrogate) models to capture the localization tensors for
elastic and plastic deformations in multiphase polycrystalline microstructures.
In turn, these models will be used to formulate a computationally efficient
strategy for Bayesian sequential design of experiments that identifies the most
optimal experiments offering the highest potential for information (or
knowledge) gain. As a result, several high-throughput experimental assays will
be designed and evaluated to critically examine their value for reliably
calibrating the unknown material parameters in sophisticated plasticity
theories. Based on the results of these investigations, novel high-throughput
protocols will be designed and implemented to demonstrate the significant cost
and time savings achieved in the multiscale characterization of the mechanical
behavior of heterogeneous structural materials. Specifically, the new protocols
will be validated using samples of polycrystalline dual-phase
steels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.