* 2027336
* RAPID: Understanding COVID-19 Transmission With Non-Markovian Models
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Caterina Scoglio, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,958.00

With COVID-19, the world has experienced the most significant pandemic of
contemporary history. In an effort to reduce the virus transmission, different
mitigation strategies have been proposed and implemented. In this situation,
models of disease transmission have emerged as a key tool to predict current and
future characteristics of COVID-19 spreading, with or without the implementation
of mitigation strategies, and to guide policymaking decisions. Models however
are accurate predictors if they are built upon reliable data and evidence-
supported assumptions. Large swings in model predictions can be imputed to
assumptions not supported by data or evidence, with consequences on the model
reliability. One typical assumption is the exponential distribution of the
transition times of individuals between different states of disease (i.e.,
compartments that mark individuals as susceptible, exposed, infected, and
recovered). However, recent observations of COVID-19 data, highlight non-
exponential distributions for some critical transition times, such as the
infectious period. This directly impacts the accuracy of the models. With this
in mind, the goals of this project are to: 1) develop network-based
compartmental meta-population models that accept arbitrary distributions for the
transition times of the individual between different compartments; 2) develop
rigorous methodologies to estimate unknown parameters of the model using
stochastic optimization methods; 3) determine contact networks tailored for
regions receiving lower attention, such as rural areas. Successful completion of
this project will provide benefits to the USA public health, in particular to
the analysis and monitoring of COVID-19. More accurate model-based testing of
mitigation strategies will help public health officials to select strategies and
to gather trust and support around mitigation policies. This way, health
policymakers, modelers, and the general public will share common goals toward
eventually stopping COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team
will develop non-Markovian models that are driven by empirically determined
distributions of transition times as suggested by recent results from analyzing
data for COVID-19, highlighting the non-exponential distributions for some
critical transition times. This novel aspect of our proposed model produces more
accurate estimates of the current and future outbreak characteristics. For
example, we can estimate the number of undetected infected people more
accurately than models assuming the exponential distribution. Furthermore, as
any model has known and unknown parameters, the estimation of the unknown
parameters is critical to the model accuracy. To estimate the unknown parameters
for this COVID-19 pandemic in the USA, we plan to use epidemic curves generated
using the meta-population model and stochastic optimization techniques. The
increased model accuracy produces better estimates of the outbreak
characteristics and in turn better predictions of the mitigation policies
effectiveness. Finally, any network-based model requires to input of a network
representing contacts or movements. While these contact networks are available
for some cities affected by the pandemic, rural regions have been less analyzed,
despite occasionally being hot spots. The team will work to determine data-
driven contact networks for certain rural areas of interest, for which we will
apply and test our modeling approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.