* 2027029
* CAREER:  Lamellar Lubricity - Linking Structure, Properties and Tribological Performance of Molybdenum Disulphide
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Brandon Krick, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 470,772.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports
fundamental studies of the friction and wear processes of the important dry,
non-oil-based, solid lubricant materials that are critical for use in harsh
environments, including space. The work serves to promote our scientific base of
understanding of the mechanism of lubrication aiding in the further development
of dry lubricants. These lubricants are critical to our national defense and
prosperity by impacting the many commercial applications where poor lubrication
can lead to wear that limits the machine lifetime and wastes energy. The
research will use atom-level tools to understand surface structure of these dry
lubricants, with an emphasis on MoS2 which is the most important dry lubricants
in use. This lubricant fails in use through the development of defects and a
defect structure within the MoS2. To determine the evolution of this defect
structure, samples will undergoing controlled wear in the laboratory or will
have been exposed to the environment of space on the international space station
(ISS) for an extended time. The changes in friction and lubricating properties
together with the atomic level structure will be ascertained. This information
will generate the basic understanding of the defect formation process aiding in
the design of new lubricants and additives with extended lifetime in all
environments. The outreach and education features include an integrated
research/education plan to increase education, exposure and interest in
tribology at all levels of society, with hands-on K-12 outreach activities,
curriculum development, and student undergraduate and graduate research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments, advanced characterization and
models will probe the links between structure, processing, properties and
tribological performance of MoS2 coatings for extreme environments (including
space). The technical program is centered 2 research themes: 1) assess the role
of molybdenum disulphide microstructure and composition in preventing chemical
and tribological degradation during exposure to oxidative and humid
environments; 2) understand the energetics of MoS2 tribology to develop a model
of friction based on orientation, commensurability, defect density and
crystallite size as a function of temperature, environment and starting/evolving
microstructure of tribofilms formed during sliding. MoS2 films of varying
microstructure, composition and processing techniques will be systematically
tested to develop a mechanistic framework for tribological interactions of MoS2.
Experiments include environmental tribological studies looking to the effects of
ultrahigh vacuum, humidity, O2, atomic oxygen and temperature extremes through
state-of-the-art surface chemical characterization and atomistic molecular
dynamics models. Finally, tribological experiments and material samples returned
from the international space station will be analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.