* 2027929
* RAPID: Influence of reusable personal protective equipment on resilience of hospitals in a pandemic
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Andrea Hicks, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 78,394.00

A major challenge in responding to the Covid-19 pandemic is keeping health care
workers safe through the usage and supply of personal protective equipment
(PPE). There is currently a severe shortage of PPE across health care facilities
in the United States, in part due to a reliance on disposable PPE, which must be
replenished. In order to increase the resiliency of the healthcare system, a
fundamental shift for meeting the baseline demand of PPE may be met by utilizing
reusable options. The main goal of this work is to generate new insight on the
resilience of hospitals as a function of how they meet their baseline PPE
demand, while informing hospitals how to increase their resiliency during this
current pandemic, and engaging the public through crowd sourcing information as
to the number of health care systems requesting citizen-made PPE. This project
will quantify the equivalent life cycles of single use and reusable PPE, and the
increase in the resiliency of a hospital as a function of its usage of reusable
PPE in pandemic events.

Life cycle assessment will be coupled with agent based modeling to generate new
fundamental insight as to the potential shifts in the resiliency of a hospital
system due to the baseline usage of reusable PPE. These insights may help to
weather the current pandemic and future anticipated pandemics. Disposable PPE
and other medical supplies have been adopted largely out of a concern for
healthcare acquired infections. However, in a time of great surges in demand,
such as those which occur during a pandemic, this can result in a lack of
available PPE due to competing demands from multiple hospitals and a lack of
available supplies. The approach of the study is 3-fold: (1) generate
comprehensive data as to the life cycle of reusable versus single use PPE in a
pandemic setting, (2) create new insight as to the resiliency of hospitals as a
function of meeting their baseload PPE demand with reusables, and (3) generate
crowd sourced information as to the real time stability of hospital supply lines
as a function of requests for citizen – made PPE. This work proposes to assess
the resiliency of a hospital due to surges in demand for PPE during a pandemic,
and the ability of the hospital to meet those needs. This will result in new
ways of evaluating the current debate between reusable and single use medical
supplies in a crisis situation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.