* 2027199
* RAPID: Coronavirus-Driven Aerosol Reductions in East Asia and the Effect on Atmospheric Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Paul Miller, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2022
* USD 128,339.00

The goal of this project is to determine how Chinaâ€™s government-mandated
COVID-19 quarantine during February 2020 altered the meteorological conditions
in which the disease was being transmitted. During the height of the COVID-19
outbreak in East Asia, the Chinese government authorized closure of many
industrial facilities, temporarily and dramatically reducing air pollution in
East China. The swift reduction of particulate emissions, which can weaken the
intensity of incoming solar energy, would have likely allowed more sunlight to
pass through the atmosphere, thereby increasing surface air temperature during
the quarantine. Because pathogen transmission can be retarded in warmer and more
humid conditions, increased surface air temperatures concurrent with quarantine-
reduced aerosols may represent another, yet unintentional, mechanism by which
large-scale lockdowns can slow the spread of COVID-19. This project will employ
satellite imagery and weather model simulations to determine the extent to which
reduced air pollution altered air temperature, as well as several other
meteorological conditions, during February 2020 in East China. The findings of
this project will also reveal additional important information about how
atmospheric particulates influence regional weather patterns on a normal, non-
quarantine basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will mine daily satellite
images of NO2, aerosol optical depth (AOD), and air temperature as well as in-
situ data from the World Meteorological Organization and Aerosol Robotic Network
(AERONET) to assess the co-evolution of pollution decreases and air temperature
increases. Additionally, the project will employ the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model coupled with chemistry (WRF-Chem) in a numerical
modeling experiment for February 2020 over East China, whereby one simulation is
initialized with normal emissions and the second simulation reduces emissions
commensurate with the satellite observations collected during February 2020.
This project will yield three key products: (1) Daily database of NO2, AOD, and
surface, 925-, and 850-hPa temperature over East China, both absolute values and
departure from climatology; (2) Two one-month weather simulations for typical
emissions and COVID-19-reduced emissions over China; (3) The net impact of
aerosol radiative effects on air temperature, as well as a summary of any
changes to circulation, cloud cover, and precipitation. These products are
valuable for the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as future disease outbreaks, because
they can inform how quarantines and lockdowns potentially impede pathogen
transmission via aerosol reductions and associated meteorological
feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.