* 2027778
* RAPID: A rapid and ultrasensitive technology for sensing intact SARS-CoV-2 using designer DNA nanostructure capture probes and photonic resonator interference scattering microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 04/30/2023
* USD 165,317.00

The rapid development of the COVID-19 pandemic highlights the shortcomings in
existing technologies for viral detection and identification. The lack of
widespread availability of testing, combined with a high rate of false negative
tests, contribute to quarantine failure and confusion among health authorities
and the public. The investigator proposes to combine biosensing and biophotonics
approaches to develop and demonstrate a rapid, room temperature, single-step,
virus-specific, and ultrasensitive digital resolution assay for COVID-19 that
can be performed immediately after sample collection at the point of care, and
provide a result in less than 15 minutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
and his group recently demonstrated that a photonic crystal surface can amplify
the scattering of light from surface-attached nanoparticles, including virions,
and that a new form of biosensor microscopy called Photonic Resonator
Interference Scattering Microscopy (PRISM) can detect and digitally count the
virus particles in real time, without the use of additional labels or stains.
These technologies will be rapidly adapted and tested for COVID-19
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.