* 2027628
* RAPID: Deep Learning Models for Early Screening of COVID-19 using CT Images
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Yaacov Yesha, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 149,995.00

The rapid spread of COVID-19 has severely impacted the lives of billions of
people across the world. Healthcare systems are strained both in terms of
dealing with the large number of cases but also the risk of infection imposed on
healthcare workers. This project develops low-cost, effective, and minimal
contact early screening tools for detection, treatment, and prevention of the
spread of the disease. In order to respond to infectious diseases such as
COVID-19 and prevent future, this project proactively builds resources to help
the medical community be better prepared in early stages of diseases with
pandemic potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an understanding
of SARS-CoV-2 through an early screening tool to distinguish the recent
coronavirus (COVID-19) infections from other respiratory illnesses such as
Influenza-A and viral or bacterial pneumonia as well as from patients who have
no pulmonary disease. There are two major contributions of the project: (1)
generate high quality Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with 2D and 3D
kernels for early detection of COVID-19 infection, and (2) synthesize realistic
Computed Tomography (CT) images using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
that will be publicly available for research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has significant broader impacts in
the United States and across the globe. The pre-trained models are useful as
early screening tools by medical practitioners. The pre-trained models can also
be useful in studying other widespread diseases and pandemics in the future. The
synthetic data generated in this project allows researchers to develop newer
models for early screening of COVID-19. This project will be part of the
necessary preparation that the United States and other nations across the world
could put in place to minimize the impact of future disasters caused by pandemic
diseases such as COVID-19. This project is being performed within the auspices
of the Center for Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA), an Industry
University Cooperative Research Center at UMBC funded by NSF. The project
repository will be maintained at https://carta.umbc.edu/ for 5 years. The
repository consists of the following resources: (1) High-quality pre-trained
models for early detection of COVID-19 detection and (2) realistic CT images
with both 2D axial slices and 3D volumes that can be used to train other models.
The codes, models, synthetic data, and results generated in this project are
being widely disseminated through the project website and Github
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.