* 2027397
* RAPID: Responding to a Global Pandemic--The Role of K-12 Science Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Patrick Smith, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 12/31/2021
* USD 171,208.00

When a global health crisis emerges, students at all levels turn to their
science teachers for information and, at times, reassurance, according to
researchers at Horizon Research, Inc. (HRI). Science teachers serve a critically
important public health function and become an important part of the nation’s
response efforts. Given the magnitude of the current COVID-19 crisis, it is
likely that students are bringing their questions and concerns to their science
teachers. As this award is made, nearly all K–12 school buildings in the U.S.
are closed, and science teachers face unprecedented challenges in carrying out
the instruction for which they are responsible while simultaneously addressing
students’ questions about COVID-19. Moreover, they must do this within new
instructional formats. Education is crucial for helping students to understand
the facts about the virus, despite much conflicting information and
misinformation available. Education helps students understand and actively
participate in measures to stop the spread of COVID-19. This award will support
a national research study on how teachers are helping students respond to
COVID-19. The findings will inform the development of curriculum materials for
teaching about COVID-19, which are much needed right now, and help science
teachers to adapt their instruction as they help to fulfill a critical public
health function. This study will enable a better understanding of the role that
science teachers can play in a national response, both now and in future crises.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will build on a study of science teachers
conducted by HRI following the Ebola outbreak of 2014. Specifically, the
research will investigate (1) where teachers of science get their information
about coronavirus and COVID-19; (2) what types of resources teachers find most
useful; (3) what factors influence whether science teachers address COVID-19 in
their instruction; and (4) how science teachers adapt their teaching in response
to COVID-19. HRI will recruit a nationally representative sample of several
thousand K–12 teachers of science and invite them to complete a survey about
their instruction related to COVID-19, both before school buildings closed and
after. Using the Theory of Planned Behavior, the survey will be constructed to
identify factors that predict whether teachers take up the topic. The survey
will also collect data about how teachers address the virus and its transmission
with their students. HRI will disaggregate survey data by school-, class-,
student-, and teacher-level variables to identify patterns in student
opportunities. Survey data will be supplemented by interviews with 50 survey
respondents to gather more in-depth information related to the constructs of
interest. Study findings will be immediately shared through a preliminary report
that focuses on the survey data; mainstream print media using press releases;
and social media partnering with the National Science Teaching Association. HRI
also will publish policy briefs intended as guidance for schools, districts, and
states; and research articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by
the DRK-12 program in the Division of Research on Learning, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. The Discovery
Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12
students and teachers, through the research and development of new innovations
and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.