* 2027185
* NSF2026: Convergence Around a Sustainable World Without Waste
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Valerie Thomas, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Every year, 10 million tons of plastic waste enter the oceans and 1.3 billion
tons of food is wasted. This project will contribute to meeting such challenges
by working toward a world without waste. It will identify the fundamental
research needs and opportunities for achieving such a future that is also
economically feasible, socially desirable, and environmentally viable. To
achieve these goals, a series of workshops will held to bring together a diverse
group of stakeholders across many disciplines from academia, industry,
government and non-governmental organizations. Education curricula will be
developed for a Masters program that will train students to work toward
achieving a world without waste. For continuing research growth toward a
sustainable world without waste beyond the duration of this project, a new
section of a research society will organize regular conferences on this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will organize workshops with the
overarching goal of examining the fundamental drivers underpinning the pressing
challenge of spiraling global waste and resource consumption through the lens of
convergence. An important realization from current efforts is that while
engineering needs to play an important role by developing relevant technologies,
other disciplines such as economics, social sciences, and environmental science
are also essential for understanding and developing appropriate markets and
societal incentives. Various disciplines need to forge links and transcend their
traditional boundaries to move toward deeply convergent research approaches. In
this project, multidisciplinary research teams will explore integration of
knowledge, methods, models, and data necessary for creating and evaluating
potential solutions. Co-creation of knowledge with stakeholder input will inform
novel business models, engagement approaches, policy options, and innovative
technical and science-based advances toward a sustainable world without waste.
The proposed workshops will develop a framework for advancing convergent
research and scholarship on the NSF big idea "World Without Waste." A new
section will be established as a part of the International Society for
Industrial Ecology to foster growth toward meeting these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.