* 2027108
* SemiSynBio-II: Hybrid Biofilm Semiconductor Information Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Brenda Rubenstein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
ways of connecting electronics, biology, and information using living
communities of bacteria. The majority of microbes on earth do not live as
solitary cells. Instead, they form remarkably complex communities which are able
to thrive in nearly every environment from the bottom of the ocean to the human
gut. If we can integrate communities of bacteria with microelectronics, perhaps
we could combine the impressive energy efficiency, environmental resilience, and
multifunctional chemical sensing of bacterial biofilms, with the flexibility and
programmability of modern semiconductors. The project engages the broader
community by offering interdisciplinary courses on bioelectronics and computing,
providing research opportunities for high school students and undergraduates,
and organizing workshops that bring together researchers and industry
representatives from different disciplines to investigate frontiers at the
intersection of electronics, computing, and biology. These research goals and
educational opportunities are relevant to many areas in the modern workforce,
including computing, biotechnology, and synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores hybrid information systems using bacterial biofilms integrated with
semiconductor technology. Microbial biofilms are highly complex systems with
emergent order, which can survive in widely varying environments. It was
recently observed that Bacillus subtilis cells in biofilms can use ion channels
to propagate electrical potential waves among populations of thousands of
individual bacteria. Thanks to signal regeneration by downstream cells, these
electrical signaling modes have the potential to travel farther than by
diffusion alone, and they offer a unique opportunity for new modes of
interfacing electronics and biology. The first goal of the project is to design
a hardware platform which incorporates living biofilms on active custom
semiconductor chips, which can both sense and actuate signaling within the
biofilms. The second goal is to study the underlying mechanisms of electrical
signaling and oscillations within single biofilms, as well as signaling between
multiple nearby biofilms. The third goal is to utilize the electrical properties
of the biofilm to encode abstract information written using addressable
electrical stimulation, and to perform hybrid computations using programmable
networks of coupled biofilm oscillators. These research activities are
integrated with opportunities for cross-disciplinary educational programs
involving both underserved Rhode Island students and the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SemiSynBio-II program (NSF 20-518) grant
supports research to explores hybrid information systems using bacterial
biofilms integrated with semiconductor technology with funding from the Division
of Materials Research (DMR) of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate (MPS), the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) of
the Biological Sciences Directorate (BIO),the Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations (CCF) of the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate (CISE), and the Division of Electrical, Communications
and Cyber Systems (ECCS) of the Engineering Directorate
(ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.