* 2027596
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Wireless Hardware Analog Encryption for Secure, Ultra Low Power Transmission of Data
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Donatello Materassi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 472,948.00

Data encryption is a process to transmit sensitive information over a public
channel such as a wireless channel, so that only authorized receivers can access
it. Unfortunately, digital encryption techniques typically require the use of
microprocessors which are power-hungry devices. This project advances the use of
alternative analog encryption techniques, such as chaotic encryption. Since
analog encryption techniques are more power efficient, this approach makes it
possible to avoid the use of microprocessors and consequently facilitate the
realization of more portable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the idea of
encrypting information via chaotic signals is at least three decades old, only
relatively recent technological advancements in circuit fabrication allow the
practical implementation of chaotic encryption over a wireless channel. Indeed,
one of the main intellectual merits of this project would be the realization of
a wireless sensor with integrated encryption on the same chip. Another
technological innovation brought by the project is the creation of mechanisms
for coordinated communications among multiple devices over the same chaotically
encrypted channel using cognitive radio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact at
large of these methods can be significant. For example, embedding analog
encryption techniques in biomedical devices increases the privacy and comfort of
patients since data are going to be transmitted wirelessly over a secure
channel. Furthermore, autonomous energy-harvesting coin-sized sensors could be
easily deployed to monitor large areas requiring minimal
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results, data and simulation software
obtained in this project will be stored on the website
https://www.eecs.utk.edu/people/faculty/dmateras/ for at least five years.
Software will be released under an open-source license to facilitate the
replicability of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.