* 2027740
* Quantitative Measurements of Temperature and Species in Counterflow Flames Near Extinction
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Robert Lucht, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Accurate measurements of temperature are critical for improving our
understanding and modeling of flame structure and pollutant formation in flames.
Modern computational models of both laminar and turbulent flames incorporate
detailed models of chemical reaction kinetics and transport processes. The rates
of chemical reactions in particular can exhibit strong temperature dependence.
Consequently, accurate and validated methods for measuring flame temperatures
are critical for rigorous comparison of numerical calculations of flame
structure and pollutant formation with experiment. Coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering (CARS) spectroscopy is widely considered to be the most accurate
temperature measurement technique for flames but it is difficult to assess
accurately the absolute temperature accuracy of the method, mostly because of
the lack of other validated methods for measuring temperatures in excess of 2000
K. In this work a rigorous theoretical analysis of the accuracy of temperature
measurements using the laser diagnostic method CARS spectroscopy will be
performed. In addition, a new type of CARS experimental system will be developed
to eliminate some factors which cause increased uncertainty in CARS temperature
measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to demonstrate
temperature measurement accuracies of better than one per cent, which will
enable rigorous evaluation of important aspects of computational flame models.
Temperatures will be measured in both near-adiabatic Hencken burner flames and
in non-premixed counterflow flames using an advanced high-spectral-resolution
scanning CARS system. These measurements are enabled by the recent acquisition
by our group of a high-power, single-frequency-mode, tunable titanium:sapphire
continuous-wave laser system. The spectral width of the CARS laser beams will be
approximately an order of magnitude less than the spectral width of the Raman
lines for species such as N2 and H2. Consequently, we will be able to resolve
the CARS spectral lines, minimizing the effects of the uncertainties their
linewidths. The impact of the vibration-rotation interactions (the Herman-Wallis
effect) and the effect of vibrational anharmonicity on the accuracy of
temperatures extracted from N2 and H2 CARS spectra will be theoretically
investigated. The accuracy of the high-spectral-resolution CARS temperature
measurements will be validated in near-adiabatic Hencken burner flames. The
validated CARS temperature measurements will then be performed in laminar,
counterflow, non-premixed hydrocarbon/air flames, emphasizing measurements of
flame structure near extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.