* 2027471
* RAPID: Faculty Adaptability and Community Engagement when Teaching in a Crisis
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2022
* USD 224,572.00

The alarming spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has spurred a national emergency.
Many universities announced in mid-March 2020 that all courses taught in
classrooms will be delivered online for the remainder of the semester. This
requirement means that faculty have no choice but to change their teaching
practices immediately. The requirement to rapidly change teaching practices
across the country has rarely occurred. In this instance, it may mark a critical
time of change in how university courses are taught and how university faculty
view teaching. University teaching practices, particularly in technical fields,
have been notoriously slow to adapt to changes in technology and a growing
understanding of best-practices under a variety of educational circumstances.
For instance, lecture is no longer recognized by education researchers as the
most helpful for all types of learning. The unfolding response to the COVID-19
mandate to teach remotely (online) provides a unique, one-time opportunity for
ground-breaking research to study how crisis-induced changes to instruction
influence faculty’s teaching experience. RAPID response funding will enable
real-time documentation of the faculty experience during this crisis and help
explain the results of studies of teacher-design instruction generated during
the COVID-19 event. The results of this study will help future efforts to build
faculty’s sense of community around teaching. Building a greater sense of
community around teaching will benefit society by improving teaching practices
which in turn will improve student persistence, learning, and engagement. Such
improvements can ultimately lead to engineering graduates who are better
prepared to tackle the diverse challenges that society faces now and into the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to identify
cognitive and emotional themes concerning faculty and staff adaptability and
community engagement during a crisis compared to those found under typical
teaching circumstances. To accomplish this goal, the objective of this work is
to track changes in the teaching experiences of faculty and staff during a
crisis by collecting and analyzing data acquired through surveys and interviews.
Two research questions will guide the project: 1) During a crisis, how do
engineering faculty and staff experience a sudden change in course delivery
(with a focus on cognition, emotions, and community engagement)? 2) How do these
experiences vary throughout the duration of the crisis? A hybrid convergent and
sequential mixed-methods approach will be used to track the teaching experiences
of faculty as the crisis progresses. Data collection will be guided by the
adaptability framework dimensions of cognition and emotions with additional data
being collected around community engagement. Data collection will consist of
brief weekly surveys (n=75) and three semi-structured phenomenographic
interviews with engineering faculty (n=10) and the staff who support them (n=5)
spread over the remainder of the semester. This work will contribute fundamental
knowledge on faculty’s adaptability and community engagement in the face of an
urgent need to deliver courses differently and could help shape the design of
professional development opportunities that promote adoption of research-based
pedagogies and instructional technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.