* 2027806
* Dimensions US-China: Collaborative Research: Impacts of heritable plant-fungus symbiosis on phylogenetic, genetic and functional diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Rebecca Creamer, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 76,541.00

As primary producers of life, the hundreds of thousands of species of flowering
plants are an essential component of Earth’s biodiversity. Interestingly, seeds
of flowering plants often bear additional biological diversity in the form of
partnering fungi and bacteria. Diverse impacts of seed-borne fungi include
enhanced protection of host plants from parasites, pathogens and drought, as
well as effects on diversity of their ecosystems. Recently, one fungus was even
shown to donate a disease resistance gene to a wild relative of wheat. This
study employs cutting-edge methods in ecology, genomics and other biological
sciences to research the diversity of plants and their seed-borne fungal
partners in the U.S. and in China, a global hotspot for plant diversity. Results
will guide efforts to preserve biological diversity and promote healthy,
resilient and productive natural ecosystems, rangelands and pastures. Outputs to
the public and the scientific community will enhance knowledge of plant-microbe
symbiosis as a key dimension of diversity. The research and educational exchange
activities will strengthen and diversify scientific collaboration between
scientists and students in China and the U.S., provide training to graduate
students and postdocs in a broad range of biological and bioinformatic sciences,
and integrate field, classroom, and lab activities for K-12 and undergraduate
students to discover microscopic and macroscopic layers of biological
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will first entail a survey for
seed-borne fungal endophytes across the taxonomic range of flowering plants,
with emphasis on the plant diversity in China. The GBOWS (Germplasm Bank of Wild
Species) seed collection in Kunming, China encompasses 37% of Chinese flowering
plant species, and this and other collections will be surveyed to examine
occurrence and possible roles of fungal seed-endophytes in the diversity of
flowering plants. Then, endophyte-symbiotic plant species will be surveyed over
wide geographic ranges to elucidate interactions of different “dimensions” of
diversity of the target plants and their symbionts. Such dimensions will include
genetics, gene expression, morphological characteristics, and ecological
effects. These studies will also extend to neighboring plants that grow in
association with the target species and the seed-endophytes that they, too,
might possess. To complement these broad-scale surveys, the third objective will
involve field experiments, conducted jointly with K-12 schools, to test how
seed-borne fungal endophytes of grasses and legumes may drive diversity of their
hosts and the broader plant community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.