* 2027085
* RAPID: Approach-Avoidance Tendencies to Pathogen-Salience as a Function of Uncertainty and Regional COVID-19 Infection Rates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Raheem Paxton, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 10/31/2020
* USD 77,472.00

The growing presence of COVID-19 in the United States creates a social
psychological problem of a scale never before encountered in modern times. This
time-critical research project investigates how peoples’ feelings of uncertainty
about the spread of COVID-19 across the United States impacts emotional and
motivational behaviors to avoid the virus, even when people may be unaware of
how they feel and act. Emotion-based responses are hypothesized to be amplified
because of the uncertainty involved in a contagion spread. To test this
hypothesis, the project develops a novel smart phone application that
participants can use around the country, even when they are in physical
isolation. The smart phone application creates a novel way to study the
emotional impact of virus transmission as well as educate participants about
their own motivations to stay healthy. This project informs and educates about
the science of COVID-19 transmission and prevention to help develop
interventions for this and future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This time-
critical RAPID project utilizes the smart phone application to engage in
immediate nationwide testing of one thousand individuals from across the
country. Testing will continue for nine months so that peak and declining rates
of disease are captured. The smart phone application assesses non-conscious
motivational tendencies to avoid objects and people which could potentially
transmit COVID-19. The research also tests how these motivational tendencies
promote or hinder health-related behaviors such as handwashing and social
distancing. Importantly, the project investigates regional differences of
infection rates across the United States to test the influence of increasing and
declining infection rates on peoples’ feelings and actions. The research and the
software developed in this project will facilitate the development of future
interventions aimed at reducing the emotional distress caused by the spread of
deadly diseases and to increase healthy behaviors in response to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Social
Psychology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.