* 2027516
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Holistic Optimization of Data-Driven Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Alvin Cheung, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,432.00

We interact with online shopping and banking websites on a daily basis. Many of
these websites are powered by data-driven applications. Such application often
consists of two parts: an application hosted on an application server, and a
database management system (DBMS) hosted on a separate server from the
application server that maintains persistent data. Unfortunately, many data-
driven applications suffer from performance problems, such as taking a long time
to load a page or inability to scale up to serve large number of clients
simultaneously. The state of the art in discovering and fixing performance
problems in data-driven applications is to examine the two parts of the
application separately, and doing so misses many opportunities in discovering
and fixing such problems. Unlike prior approaches, in this project we will treat
the DBMS and the application in tandem. In particular, we will devise new
techniques and tools to help identify performance problems, understand the cause
of such problems, and fix them automatically. This project will open up new
opportunities in cross-layer program compilation and optimization, with the
practical goal of improving the performance of data-driven applications that
will have a significant impact in many aspects of our daily lives. The findings
from this project will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate software
engineering, introduction to data management, and compiler classes to be offered
at the University of Chicago and the University of Washington. The outreach
activities of this project will include engaging and advising students through
special programs geared toward under-represented groups such as the Distributed
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (DREU) organized by CRA-W (Computing
Research Association -- Women) and Diversity Workshops organized by CRA-W.
Specifically, the proposed research consists of three thrusts: (1) a new cross-
layer program analysis framework that produces an end-to-end profile of data-
driven applications by understanding the application code, the queries that the
application sends to the DBMS, and how the DBMS processes such queries; (2) a
program analysis and testing framework that identify performance problems in
data-driven applications by leveraging the end-to-end profile created from (1);
and (3) new means to optimize data-driven applications by transforming both the
application code and the queries that are issued. These three thrusts will work
together to improve the performance of data-driven applications and help
programmers detect performance problems during development. Software developed
by this project, benchmarks used for evaluation, and performance comparison with
existing techniques will be released to public domain through the project
website. Further information will be available at the project website
(https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~akcheung/coopt.html).