* 2027045
* SemiSynBio-II: Hybrid Bio-Electronic Microfluidic Memory Arrays for Large Scale Testing and Remote Deployment
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Wilson Wong, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,497,580.00

The ability to record events (“memory”) is a crucial part of many complex
systems. Recording events allows these systems to modify their behavior based on
previous interactions, report on their history, or communicate local information
to a global community. Biological systems will benefit greatly from the creation
of memory elements. Biological memories in bacterial or mammalian cells could be
used to monitor a person’s microbiome, develop smart materials that respond to
the environment, or create specialized sensors that react to biotoxins.
Biological memories in living cells themselves require a controlled environment.
This environment not only ensures their long-term survival and viability but
also allows for the controlled reading and writing of the memory. Reading and
writing will ultimately be how these systems are “programmed” and how the data
they collect can be acted upon. This project creates novel bio-memories using
devices that move small amounts of liquids (microfluidics). Microfluidics are
used to test in parallel many biological-memory configurations to determine
which are the best at testing specific environmental signals (e.g. toxins,
metals, hormones). The best of these memories are then integrated with low-cost,
embedded electronics that can read their outputs as well as control the
microfluidic environments housing the memories and allowing external signals to
“write” information in the memories. Biological memories, microfluidics, and
electronics together form what is called “Hybrid Bio-Electronic Microfluidic
Memory Arrays”. These devices will explore numerous interdisciplinary challenges
and create opportunities for exploring applications at the boundaries of
computer science, synthetic biology, and materials science. To maximize this
project’s impact, all of the research including the microfluidic and electronics
designs and software will be made open source. All genetic memory elements will
be provided to the scientific community. More than 48 undergraduate students
will be mentored during the project period via NSF sponsored programs and summer
research programs at Boston University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a
three-phase structure, where in the first phase biological memories are
developed with the aid of a high-throughput, electronically augmented
microfluidic screening platform. Recombinase enzymatic reactions on DNA will act
as the irreversible memories while epigenetic, chromatin modifications will act
as the reversible mechanism. This phase will involve the creation of 1000’s of
potential memory elements. In the second phase, the top candidates from the
first phase are combined in a massively parallel, highly integrated
microfluidics platform to develop the eventual deployed microfluidic as well as
establishing the operating and control conditions needed for the memories.
Finally, in phase three, a small-scale deployment environment is created to
observe and tune the performance of the newly created Hybrid Bio-Electronic
Microfluidic Memory Arrays in an aquatic deployment scenario meant to replicate
real-world bio-sensing applications for heavy metals and other environmental
signals. These phases explicitly address three bio-memory challenges (create,
control, and deploy) using state-of-the-art biological reversible and
irreversible memories, droplet microfluidics, and customized embedded
semiconductor-based electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.