* 2027300
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing High-latitude Ionospheric Fluid Turbulence and Radio Scintillation with New Observations and Data-Driven Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Leslie Lamarche, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2023
* USD 304,124.00

This collaborative award is for a study of the complex spatial structure
exhibited by ionosphere plasma in Earth's polar regions. Small-scale plasma
structuring modifies the phase and amplitude of trans-ionospheric radio signals,
producing significant scintillation activity. These effects are detrimental to
communication and navigation systems but can be used as a remote-sensing
diagnostic to help discern the characteristics of fundamental small-scale plasma
processes that result in ionospheric structure. This research will improve
understanding of the two major processes contributing to ionospheric
scintillation: gradient drift and Kelvin Helmholz instabilities. The research
plan directly relate to goals of NSF Aeronomy and CEDAR programs to investigate
cross-scale coupling in the ionosphere-thermosphere-magnetosphere system, and
would be applicable to other disciplines within plasma physics. The team will
develop and apply rarely utilized capabilities of the Resolute Bay incoherent
scatter radar (RISR), expanding the range of measurements the community can
easily request from this facility while also advancing modeling capabilities.
The project is co-led by two early-career scientists including a first-time NSF
PI. The award enhances the space physics program at ERAU with support provided
for one undergraduate student and one graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial irregularities within ionospheric plasma undergo
dynamical evolution under the influence of magnetospheric forcing and internal
ionospheric processes, producing a cascade of energy moving generally from large
scales into intermediate and small scale structures. These scales are believed
to be generated by a variety of instability mechanisms and structuring
processes, but the details of the evolution of this plasma structuring over time
are poorly constrained, especially for the non-linear aspects. The research plan
will focus upon detailed data-model synthesis to characterize physical
parameters expected to contribute to irregularity evolution in the ionosphere
(i.e., large-scale density structures, background velocity fields, gradients and
shears, and precipitation regions). The approach include modeling of radio wave
propagation (using SIGMA) and polar cap ionosphere based upon the ingestion of
existing and new observations from RISR, characterizing large-to-medium scales
and scintillation activity using GPS (L-band) and UHF/VHF radio beacons. Results
will be interpreted through comparisons with the predictions of a physics-based
instability model as represented by the GEMINI model to characterize observable
effects of ionospheric instability in many idealized situations and for select
case studies based on data-driven model inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.