* 2027572
* RAPID: Teaming in the Time of Covid-19: Understanding how technology affordances can enable collaboration during sudden workplace disruption
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Leslie DeChurch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

Organizations have contemplated and - in some cases - experimented with the idea
of remote work for several decades. The spread of the novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) has enlisted the world in an involuntary and instantaneous "beta-
test" of remote work at scale. In the span of a few weeks, shelter-in-place
orders have come down from government agencies in the US and elsewhere requiring
organizations to transition nearly their entire workforces to remote work
arrangements instantaneously. Undoubtedly, these rapid and wholesale shifts to
remote work arrangements are leveraging recent advances in the development of
digital collaboration platforms that enable teams to communicate via text,
audio, and video and to share and edit documents in real-time. However, until
now, we have not had the need (or the will) to experimentally - and at scale -
assess the ability of digital collaboration platforms to support an all remote
workforce. The pandemic offers us an unprecedented opportunity to understand how
the sudden switch to remote collaboration presents challenges and opportunities
to distributed teams. Thus, this research seeks to answer fundamental questions
about how workers organize for remote work before, during, and after a sudden
shift to remote collaboration. This includes exploring the lasting impacts of
COVID-19 on organizations, even after returning to the "new normal."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws insights from studying workers. It
leverages surveys (including questions about their social networks), HR data, as
well as data from collaboration server logs that have been collected over the
past year, prior to the pandemic, from four organizations. These data will be
augmented by collecting new data from these same organizations to understand
remote work during and post pandemic. These include surveys, HR data,
collaboration server logs, as well as qualitative interviews. Taken together
these longitudinal data will help us understand how the observed shifts in
patterns of teamwork can be explained by the particular ways in which workers
utilize technology before, during and after the COVID-19 crisis. It will explore
how work-life blending and burnout differentially impact remote workers.
Furthermore, to assess changes in how employees collaborate on and around
digital platforms before, during, and after COVID-19 disruption, data will be
collected that examine when and what workplace policies were put in place by
organizations or other local, state or national agencies in response to
COVID-19. These include decisions for partial evacuation of offices, total
shelter-at-home, lay-offs for certain categories of employees, leave without pay
for others, mandatory use of certain technologies, as well as phased re-entry
back into the office. As such, the research project will advance our fundamental
understanding of the manner in which digital collaboration technologies provide
challenges and opportunities to teams collaborating - including the most extreme
scenario - remotely. It will also provide an evidentiary base for how workplace
related policy interventions impact the use of technology for teamwork. Results
from this research will contribute to generating policy recommendations about
how technologies should be used to enable collaboration at key transition points
during a future crisis of this magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.