* 2027362
* Collaborative Research: Behavior of Boron During Prograde Diagenesis and Metamorphism of Pelagic Sediments from the Nankai Trough
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Maureen Feineman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 212,219.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate slides beneath another, are places
where water, carbon dioxide and other chemical components are transferred
between the Earth’s surface and interior. Some chemical components that enter
into subduction zones are released back to the oceans (as water or gas); others
contribute to magmas in volcanoes (where they become part of the crust as
igneous rocks or are released to the atmosphere as volcanic gases) and still
others are transported all the way into the deep interior of the Earth.
Understanding how elements and compounds are divided between the surface and the
interior of Earth can provide important information about the regulation of
carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere, the concentration of radioactive
elements near the surface of the Earth, and the tendency of some volcanoes to
erupt violently. This project uses the element boron, which is highly
concentrated in seawater and ocean sediments compared to the interior of the
Earth, to track the recycling of surface components through subduction zones. If
we can measure the amount of boron entering into a subduction zone on the sea
floor and how much boron is released by associated volcanoes and into the ocean,
then we can calculate how much boron is recycled into the deep Earth. The
workplan includes opportunities for intellectual exchange between collaborators
in the United States, Italy, and Japan. Students at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels will participate in and benefit from the collaborative
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zones are the primary locus for
recycling of crustal materials into the Earth’s mantle, with important
implications for mantle and continental crustal evolution throughout Earth
history. Subducted sediments in particular contribute volatiles, trace elements,
and unique isotopic signatures to the oceans, the mantle, and arc magmas. Boron
is both highly fluid mobile and isotopically fractionated during thermally-
driven desorption and metamorphic dehydration, making it an excellent tracer for
both sediment and fluids. In contrast, Rare Earth Elements (HREE) and High Field
Strength Elements (HFSE) are generally immobile, making them good tracers of
sediment and basalt provenance. By observing the co-variation of B, d11B, and
HREE/HFSE concentrations in progressively dehydrated marine clays and subsidiary
basalts within a unique sample suite from the Nankai margin, we propose to
constrain 1) the initial variability in slab inputs to the trench within a well-
constrained segment of a single subduction zone; and 2) the evolution of
sediment and released fluid composition through progressive desorption and
dehydration prior to entering the sub-arc region. The workplan includes
opportunities for intellectual exchange between collaborators in the United
States, Italy, and Japan. Students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels
will participate in and benefit from the international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.