* 2027524
* Collaborative:RAPID:Leveraging New Data Sources to Analyze the Risk of COVID-19 in Crowded Locations.
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* David Ebert, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2022
* USD 57,999.00

The goal of this project is to create a software infrastructure that will help
scientists investigate the risk of the spread of COVID-19 and analyze future
epidemics in crowded locations using real-time public webcam videos and location
based services (LBS) data. It is motivated by the observation that COVID-19
clusters often arise at sites involving high densities of people. Current
strategies suggest coarse scale interventions to prevent this, such as
cancellation of activities, which incur substantial economic and social costs.
More detailed fine scaled analysis of the movement and interaction patterns of
people at crowded locations can suggest interventions, such as changes to crowd
management procedures and the design of built environments, that yield social
distance without being as disruptive to human activities and the economy. The
field of pedestrian dynamics provides mathematical models that can generate such
detailed insight. However, these models need data on human behavior, which
varies significantly with context and culture. This project will leverage novel
data streams, such as public webcams and location based services, to inform the
pedestrian dynamics model. Relevant data, models, and software will be made
available to benefit other researchers working in this domain, subject to
privacy restrictions. The project team will also perform outreach to decision
makers so that the scientific insights yield actionable policies contributing to
public health. The net result will be critical scientific insight that can
generate a transformative impact on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
including a possible second wave, so that it protects public health while
minimizing adverse effects from the interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will
accomplish the above work through the following methods and innovations. LBS
data can identify crowded locations at a scale of tens of meters and help screen
for potential risk by analyzing the long range movement of individuals there.
Worldwide video streams can yield finer-grained details of social closeness and
other behavioral patterns desirable for accurate modeling. On the other hand,
the videos may not be available for potentially high risk locations, nor can
they directly answer “what-if” questions. Videos from contexts similar to the
one being modeled will be used to calibrate pedestrian dynamics model
parameters, such as walking speeds. Then the trajectories of individual
pedestrians will be simulated in the target locations to estimate social
closeness. An infection transmission model will be applied to these trajectories
to yield estimates of infection spread. This will result in a novel methodology
to include diverse real time data into pedestrian dynamics models so that they
can quickly and accurately capture human movement patterns in new and evolving
situations. The cyberinfrastructure will automatically discover real-time video
streams on the Internet and analyze them to determine the pedestrian density,
movements, and social distances. The pedestrian dynamics model will be
reformulated from the current force-based definition to one that uses pedestrian
density and individual speed, both of which can be measured effectively through
video analysis. The revised model will be used to produce scientific insight to
inform policies, such as steps to mitigate localized outbreaks of COVID-19 and
for the systematic reopening, potential re-closing, and permanent changes to
economic and social activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.