* 2027767
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Adjustment and Effectiveness of Rapid Transition to Remote Work
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Tammy Allen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,625.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has forced much of the country’s workforce into remote
work arrangements. With the need for social distancing, the ability to continue
essential business functions through effective remote work arrangements is a key
means for addressing the global health crisis. However, many organizations are
unprepared to accommodate a remote workforce and likewise lack insight into best
practices as to how to promote continued productivity and well-being of the
workforce in such arrangements. Although there is a large body of extant
research on remote work arrangements, numerous questions remained under
investigated. This project will address these gaps by studying the impact of
several organizational, individual, technological, and supervisor
characteristics on remote worker adjustment, well-being, and productivity.
Findings from the project will provide evidence-based best practices that many
large and small businesses can use both during future pandemics and other
extreme events, but also going forward in normal work environments that may
increasingly want to support remote work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19
pandemic has suddenly promoted the need for remote work arrangements on a vast
scale, but we lack key information regarding what makes such work productive and
sustainable. This project will obtain data from 500 full-time employees who are
working remotely during the response to COVID-19 but were not doing so
previously. The first phase of the project will collect a baseline survey that
captures characteristics and experiences prior to the pandemic and remote work
transition and general perceptions of the adjustment to remote work process.
Phase 2 involves a 30-day experience sampling study administered daily at the
end of each workday that will capture day-to-day experiences, attitudes, and
performance of remote workers. Benefits of this panel design are: 1) provides
insights into how multiple dynamic changes influence outcomes; 2) enhances
ecological validity; 3) allows researchers to examine both within- and between-
person processes; and 4) reduces retrospective recall biases. The project will
partner with several work organizations to collect the data. Data from Phase 1
will be analyzed using regression and dominance analysis; data from Phase 2 will
be analyzed using multi-level modeling which controls for nested structures,
adjusting standard errors to take into account the lack of independence. These
analyses also control for between-subject variables and previous measurements
while also accounting for missing data. Findings from the project will inform
organizational theories involving the effects of organizations, individuals,
work, and technology on workers and work outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.