* 2027059
* RAPID: Determine Community Disease Burden of COVID-19 by Probing Wastewater Microbiome
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Tao Yan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 151,956.00

The global COVID-19 pandemic is an urgent global health and economic crisis. The
impacts of the current outbreak are exacerbated by the potential for infection
outbreaks to seasonally reoccur. This potential seasonal cycling presents a
great challenge to the current clinic-based disease surveillance approach which
does not adequately test asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic patients. There is
a critical need for alternative methods to assess spread, as undiagnosed
infections are driving disease transmission in the COVID-19 pandemic. To
directly address this need, this project will develop the science to assess
community infection prevalence by analyzing the wastewater microbiome, promising
a rapid, sensitive, and comprehensive approach for microbial disease
surveillance. Successful development will allow assessment of infection rates in
the population served by the wastewater treatment plant, including those with
mild or no symptoms. Such capabilities would dramatically improve surveillance
of pandemics by indicating in real time where the disease is emerging in new
hotspots. Such information would inform intervention strategies for controlling
the current COVID-19 pandemic, and help the Nation manage future outbreaks more
effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project has two specific research
objectives in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. The first objective is to
develop and optimize a highly efficient concentration and detection method for
enveloped viruses (like coronavirus) in the wastewater matrix. There is urgent
need for this knowledge given that the most commonly used concentration methods
for viruses in water samples were developed for the non-enveloped viruses.
Successful completion of this phase of the research will thus fill a major
technological gap and significantly advance the capability to detect and monitor
the SARS-CoV2 in water and wastewater. The second objective is to collect time-
sensitive wastewater samples from communities impacted by the disease. The
wastewater will be used to determine the abundance, diversity, and temporal
dynamics of SARS-CoV2 and other enveloped viruses in the wastewater. These data
will be analyzed to reconstruct the extent of COVID-19 community transmission.
The research will generate much-needed information on community transmission of
COVID-19, as well as serve to validate the wastewater-based surveillance
approach. If successful, this research will provide a new avenue to protect the
public health of the Nation through wastewater
surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.