* 2027667
* RAPID:Genomic Variation Analysis of Coronavirus to Better Understand the Spread of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Jing Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2023
* USD 148,386.00

Currently, there is a world-wide pandemic of the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) that is caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). As of April 2, 2020, there have been more than one million
confirmed cases of COVID-19 and more than 55,000 deaths. These numbers are
increasing rapidly. Yet, the short time since the beginning of this outbreak
limits our understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 spreads. The objective of this
project is to address this gap. In response to evidence that the rate of
infections among healthcare providers is alarmingly high, this project will
expose transmission patterns in the hospital setting. In collaboration with the
Cleveland Clinic, the investigators will have access to genomic,
epidemiological, and clinical patient data. Joint computational analysis of this
data will result in a computational model that will provide insights into
transmission patterns in hospitals, such as from patients to doctors and health
workers, or from doctors to doctors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities in
this project will be organized along three Aims. Aim 1: Perform whole-genome
sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 samples collected at the Cleveland Clinic. The data
will be augmented by existing SARS-CoV-2 sequence data from multiple online
databases, as well as existing sequence data from other species. Aim 2: Build an
analysis pipeline and perform evolutionary analysis of genomic data obtained in
Aim 1. Aim 3: Perform joint analysis of genomic, epidemiological, and clinical
data to infer transmission patterns. One of the unique advantages of the project
is the ability to directly link identified genomic strains to clinical data. The
activities have direct clinical implications for better protecting healthcare
workers and minimizing the overall rate of infections in the hospital setting.
Findings from this project will be shared with the research community at large
to aid further analysis in other hospitals as more data becomes available during
this pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.