* 2027148
* RAPID: The Diffusion of Fear and Coronavirus: Tracking Individual Response Across Time and Space
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Grant Drawve, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2023
* USD 184,257.00

The world is facing a pandemic owing to COVID-19. The economic and social
disruption is just beginning, and many are fearful of the illness as well as
effects on economic and social systems. Residents will continue to experience
disruptions in their daily lives as more cases are detected in the coming weeks,
in turn affecting their social and psychological wellbeing. This project will
investigate the diffusion of fear and related mental and physical health
behaviors across the United States amidst the crisis. This project examines how
individuals’ perceived risk and objective expressions of fear, including extreme
social distancing, panic purchasing, and hoarding, are driven by demographic,
physical and mental health, social connectivity, and media consumption
characteristics. In addition, the project analyzes how community
vulnerabilities, socioeconomic disadvantages, and geographic proximity to
detected and disclosed coronavirus cases impact individual fear response
behaviors simultaneously. Broadly, this project advances knowledge regarding how
individuals respond to crises, personally and collectively, and benefits
governmental leaders as well as citizens so they can better prepare resources to
respond to future extreme events. Gathering indicators of well-being, along with
assessing their impact provides valuable information to help organizations,
governments, and policymakers better understand the personal, social and
systemic ramifications of epidemiological disasters like the COVID-19 pandemic.
Not only will the project illuminate how the victims of the pandemic are
currently coping, but it also will provide information as to how social
institutions are addressing the needs of these survivors – thus, demonstrating
the breadth and wealth of America’s social ties/resources, as well as their
major deficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes fear
generated by the COVID-19 pandemic as a function of social and community
characteristics. It will develop a random, representative post-stratified,
weighted sample of the United States population using an on-line survey of
approximately 10,000 individuals. The 15-20 minute self-administered interview
utilizes validated survey instruments capturing multiple dimensions of
subjective and objective fear, mental and physical health, media consumption,
and communication behaviors related to fear responses. In addition, using
multiple geo-location markers, the project pairs individuals’ responses with
existing aggregate databases, including those capturing the locations of
confirmed COVID-19 cases, specific community-level disease vulnerability, and
macro-level socioeconomic disadvantages to enable the use of well-established
standard linear modeling, as well as hierarchical modeling techniques nesting
individual respondents in their respective geographic communities. The project
is an excellent candidate for RAPID funding because fear and anxiety become
heightened as more cases are reported; thus, it is critical to interview
respondents at the height of their concerns to reflect the growing social
anxiety that is so widespread during these times. The study will provide a
baseline for evaluating dynamic changes in fear responses and general well-
being. It will also address key questions in social science regarding how fear
and anxiety moves in and around dynamic social environments both temporally and
spatially, thus informing sociological theories involving changes in social
capital and the culture of fear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Sociology, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.