* 2027789
* RAPID: Privacy-Preserving Crowdsensing of COVID-19 and its Sociological and Epidemiological Implications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Jaideep Vaidya, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,597.00

The successful containment of pandemics such as COVID-19 requires the ability to
record the presence of infections and track its spread within communities. While
testing is the primary source to collect such information, the lack of testing
resources and the resultant under-testing significantly hampers this effort.
Mobile crowdsensing is an alternative technological approach that can be
effective in such situations if used by a significant fraction of the
population. However, privacy concerns as well as the stigma associated with the
pandemic prove to be huge barriers that inhibit the accurate collection of
information in this way. The goal of this project is to develop an
infrastructure and platform to collect data from the population and distill it
into aggregate information to provide insight to both users and policymakers
while protecting privacy. The project also aims to gain a broader understanding
of privacy and decision making in extreme situations and learn how humans value
their privacy and the choices they make in such situations. The project will
enable the collection of real-time data, which is not available otherwise, and
will enable a more effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increased
dissemination of localized information to users can help encourage social
distancing from a psychological perspective and thus contribute to the well-
being of individuals in society. The improved understanding of privacy from a
socio-cognitive perspective to be gained from this project will improve the
quality of data privacy solutions that are developed in the future.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a crowdsensing tool that will use self-
reported symptoms to effectively identify new clusters of COVID-19 and measure
their growth in real-time. Within the project effort, the investigators will
study both mathematical guarantees of privacy and the social aspects of privacy
decision making, specific to this context. To provide privacy protection for
users an appropriate definition of privacy that relaxes differential privacy and
corresponding privacy mechanisms will be developed. The project will utilize
insights from extant literature to enable users to make an informed decision
regarding sharing their private information and also generate new knowledge
regarding human privacy behavior in extreme health scenarios. The project also
creates a research infrastructure to support and study important questions
regarding privacy and public health, and develops new synergies by bringing
together experts from privacy, crowdsensing, communication, and
epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.