* 2027001
* RAPID: Modeling Outbreak of COVID-19 Using Dynamic Survival Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Grzegorz Rempala, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2023
* USD 198,598.00

The outbreak of COVID-19 has created a tremendous need for predicting both the
dynamics and the size of regional COVID-19 outbreaks. Equally important is the
need to determine the potential effects of early interventions such as school
closures and mandatory or self-imposed quarantines. To answer these questions,
this project will develop a general mathematical framework for analyzing the
ongoing outbreak trends using data solely from partially observed new daily
infection counts (also known as the epidemic curve). The PIâ€™s new framework will
not assume any specific infectious or recovery periods (which are often unknown)
or observable prevalence of the disease. The tools developed as part of this
project will both help predict the rate of growth of new infections and estimate
the effect of social distancing and other preventative measures on flattening
the epidemic curve. The PI will use a new dynamical survival analysis approach
to predict the trajectory of the COVID-19 epidemic for a mid-western region of
the United States. Data from elsewhere in the world, like the city of Wuhan in
China, will be used to calibrate the predictions. The project will also provide
a practical interdisciplinary training for a PhD student and a post-doctoral
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling and predictive framework to be
developed is fundamentally different from the traditional approach based on the
incidence or prevalence counts in a compartmental SIR model. Specifically, the
PI will apply the dynamical survival analysis (DSA) approach that considers
aggregated mean field equations for the underlying large stochastic network and
regards them as the approximate survival law of the infection times. The PI will
use these DSA-based equations to model both the epidemic and recovery curves and
compare them with the ones observed during the COVID-19 outbreak. The
statistical analysis of epidemic data performed with the help of the new
framework will allow the quick elucidation of the dynamics of an epidemic (for
example, the basic reproduction number, R0) and the potential impact of
interventions (such as quarantine or social distancing). The new framework will
help provide a better understanding of how preventive behaviors affect COVID-19
dynamics via changes in the network structure and changes in disease
transmission across edges in the network. This project will develop a user-
friendly software package for computer simulations under different parameter and
intervention scenarios (for example, vaccination schemes) that will lead to a
better understanding of how to control COVID-19
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.