* 2027496
* Investigation of Anomalous Travel Times in the Central Andes: Possible Evidence for a Lithospheric Root Trapped Above a Flat Slab
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Studies of continental deformation at convergent plate boundaries are of
fundamental importance for advancing our understanding of how continents evolve,
how natural resourses are concentrated, and how natural hazards such as
earthquakes and volcanoes occur. Because of the broad spectrum of processes
represented and the abundance of data available, the Andes mountains along the
western coast of South America provide one of the best venues to investigate
such continental deformation. This project seeks to take advantage of the
extensive archive of seismic data recorded over the past several decades in
South America to investigate how deformation is occurring beneath a particular
part of the high Andes close to the border between Chile and Argentina where the
subducting Nazca plate appears to flatten under the overriding South American
lithosphere. This region is of particular interest because previous studies
identified a seismic signal indicating unusually high elastic wavespeeds that
suggest that the South American lithosphere is thickening above the flat slab
and deforming it in the process. While such thickening is expected in this type
of convergent margin, its existence above a flat slab challenges our current
understanding of the physics and chemistry involved in such processes. This
project will develop and apply state-of-the-art seismic imaging methodologies to
an assembled dataset to allow inferences about what this feature is and how it
is influencing the deformation of the both the slab and continent, and by
extension how it affects the evolution of South America and the generation of
earthquakes and volcanos in the region. This project involves an extensive
international collaboration between students and senior scientists in the US,
Chile, and Argentina. This project will support the work of graduate students
who are both female and a member of an underrepresented demographic in STEM
research. It will also provide semester-long research opportunities for 2-3
undergraduate students. A primary emphasis of this project is strengthening
international research ties between the US, Chile and Argentina, as in involves
highly collaborative work between scientists and students at RPI, the
Universidad de Chile and Santiago, and the National University of San Juan in
Argentina.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Flat slabs and lithospheric roots are both
fundamental features in the growth and evolution of continental lithosphere at
Andean margins, but rarely, if ever, are they considered interreleated
phenomena. The mantle above flat slabs is presumed to be cold and static, while
root formation is generally believed to be the province of the ostensibly more
dynamic environment of an asthenospheric mantle wedge. Based on previous work
the investigators have done in this area with aftershocks of the 2015 Illapel
earthquake, there is evidence that the part of the Pampean flat slab beneath the
high Andes hosts such a root. Moreover, the team hypothesizes that the higher
density of this root is causing the underlying “flat” lithosphere of the
subducted Nazca plate to deflect downwards locally by 15-20 km. The
identification of a lithospheric root above the Pampean flat slab would force us
to rethink how roots evolve in a compressive tectonic environment. Several
factors that are commonly cited to be critical to root formation, including a
hydrated mantle wedge and vigorous corner flow within that wedge would be
greatly reduced, if not completely absent, above a flat slab. Additionally, an
extant lithospheric root is a relatively rare phenomenon; they often make their
presence known only by their removal. Hence, the positive identification of an
existing root presents a rare opportunity to investigate one in situ. While
previous studies of this area hint at the existence of such an entity, for the
most part it has escaped detection due to a combination of insufficient
resolution or sampling and the potential misclassification of signals as
outliers in generic background models. Preliminary analysis suggests that
current datasets have been underutilized. The international team plans to
generate enhanced catalogs of events, and then apply a combination of standard
(e.g., arrival time tomography, attenuation tomography, anisotropy from shear
wave birefringence) and more advanced (e.g., coda migration, anisotropic
receiver functions, joint inversions) analysis techniques to this data to
identify and characterize the hypothesized root.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.