* 2027165
* SemiSynBio-II: Programmable abiotic-biotic interface with planar DNA nanopore electrodes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Manjeri Anantram, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

The controlled movement of electrons through the semiconductor nanostructures is
the foundation of the entire information technology revolution. In the living
systems, information processing also takes place, and it involves well-regulated
transport of molecules through a complex network of cells using atomically
precise machines likes membrane receptors, channels, and pumps. While there has
been several efforts over the last few decades to connect these two radically
different systems into one information-processing whole, these efforts have not
succeeded, because of the structural, mechanical and biochemical mismatch at the
interface of living biological elements and nonliving electronic elements. To
solve this mismatch, a new approach to abiotic-biotic interface will be
developed, based on DNA nanotechnology, that plays to the strength of both
systems. The project will provide numerous training opportunities to various
cohorts of undergraduate students at three research
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the investigators will build a
DNA based “planar artificial gap junction” inspired by naturally occurring
biological complexes, called gap junctions, to enable a programmable, modular,
interface between biological elements (like proteins, cells and tissues) and
semiconductor devices. Much like how natural gap junctions are formed from the
protein/peptide pores that self-assemble at the interface of two cells,
artificial gap junctions are formed by precisely positioning a defined number of
DNA molecules at the active region of a CMOS device that can convert ionic
signals into electronic signals. Using the ability to easily modify DNA
nanostructures, the investigators will optimize the performance of these
artificial gap junctions as well as make them responsive to arbitrary external
signals, including molecular signals. Finally, they use the modular architecture
of our artificial gap junction to demonstrate direct electronic read-out of
molecular information from different biomolecular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.