* 2027570
* RAPID: How parenting practices influence child safety thoughts and behaviors in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Emily Kroshus, Seattle Children's Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,821.00

Parenting practices can help limit the impact of COVID-19 in two key ways.
First, parents can support childrenâ€™s implementation of behaviors to reduce
virus spread (e.g., hand washing, social distancing, and self-quarantine).
Second, parents can help limit child anxiety (e.g., overseeing and discussing
media exposure and providing factual and age appropriate information). By
understanding the factors that drive differences in these parenting behaviors,
this research can help determine how best to support child and family wellness
at a population-level during this challenging time. Differences in parenting are
likely related to differences in parent perceptions of the threat of the virus
to their family and the extent to which they believe they can take steps to
limit this threat. This study will also assess how family socioeconomic
characteristics such as income, education, occupation, and health literacy
relate to threat and coping perceptions, parenting behaviors, and child
outcomes.

A nationally representative survey of English and Spanish speaking parents of
children aged 6-17 years will address this need with the following aims: (1)
describe parenting practices related to COVID-19, (2) determine the extent to
which these parenting behaviors are related to differences in parent threat and
coping perceptions, and (3) explore and describe the relationship of family
socioeconomic characteristics to threat and coping perceptions, child anxiety,
and child health behaviors to reduce virus transmission. Results of this study
will provide key information about how to target and optimize health
communication in the current pandemic context and can identify where structural
interventions to address fundamental disparities in social determinants of
health may be needed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.