* 2027632
* Scholarships to Support Retention, Academic Success, and Career Pathways in Mechanical Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Subha Kumpaty, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,974.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Milwaukee School of Engineering, an urban private, non-profit
university. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to
fifteen unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in
Mechanical Engineering. Scholars will be selected in two cohorts of first year
mechanical engineering students. The Scholars will be retained and assisted
through degree completion and placement into the workforce or graduate school.
In addition to scholarships, the program will provide Scholars with a robust
suite of support structures that include social activities, peer tutoring,
shadowing experiences, student-faculty interaction, career guidance, and
preparation for research, graduate school and/or the engineering workforce.
Because of institution’s geographical context and student population, the
project is likely to broaden participation in engineering. Milwaukee has the
third-highest level of poverty among large cities in the United States and the
population includes about 27% African Americans and 16% Hispanic Americans. In
addition, because the project has strong linkages with the Milwaukee Public
Schools and the K-12 community, the project can contribute to strengthening the
engineering talent pipeline. Also notable is the strong industry component that
will facilitate Scholar internships and career mentoring to help nurture
engineering identity and increasing the potential for the Scholars to enter
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. With regard to intellectual merit, the project
will generate new knowledge by investigating the effectiveness of the support
structures employed to enhance student persistence to graduation. The value of
this knowledge is elevated by the relatively unique institutional setting, which
features a standalone, fully accredited, non-profit university that is primarily
an engineering school. The project has the potential to increase understanding
about the impact of curricula and co-curricular interventions on cognitive and
non-cognitive student characteristics, personal development, retention, and
graduation. For the cohorts of financially eligible, academically talented
mechanical engineering students, three research questions are posited: (1) Does
the project produce significant differences in retention of the Scholars? (2)
Which interventions are more effective in retention and academic success of
Scholars? (3) Does the project effectively provide a pathway to a successful,
satisfying career for the Scholars? Answers are to be sought through collection
and analysis of quantitative and qualitative data from surveys, in-person
interviews, and focus groups. The project management team has the needed
expertise and includes a social science researcher who will lead the educational
research activities. There is a well-qualified external evaluator charged with
evaluation of the process of project execution and the monitoring of the extent
of adherence to the project management plan. The dissemination plan for
widescale distribution of findings is robust and comprehensive, including on-
campus presentations, posters, professional engineering conferences, social
networks, industry, and K-12 outreach. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.