* 2027679
* RAPID: Tracking the Coronovirus in municipal wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Christine Kelly, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused major human health and economic
impacts. One of the most critical questions is determining who is infected to
help understand how rapidly the outbreak has progressed. With the continuing
mismatch between testing need and capacity, alternative methods are needed to
assess the outbreak. Further difficulty in monitoring the outbreak results from
the fact that most infected individuals do not show COVID-19 symptoms
immediately. These issues limit the ability of decision makers to determine
where outbreaks are occurring within their communities, when outbreaks start,
and when outbreaks slow or stop. The goal of this project is to address such
limitations by developing the science behind monitoring the spread of the
disease through community wastewater surveillance. To achieve this goal, the
research will measure SARS-CoV2, the virus that causes COVID-19, in the
wastewater system. This new detection method will allow for decision makers to
assess potential outbreaks before symptomatic people request testing. In
addition, results will help determine which communities have infected
individuals. This is particularly important to assess whether the COVID-19
outbreak is slowing in response to interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to determine the onset, duration, termination, and location
of the COVID-19 outbreak via wastewater surveillance. This work will test two
hypotheses that: 1) SARS-CoV2 virus RNA concentrations in sewage and stormwater
correlates with the initiation, progression, and decline of a communityâ€™s
aggregate COVID-19 infection; 2) Spatial sampling within a sewer system network
can isolate the location of COVID-19 hotspots within a given community. To test
these hypotheses, two objectives will be completed: 1) SARS-CoV2 RNA in four
Clean Water Services (CWS, Washington County, Oregon) wastewater treatment
facilities and stormwater collection systems will be quantified using reverse
transcriptase droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (RT-ddPCR) on a weekly
basis. In the wastewater treatment plants, SARS-CoV2 RNA will be quantified in
liquid primary clarifier effluent and in primary clarifier solids. At stormwater
collection systems, SARS-CoV2 RNA will be quantified from the liquid and solid
fractions. 2) SARS-CoV2 RNA will be quantified using RT-ddPCR at 12 selected
sampling points throughout the CWS sewer system network on a biweekly basis
through June, 2020, and monthly for the remainder of the project. The results
will be incorporated into a GIS system containing publicly available demographic
databases to identify COVID-19 hotspots and possible underlying contributing
factors. The results of this work will demonstrate the feasibility of using
wastewater collected at a centralized treatment facility to monitor COVID-19
outbreaks for an entire community. A second outcome of this work will determine
how SARS-CoV2 RNA partitions between wastewater solids and liquid factions.
Additionally, this work will determine if stormwater is a potential reservoir of
SARS-CoV2 RNA during a COVID-19 outbreak. Finally, this work will demonstrate
how sampling throughout a sewer line network can identify COVID-19 outbreak
hotspots. If successful, this research could lead to other similar monitoring
efforts for other viral outbreaks and protect the public health of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.