* 2027590
* STTR Phase I:  Enabling Rapid Scale-up of COVID-19 Treatment using Next-Generation Light Driven Chemistry
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2020
* Chern-Hooi Lim, New Iridium
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2020
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a photocatalytic process to facilitate
enhanced speed and efficiency for production of key intermediate chemicals for
production of Remdesivir, a potential life-saving drug in the fight against
COVID-19. Remdesivir has been identified as one of the most promising treatments
for COVID-19; recently receiving fast-track approval for Phase III trials and
compassionate use against this rapidly spreading and deadly disease. However,
today Remdesivir is not an approved drug and is therefore not manufactured at
scale. This project offers potential for accelerated production of Remdesivir by
removing manufacturing bottlenecks of intermediates that threaten rapid scale-up
and efficient manufacturing. Upon approval, process bottlenecks could inhibit
mass-production, delay global availability and jeopardize millions of lives. An
optimized production method for key intermediates is urgently needed to meet
worldwide demand that will be critical in the race to control the pandemic.
Potential problems with the current processes include costly and hazardous raw
materials, low yields, expensive and specialized equipment required for harsh
operating conditions and air- and water-free environments, and arduous
purification and facility clean-up procedures. In addition, this project also
provides a simplified, modular and faster approach for building libraries of
derivative molecules to screen against COVID-19 and future viral threats.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop an optimized manufacturing process
for Remdesivir, one of the most promising COVID-19 therapeutic candidates
identified to date, using photocatalysis, a powerful new chemical technology
driven by light. Research objectives include using photocatalysis to develop a
vastly superior synthesis route requiring fewer process steps, less toxic
reagents and milder and safer reaction conditions. The new route will eliminate
the need for specialized production equipment and procedures to maintain
cryogenic temperatures and air- and water-free environments, will result in
faster production times and overall higher yields, and will alleviate arduous
purification and facility clean-up. The improved process will also facilitate
installation of new molecular architectures and development of derivative
molecules vital for efficacy screening against this and future viral threats. A
second objective is to optimize the process for manufacturing at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.