* 2027489
* RAPID: Conformal, Anti-viral Nanofilms on Personal Protective equipmenT materials to combat CoronavirUs tRansmission/sequEstration (CAPTURE)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In the current state of pandemic COVID 19, use of personal protective equipment
e.g. medical gowns, gloves, facemasks, etc.) stand as the primary line of
defense for preventing infection. Communication of the pathogen occurs directly,
from person to person, as well as through cross-contamination from surface to
surface. Current forms of personal protective equipment only provide user
protection from infection by functioning as a physical barrier. Incorporation of
virus-binding polymers and anti-viral nanomaterials with current forms of
personal protective equipment can allow the ‘capture’ and ‘killing’ of virus
species: protecting medical personnel/first responders and subsequently
preventing the spread of contagions, such as the novel coronavirus. This RAPID
proposal, supported by the nanoscale interaction program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, explores the
nano-scale interactions between virus species and medically relevant
nanomaterials. The project will utilize bio-compatible polymer nanolayers
embedded with local UV light emitting nanoparticles as a model system for the
future design of nanomaterial-based anti-viral coatings. Results from this study
will demonstrate the efficacy of such nanomaterial platforms towards
inactivating harmful viral pathogens as well as elucidate virus-biomedical
material interactions. Such valuable information will be disseminated to the
public for better design of improved and more effective personal protective
equipment in the containment of coronavirus and other pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Viral pathogens pose a significant threat to humanity. The COVID-19
pandemic typifies this threat with substantial, crippling impact on the global
social structures and economics already felt. Current forms of personal
protective equipment function solely as physical barriers to infection/viral
transmission (e.g. hospital gowns, medical face masks, gloves, etc.). Ideal
personal protective equipment should directly inactivate the virus, upon
contact: thereby assuring against user infection as well as preventing cross-
contamination through surface to surface contact. In this RAPID project, we
propose the design of a multi-layer, bio-compatible nano-polymer coating on
personal protective equipment surfaces. These layers will further be seeded with
complex oxide nanoparticles which absorb white/natural light and release local
UV light to inactivate adsorbed virus agents. Additionally, specific polymers in
the coating will be chemically modified with virus surface protein binding
oligomeric molecules. The advantage of studying such interaction is twofold: (1)
surface proteins are blocked from interacting with host cells (preventing
infection) and (2) virus species are retained at the personal protective
equipment surface allowing sufficient dosing of nanoparticle-mediated UV light.
The combination of anti-viral nanoparticles and virus-selective oligomers will
function as a model for future, nanomaterial-based, products effecting a
‘capture’ and ‘kill’ approach. Specifically, this interdisciplinary study
between engineering and biomedical sciences will highlight nanoscale binding
interactions (oligomer-protein, polymer-virus membrane) and the efficacy of
nano-emitters in anti-viral platforms. The data collected will educate and
inform the general public on diverse, relevant subjects; including outreach to
various audiences. The model is designed to be highly generalizable to other
virus types and for incorporation of nanomaterials with varying chemical,
optical, or biological modes of action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.