* 2027225
* RAPID: Community-wide acquisition of medical knowledge about COVID-19 under conditions of risk and uncertainty
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Alin Coman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 03/31/2022
* USD 189,833.00

The response to the COVID-19 pandemic may depend critically on how communities
of individuals acquire and propagate medical information. This is especially
true given the many and frequent updates of medical information transmission,
treatment and containment strategies. Although the diffusion of knowledge has
been studied previously, very few models incorporate psychologically grounded
assumptions about knowledge search, acquisition, and propagation. Specifically,
they do not fully consider (1) that information propagation is influenced by the
communicative context, (2) that it is critically affected in high-anxiety, high-
uncertainty environments, and (3) that results obtained in dyadic level
paradigms cannot simply be extrapolated to large social networks. The
integration of these advances will address three key questions: First, how does
the high perceived risk of infection influence the lay public’s acquisition and
propagation of medical information in social networks? Second, how do emotion,
social distancing practices, and media consumption impact medical knowledge
acquisition and propagation? And third, what socio-cognitive strategies could
one employ to increase the spread of accurate information and to diminish the
diffusion of misinformation in social networks? Findings from this study could
inform the development of infrastructure and practices to better prepare the
population for medical crises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic
provides an urgent opportunity to investigate the acquisition and propagation of
medical knowledge in social networks under conditions of high perceived risk of
viral infection. This project uses developments in cognitive psychology, social
psychology, and network science to address these critical issues. This cross-
disciplinary approach will relate individual-level processes to community-wide
acquisition of medical knowledge. Online communities will be assembled, and
individuals will engage in a sequence of networked conversations about their
knowledge of COVID-19. These interactions will occur using a computer-mediated
tool, SoPHIE (Software Platform for Human Interaction Experiments), that allows
for seamless communication in conversational networks, designed according to
experimenter-specified parameters. Individual knowledge will be measured before
and after networked conversations, and the conversational network structure will
be manipulated together with the threshold at which people are willing to
provide and accept information from others. Advances from this project will be
of interest to scientists for modeling optimal information diffusion in social
networks and to public health officials interested in disseminating accurate
information to the public in their efforts to save lives during times of
turmoil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.