* 2027049
* RAPID: Shutdowns and Consequences — Extreme Plumbing Stagnation and Recommissioning
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Andrew Whelton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 216,000.00

The explosive onset of school, business, and event venue shutdowns across the
nation to encourage social distancing in response to COVID-19 will be disruptive
on multiple levels. While 2-4 week shutdowns are increasingly being declared,
some organizations have warned of longer closures. The proposing team's own
school and office building water testing evidence indicates such extended
shutdowns will have drastic consequences on building drinking water safety:
chemical and microbiological water quality potentially presenting serious public
health risks. As inhabitants return, they will encounter extremely stagnated
water with excessive lead, copper, and bacterial concentrations, that may
include pathogens like Legionella pneumophila. There are no national or industry
guidelines for building reopening after extended shutdowns. A fundamental
understanding of water quality deterioration mechanisms precipitated by large-
scale shutdowns and plumbing decontamination is critically lacking. The
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO) serves over
100,000 public health professionals and has made clear that building
recommissioning practices are lacking. The COVID-19 building closures present a
rare opportunity to study chemical-microbiological-physical- material
interactions in multiple otherwise operational buildings. At both full- and
bench-scales, the team will (1) characterize disinfectant, heavy metal, and
bacterial changes during extended building closures, and (2) develop evidence-
based plumbing remediation methods to address water quality deterioration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a college campus affected by COVID-19, water quality
will be characterized in closed or under- utilized buildings over the course of
5 months (Objective 1). All in-person class meetings have been cancelled for
spring semester at Purdue, while research activities can continue, allowing
real-scale study of buildings impacted by closure. Before fall semester,
decontamination procedures will be tested (Objective 2). Bench-scale experiments
will be conducted in parallel to simulate water use conditions and probe the
fundamental factors that influenced deterioration and plumbing decontamination
effectiveness. The team will elucidate the fundamental factors that control
extreme chemical and microbiological transformations in plumbing that are
occurring nationwide during the COVID-19 outbreak, as well as during many other
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.