* 2027139
* Distributed Joint Localization and Tracking for Multi-robot Networks Under Local Sensing and Communication Constraints with Theoretical Guarantees
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,828.00

This Dynamics, Control, and System Diagnostics project will support research to
enable large-scale, distributed coordination of multi-robot systems, promoting
the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity. In applications
such as surveillance, security, and disaster response, a network of mobile
autonomous robots collectively tracks a subject over a wide area. As the subject
and the robots move in and out of observation and communication range, each
robot in the network needs to propagate estimates of position, velocity, and
orientation for both itself and the subject, based on noisy measurements. The
first task is called "localization," and the second task is called "tracking."
Communication limitations mean that it is often infeasible to rely on a central
controller, so each robot must be responsible for making its own decisions. This
project will address the problem of how to coordinate information among the
individual robots, to allow each of them to make the best possible decisions.
Results from the project will benefit numerous applications involving multi-
robot systems such as surveillance and security, disaster response and
environmental monitoring. Education and outreach activities will broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to address the fundamental theoretical and
practical issues caused by sensing gaps, local communication, and lack of
absolute pose measurements in distributed collaborative sensing with mobile
robotic networks. The first thrust is to derive a unified framework for fully
distributed joint localization and target tracking through local cooperation.
The second thrust is rigorous theoretical analysis of the framework with
realistic issues, namely, sparse and changing sensing and communication and
uncertain target models. The third thrust is experimental demonstration on
mobile robotic networks with physical constraints. The research will
significantly advance distributed estimation in both theory and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.