* 2027251
* RAPID: CORPUS: An Edge Intelligence-Assisted Multi-Granularity COVID-19 Risk Predication and Update System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Ming Dong, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Since the first COVID-19 case was diagnosed and reported at the end of December
2019, there have been more than 1.6 million COVID-19 cases reported, causing
more than 100,000 death worldwide as of April 10, 2020. The outbreak of COVID-19
has significantly affected individuals and our society as a whole, and many
national and international events have been canceled over COVID-19 fears,
including NBA, NCAA events, Mobile World Congress. For the sake of either
individual, institutes, or governments, a risk prediction and update system are
urgently needed. However, to design and implement such a system, there are
several system challenges. First, how to derive the infection risk level from
different granularities, i.e., individual-, event-, and institution-levels?
Second, how to dynamically update the risk level based on the latest outbreak
news? Third, how to preserve user sensitive data while sharing adequate data for
risk level calculation? To attack these challenges in this RAPID project,
researchers at Wayne State University and Henry Ford Health Systems design and
implement CORPUS, an edge intelligence-assisted, multi-granularity COVID-19 Risk
Prediction, and Update System, which includes a mobile app running on personal
phones, as well as a large-scale distributed protocol behind the app collecting
and updating the information. First, CORPUS will build a multi-granularity risk
analysis model, from fine-grained personal risk to small clustered meeting risk,
to coarse-grained large clustered event risk, and institutional/organization
risk. Second, CORPUS employs a data propagation protocol to build and update the
risk analysis model. The data that can contribute to CORPUS include spatial data
(such as GPS signal), temporal data (such as calendar event), as well as the
input from the user (such as meeting with a specific person). Third, CORPUS
leverages privacy-preserving algorithms such as node-level feature pooling and
anonymous parameter of the model instead of raw user data, to ensure the
confidentiality of personal information when multi-granularity models request
personal risk information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rapid expansion of
COVID-19, there is an urgent need for the individual to know their infection
risk when traveling to a place in the foreseeable future. CORPUS can meet their
needs by leveraging personalized information and edge intelligence. For a group
or an organization, CORPUS will provide risk-related information to help them to
judge the feasibility of holding a meeting or an event during an outbreak,
especially for large-scale international events (such as the Olympics and World
Cup). They can also proactively take action based on the risk information
provided by CORPUS to reduce the spread of COVID-19. CORPUS will help
governments perceive the risk of infection in their jurisdictions, and thus
guide infection prevention and control for effective
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.