* 2027713
* RAPID: Countering COVID-19 Misinformation via Situation-Aware Visually Informed Treatment
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Yu-Ru Lin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2022
* USD 104,491.00

As the COVID-19 pandemic spreads, countries and cities around the globe have
taken stringent measures including quarantine and regional lockdown. The
increasing isolation, along with the panic and anxiety, creates challenges for
countering misinformation--people are increasingly tapping into online
information sources already familiar to them with declining chances of accessing
alternative stories. This project will develop mechanisms based on text and
image analysis, social psychology, and crowd-sourcing that can be used in a
timely manner to counter misinformation during the ongoing COVID-19 crisis and
beyond. One of the novel features of the approach is to deal with a specific
instance of misinformation by crowd-sourcing authentic images that counter this
misinformation. This research will contribute to the scientific understanding of
misinformation and of persuasive narrative construction, to the assessment of
risk for the spread of misinformation, and to the development of mechanisms to
counter misinformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project
are divided into three thrusts. The first thrust will investigate what
information content and which specific part of a multimodal social media post
(e.g, a piece of text, text with an image, image with an embedded slogan) will
receive stronger responses and hence increase the likelihood of the post being
shared. The second thrust will create metrics to assess the likelihood of the
spread of misinformation based on predictors learned from the content to which
users are exposed. The third thrust will focus on the development of a system to
counter misinformation based on citizen journalists’ inputs of field
investigations and on machine learning techniques. Finally, the system will be
evaluated by survey studies and interviews to examine the system’s usability,
usefulness, and effectiveness in reducing the spreading and impact of
misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.