* 2027654
* iDigBio: Sustaining the digitization, mobilization, accessibility, and use of biodiversity specimen data in U.S. museum and academic collections
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 7,834,681.00

Integrated Digitized Biocollections (idigbio.org) at the University of Florida
(UF), Florida State University (FSU), and Arizona State University (ASU) is the
national coordinating body for the sustained effort to digitize, and make
available online, the vast amount of information in the nation's biodiversity
collections, which may contain up to 1 billion specimens. For biological
specimens, information digitized include names of species, localities and dates
of collection, digital photographs, sound, video, and 3-D models created from a
variety of sources. This community digitization effort was catalyzed by NSFâ€™s
Advancing Digitization of Biodiversity Collections (ADBC) program via Thematic
Collections Networks (TCNs), groups of institutions that digitize specimens to
address a major research topic such as the relationship between agricultural
crops and insects or the impacts of invasive species on natural ecosystems.
iDigBio assists in coordinating activities of the TCNs by facilitating
development of standards and workflows for digitization of specimens and related
information, providing cyberinfrastructure resources to enable long-term
preservation of digital data, promoting novel and traditional uses of
collections data in research and outreach, and working with the collections
community to plan for the long-term sustainability of the national effort and
the resources it has produced. The availability of digitized information about
specimens greatly enhances the ability to conduct research on biological
diversity and to address some of the most fundamental questions in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past ten years, the national effort to
digitize information in the nation's biodiversity collections has been
significantly advanced by the activities of iDigBio. Collaborations with data
providers and users have been developed, goals and priorities defined, best
practices related to digitization identified, and global collaborations with
biodiversity data aggregators established. Cyberinfrastructure resources,
including a national search portal, have been provided. These community-driven
activities have led to improved digitization practices, increased involvement in
digitization and training, and adoption of instruments and informatics tools
that improve the efficiency and scalability of digitization and research
workflows in all types of biodiversity collections. iDigBio works with staff in
more than 926 collections in 317 institutions distributed across all 50 states.
Communication among stakeholders to increase access to collections data has been
established through workshops, webinars, and the use of social media. Since
2011, iDigBio has sponsored attendance of 16,768 participants from 1,034
institutions to 430 workshops, webinars, symposia, and events that targeted
digitization-related topics. iDigBio has ingested 1,651 record sets containing
128 million specimen records and 41 million media records. All data ingested are
indexed to enable queries and other types of index-based access. Searches for
data can be done through a Web-based graphical interface or through programmatic
APIs. Search and analytical tools enable users to mine diverse data such as
taxonomy, location, images, traits, and vocalizations. During this award period,
iDigBio to continue its successful strategies with an increasing emphasis on
data improvement and use in research and outreach and to incorporate such
rapidly developing technologies as artificial intelligence and machine learning
in biodiversity data integration. iDigBio is recognized as an essential resource
for information on biodiversity and digitization. As the scientific and societal
benefits of validated collections data are realized, digitization will become a
common and sustained practice in natural history
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.