* 2027598
* RAPID: A Comparative Study of How Context Shapes Responses to COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Wesley Shrum, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 100,218.00

The primary objective of this collaborative RAPID research project is to further
our understanding of how cultural and political contexts shape the ways people
perceive and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The research team will conduct
400 interviews across multiple urban and rural areas for an analysis oriented
towards understanding how individuals construct and modify their perceptions
given information from a wide variety of sources and their network of
interactions with friends and family. The results of this project will provide a
deeper understanding of the social mechanisms that shape perceptions and
behaviors to public policy responses in culturally and politically diverse
contexts. Perceptions of disease (i.e., perceived seriousness, susceptibility,
and threat) shape perceived barriers and benefits to action, which in turn
affect behavior. While it is given that these perceptions are important to
understand health-related behaviors as well as support for various treatments
and actions, it is crucial to understand how these perceptions are generated.
The project interviews and the analysis are to be widely distributed to provide
grounded guidance for policy makers and others seeking to understand the
diversity of fears, risk perceptions, preparedness, and acceptable actions in
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will collect qualitative and
quantitative data on groups selected for their importance to pandemic processes
(transmission and treatment of information and infectious agents). The groups
are stratified into five categories: scientists, medical professionals,
teachers, the informal sector, and the unemployed. The purposes of the
Interviews are to Identify the principal sources of information about COVID-19
transmission, treatment, and risk, including both new and old media as well as
the factors associated with their relative importance across regions,
occupations, and rural/urban areas; to examine factors that impact the
credibility of sources in both absolute and relative terms; and to assess the
level of knowledge and preparation for COVID-19 transmission, treatment, and
risk. They will be used to Identify primary fears and concerns relevant to the
current spectrum of treatment, isolation, and containment technologies. The
results of this project will contribute to an understanding of the different
ways cultural and political contexts shape response to outbreak information and
directives, and they will provide guidance for policy makers seeking to
understand these differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Science and Technology Studied Program, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.