* 2027688
* RAPID: Visual Analytics Approach to Real-Time Tracking of COVID-19
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Satya Katragadda, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 187,477.00

COVID-19 data, related to infection rates, at-risk populations, mobility, and
commute dynamics are rapidly becoming available from several sources. However,
there is a lack of interactive visual decision-making environments integrated
with data-driven tools to help public health and community leaders understand
how various factors such as physical distancing and other mitigation strategies,
impact the spread of disease, help flatten the curve, enabling economic recovery
while minimizing public health risk due to reopening. This project will develop
visual analytic tools for tracking COVID-19 and propose balanced intervention
strategies for effective containment of the outbreak. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed visual analytics system integrates heterogeneous datasets and enables
the application of relevant analytical models and data-engineering for decision
support in a complex and evolving crisis. The objectives include the development
of (1) forecasting models for recovery based on incidence, population
vulnerabilities, mobility patterns, and mitigation activities, (2) social-media
tools to understand public sentiment and risk perceptions, (3) visual interface
for model-refinement &amp; diagnosis through data engineering and visual
analytics principles. The decision-making framework will offer new insights,
close the gap between data and decisions, and is driven-by inputs from extensive
partnerships &amp; collaborations to improve reliability and usability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data-driven tools will help improve decision makersí
understanding of disease dynamics from multiple variables. Epidemiologists could
potentially leverage these insights to create higher-fidelity models based on
interventional factors and their effect on population behaviors. Local
authorities could also utilize the models to make life-saving decisions while
minimizing impact to the economy. The project will enable new public and private
partnerships including the City of New Orleans, and Industry Advisory Board of
NSF Center for Visual and Decision Informatics. The project will benefit
graduate and undergraduate students through hands-on research experience with
the development of analytical products. The project outcomes will include
analytics dashboards, source code, models, and data collected from multiple
sources. The dashboards, project descriptions, and a list of data sources along
with their metadata will be made publicly available on www.vastream.net for a
period of two years. The public facing portion of the portal for COVID-19
component will be moved to Amazon cloud in event of disruptions from outages,
for the duration of the project. A new public repository will be created on
GitHub, and the source code and publicly available datasets will be made
available on this project repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.