* 2027196
* Rapid: Collaborative Research: Agile and effective responses to emerging pathogen threats through open data and open analytics
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Sergei Pond, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The same types of questions arise during every emergent viral outbreak regarding
its origin, its evolution, the manner of spread, and how to detect and mitigate
it. Many, if not all, of these questions depend on rapid and reliable genomic
analysis of diverse viral sample sequences by multiple laboratories. Early viral
investigation is often impaired lack of reproducibility, rigor, and
data/analytic sharing; the current investigation of COVID-19 is no different.
Essential questions such as the extent of intra-host genomic variability
(indicative of adaptation or multiple infection), viral evolution (selection,
recombination), transmission (phylogentic and phylogeographic) cannot be
answered reliably if researchers cannot trust/replicate the source data and
analytical approaches. The goal of this award is to develop, deploy, and
continuously update viral genomic analysis workflows to enable the analysis and
monitoring of viral evolution and dynamics for SARS-CoV-2, and to use the
lessons learned to prepare capacity for future outbreaks. Bioinformatics
workflows for critical tasks in investigating COVID-19 and future viral
outbreaks will be developed and COVID-19 deep sequencing data will be analyzed
and shared openly via Galaxy and Datamonkey to facilitate and accelerate
evolutionary discovery and enable the study of and response to inevitable future
infectious disease outbreaks. In an age of digital connectivity, open and
accessible shared data and analysis platforms have the potential to transform
the way biomedical research is done, opening the way to ‘global research
markets’, where competition arises from deriving understanding rather than
access to samples and data. By enabling any researcher with an Internet
connection to perform the same analyses as are done by top-flight research
groups in resource-rich countries, this award will deliver critical components
to resource limited settings, which are often those that are first and
disproportionately affected by viral outbreaks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.