* 2027891
* RAPID: Geospatially-Enabled Deep Analytics for Real-time Mitigation and Response to COVID-19 Outbreak for American Rural Populations
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Giovanna Guidoboni, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The rapid global spread of COVID-19 is changing the way we handle pandemics and
has prompted academia, private industry, and government to leverage new
technologies and approaches to minimize the impact on human lives. While much
attention is on outbreaks in urban areas, the efforts to assist rural
populations has lagged. The rural communities encompass roughly 19.3% of the US
population and 95% of the US land area. They are especially vulnerable to
disease outbreaks due to lower levels of necessary resources, such as access to
hospitals, internet, 911, as well as overall lower socioeconomic status. The
impacts of COVID-19 in rural areas are expected to be devastating. This project
delivers research, scientific, and COVID-19 planning to three rural communities.
The deliverable to the research community is access to hundreds of layers of
integrated geospatial data that are available for advanced queries and
visualization of results to support their own COVID-19 research. In addition,
research results will enhance the understanding of disease transmission behavior
and enable preparation for resilience in rural populations. The scientific
community will receive new computational methods inspired by the rural disease
analysis and associated resource management need assessment and tracking. The
implementation of this mathematical and computational work will be made
available to the COVID-19 planning community, including rural stakeholders, by
creation of an interactive dashboard where maps and summaries will provide the
frontline clinicians and/or public health responders up-to-date reports and
context for specific rural areas. The project focuses on Missouri’s rural areas
with a plan to extend the framework to the bordering states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses whether the recent advancements in
geospatial and network analyses can be leveraged to provide a scalable connected
health ecosystem for rural America in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. It also
address the new innovations necessary to bring explainable intelligence the
future waves of COVID-19 outbreak. To answer these issues, the research team,
consisting of experts in computing, geoinformatics, influenza, virology,
pathology, acute care, and telemedicine, plans the following: (1) the team will
first rapidly extend their previous work with the unique GeoSPatial Analytical
Research Knowledgebase (GeoSPARK) big data framework with relevant data from the
Census, healthcare systems, as well as the evolving information surrounding
COVID-19 disease dynamics. GeoSPARK will provide real-time analysis using
advanced complex queries across multi-resolution locational information to
address the lack of an integrated data framework dedicated to COVID-19 risk
assessment, capacity investigation, and geo-enabled decision support. (2) The
team will develop and implement a suite of geospatial analytic methods which are
inspired by the dynamics of disease outbreaks, such as network analysis (e.g.,
scenario analyses – analyze the sensitivity and impact of disruptions in
resource distribution, containment, etc.), hot spot analysis, contextual
analysis, clustering analysis, etc., to quantitatively weigh risk and assess the
multi-faceted problem of rural disparity. The analytical tools and dashboards
inspired by the field’s needs and disease dynamics in rural areas are
transformative and will enable better understanding of scenarios other than
COVID-19, such as zoonotic disease outbreaks, flooding, and
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.