* 2027920
* EAGER: Plant-microbe interactions in a changing world: indirect effects of environmental change in a heterogeneous landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Emily Farrer, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Environmental change has direct impacts on plants since plant growth depends on
factors like nitrogen, temperature, and drought. However, environmental change
can also have “indirect effects”, by altering the abundance of co-occurring
species that either positively or negatively affect the plant being studied.
While indirect effects through plant competitors and animal herbivores have been
well studied, indirect effects via microbes (including fungi and bacteria) have
received little attention. A vast array of microbes inhabits all plants, and
they have a variety of effects: some microbes cause disease while others are
beneficial and promote plant health. Environmental change may alter the amount
of disease-causing or beneficial microbes, which will have consequences for
plant growth via indirect effects. This project will assess linkages among
environmental change, microbes, and plants in the alpine tundra in the Rocky
Mountains. A deeper understanding of how microbes will be affected by changing
environmental conditions, and implications for plant growth in the future, is
important for managing our natural resources. This is especially true in the
Rocky Mountains, a much-loved tourist destination that supports a lot of
wildlife. This work may also lead to identification of plant diseases that may
increase in the future, or beneficial microbes that may be useful for
restoration. This project includes training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students as well as outreach to middle school students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test how environmental change may influence
microbial communities and plant growth, the researchers will measure plant
performance (growth, flower production) and microbes abundance and diversity (in
soil and plant roots) in: 1) a field survey across different environments in the
alpine tundra encompassing cool/wet to warm/dry conditions and 2) a field-based
experiment that manipulates growing season length and temperature. Path analysis
will be used to evaluate direct vs. indirect effects of environmental change on
plant performance. The survey and experiment are replicated across a range of
environmental conditions in the alpine in order to assess whether the strength
and direction of indirect effects vary across a heterogeneous landscape. To
understand mechanisms that alter microbial community composition and diversity,
the researchers will measure abiotic (e.g., soil moisture, snow depth) and
biotic (e.g., plant stress) factors in the survey and experiment and relate them
to microbial community structure. Functions of important microbial players in
this system will be explored by classifying microbes as pathogen, mutualist, or
decomposer using existing databases, and by measuring the function of some
microbial taxa using culture-based lab inoculation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.