* 2027976
* Collaborative Research: Operator theoretic methods for identification and verification of dynamical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Joel Rosenfeld, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 237,350.00

Widespread use of automation in many sectors of society has yielded a large
amount of data regarding historical behaviors for a variety of dynamical
systems, such as unmanned aerial, marine, and ground vehicles, biological
systems, and weather systems. This project aims to develop novel algorithms to
discover governing rules that explain the observed behaviors (i.e.,
trajectories) of dynamical systems. Discovery of underlying models, while useful
for analysis and control, can be computationally challenging. For example,
traditional modeling methods rely on derivatives, and can be hampered by even
modest amounts of measurement noise that derails numerical differentiation. Such
methods treat each measurement of the output of a dynamical system as a separate
data point. The data points are then related back to the underlying model using
numerical differentiation. Instead, in this project, the entire trajectory is
treated as a unit of interest. The sequence of measured data points is treated
as a sampled, noisy representation of that trajectory, and is related back to
the underlying model using numerical integration. It is hypothesized that
treating trajectories of dynamical systems as the fundamental unit of data can
yield better data-driven techniques for analysis and control of dynamical
systems, and this project aims to develop such data-driven identification and
verification techniques. To broaden the impact of the research, the team will
also develop week-long workshops for undergraduate students that teach data
science and artificial intelligence (AI) concepts through video games. To
facilitate early introduction to machine learning, the team will also develop
versions of the AI workshops that are suitable to be offered during high school
summer camps.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aim of this project is to
develop a new theoretical framework to process a large amount of time-series
data and to apply the framework to yield robust and flexible tools for the study
of nonlinear dynamical systems. In the proposed approach, trajectory information
is embedded in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) through what are called
occupation kernels. The occupation kernels are tied to the original dynamics
through a densely defined operator, the Liouville operator. Occupation kernels
and Liouville operators result in a nontrivial generalization of contemporary
methods that study finite-dimensional nonlinear optimization problems by lifting
them into infinite dimensional linear programs over the spaces of measures. The
proposed approach facilitates lifting into linear programs over function spaces
instead of measure spaces, and as a result, tools from function theory and
approximation theory become available for design and analysis of algorithms. The
specific aims of the project include: studying fundamental properties of
occupation kernels and Liouville operators over RKHSs, applications to nonlinear
system identification, study of the pre-inner product space that results from
the action of the adjoint of a Liouville operator on an occupation kernel, and
applications of the framework to solve motion tomography problems. The developed
tools will be validated by solving identification and verification problems for
unmanned ground, air, or underwater vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.