* 2027541
* RAPID: COVID-19 Response Support: Building Synthetic Multi-scale Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Madhav Marathe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2021
* USD 173,640.00

The Novel 2019 Coronavirus (COVID-19) has already caused unprecedented global
social, economic, and health impact. This project will develop synthetic global
multi-scale social contact networks. The synthetic but realistic social contact
networks can capture human interactions either at an individual or community
level. The networks can be used in conjunction with agent-based models to
simulate the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The simulations can in-turn be used to
design and assess various interventions that balance health benefits with social
and economic costs. Data will be made available to the scientific community. The
PIs will also work with other research groups and continue their partnership
with other federal and state agencies to support their response efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing synthetic social contact networks is a
statistically and algorithmically challenging problem. This project will
synthesize ensembles of two classes of synthetic social contact networks --
patch-based meta-population networks and individualized synthetic social contact
populations and networks using a combination of machine learning and data driven
modeling techniques. The need for such data driven mechanistic modeling methods
has become abundantly clear in regimes when the available data is sparse and
noisy. The project will undertake a detailed statistical analysis of the
algorithms and the synthetic networks they produce. This includes methods to
conduct global sensitivity analysis and methods to quantify the uncertainty in
the outcomes as a function of the network structure. One of the many uses of
this resource, is to support individual-based as well as meta-population-based
simulation models for epidemic spread in general, and COVID-19 in particular.
Beyond supporting ongoing COVID-19 outbreaks, these synthetic social contact
networks will be useful in responding to other epidemics. The PIs plan to make
this data available to the global research community so that researchers around
the world can immediately use it to assess the pandemic and the response efforts
in their respective regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.