* 2027884
* RAPID: Effective Resource Planning and Disbursement during the COVID-19 Pandemic
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Lorna Thorpe, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Uncertainties during global pandemics, such as the novel Corona virus disease
(COVID-19), can generate fear and anxiety, resulting in panic-buying and
overreactive consumer behavior. Information from a multitude of sources may
further exacerbate the situation, leading to shortages of critical disease
prevention products for emergency managers and those in dire need. The consumer
response may also vary based on population demographics and community
interactions. This project aims to understand the relationships between consumer
panic-buying, reports on infected cases, and local population demographics in a
large and densely populated urban epicenter of the virus. Fundamental
understanding of community factors and the role of reports on consumer behavior
in emergencies will enable effective and timely decisions on resource planning
and disbursement, preventing unexpected shortages of critical supplies in large
and diverse urban centers. In addition, the quantitative methodologies developed
in this project bridge the disciplines of engineering, computer science, social
and health science, creating a new interdisciplinary paradigm that provides a
holistic view towards emergency preparedness and disaster management in urban
centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this RAPID project is to
develop a multi-network framework that captures the linkages and inter-
dependencies between networks that govern information spreading, panic
spreading, and disease spreading in urban populations. Fundamental understanding
of the relationships between various factors such as consumer buying behavior,
socio-economic community characteristics, and the extent of available health
information enables the assessment of potential outcomes such as shortages of
critical disease prevention supplies. Data and crowdsourced information from the
COVID-19 experience of selected NYC neighborhoods is used as a case study for
validation studies. An accurate understanding of the multi-faceted consumer
behavior enables decision analytics for effective planning and targeted
disbursement of critical supplies for mitigating the effects of panic-buying.
The identification of underlying complex and interdependent network structures
provides insights into the design of equitable and effective strategies for
resource planning and allocation to tackle the vicious panic cycle in
emergencies, thus promoting urban resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.