* 2027546
* RAPID:Collaborative:Independent Component Analysis Inspired Statistical Neural Networks for 3D CT Scan Based Edge Screening of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Jingtong Hu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 75,000.00

COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, has shut down
cities in the United State and around the world. Due to the global lack of test
kits used to diagnose the disease, it is critical to screen suspected patients
first and prioritize those most likely to have COVID-19 for further diagnostic
test. As most patients with COVID-19 show visual signs of the pneumonia on
images from chest Computerized Tomography (CT) scans, it is possible to screen
patients based on these images. However, with the large number of suspected
cases and the time required to analyze 3D images, radiologists are challenged to
adequately screen all of the images. Most recently, several works have
demonstrated the potential of deep neural networks in identifying typical signs
or partial signs of COVID-19 pneumonia, drastically speeding up the screening
process and reducing the burden on radiologists. Due to the large 3D volumetric
data associated with chest CT scans (a few hundred MB per image), however, the
deep neural networks for classification, which mostly work on 2D images only, do
not work very well on 3D CT images. In this project, , the team explores novel
solutions across software and hardware layers to enable a solution that allows
plug-and-play for automatic COVID-19 screening with fast turn-around time. The
project will enable the deployment of deep learning to efficiently and
accurately screen suspected COVID-19 patients, and significantly reduce the
burden on radiologists. It can effectively address the diagnosis bottleneck
caused by the lack of rRT-PCR test kits. In addition, the proposed techniques
can be applied to other areas beyond COVID-19 screening where neural networks
need to handle large volumetric data. The project will be made open source to
enable wide distribution in a timely manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will explore ICA-Net, a novel Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
inspired statistical neural architecture that can efficiently and accurately
extract features from 3D CT images of large sizes for COVID-19 screening. ICA-
Net will be the first neural architecture that targets large volumetric 3D image
classification. In addition, considering the practical use of this project where
security/privacy of patient data and fast turn-around time are strongly desired,
through hardware/software co-design, the project will identify the best solution
to be deployed on the edge using commercially off-the-shelf hardware for plug-
and-play in clinics. As such, it can be immediately integrated and used for
COVID-19 screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.