* 2027556
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: The Impact of COVID-19 on Norms, Risk-taking, Information, and Trust
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Rick Wilson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2021
* USD 109,367.00

The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has hit countries around the world hard and is
likely to have both short-run and long-run impacts on health behaviors, social
norms, and trust in government and other organizations. In the short run,
governments and health organizations provide extensive information and recommend
behavior to avoid contracting the disease and spreading it to others. This
research involves surveys to figure out whether and to what extent people follow
recommendations and change behavior. Because the research team has been
following a sample of university students for several years, the team already
knows a lot about them, and this facilitates an understanding of variation in
compliance with recommendations. For example, risk-tolerance and trust in
organizations are likely to matter. The team is exploring how people process
information about the virus, and how that affects their beliefs about the risks
to themselves and others. The researchers also are examining the impact of the
COVID-19 outbreak on social norms, and how those change over time. The second
wave of the study looks for longer run impacts. The results of this study will
be useful in shaping future policies and communications about health risks,
especially during epidemics and other health crises. The researchers make use of
previous samples of subjects to test the impact of COVID-19 information and
recommendations on behavior, social norms, trust in each other and institutions,
and risk-tolerance. They have four areas of study. The first is how how people
process “noisy” information in the context of COVID-19. Prior research by a team
member has shown that some individuals tend to misunderstand such information to
their benefit. The teams adapt the methodology and protocol of the prior work to
examine how individuals interpret COVID-19 information, and how this affects
their beliefs about their own vulnerabilities. Second, the team studies the
impact of COVID-19 on norms of behavior, including those directly related to the
virus (social distancing, hand-washing), as well as norms of trust, sharing and
in-group favoritism that may be shifting or newly emerging in response to
COVID19. Prior work by a team member developed a methodology for eliciting
social norms, and has shown that norms evolve in response to social influence.
Third, they explore the impact of COVID-19 on interpersonal trust and trust in
institutions, which significantly impacts willingness to follow government and
organizational recommendations. Prior work by team members used incentivized
games and surveys to study trust and reciprocity in natural disaster settings.
Finally, they look at risk perception and risk taking related to COVID-19. Using
incentivized measures of risk tolerance, and survey measures of domain-specific
risk perceptions and behavior, the team explores the relationship between risk
aversion and behavior, but also how the advent of COVID-19 has changed
preferences for risk-taking. In these ways prior knowledge about the subjects
provides an opportunity to study the impact of a national health catastrophe on
information processing, social norms, trust and reciprocity and risk-taking.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.