* 2027637
* RAPID: Impacts of Unprecedented Shift to Online Learning on Students' Cognitive Load and Readiness for Self-Directed Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Elise Barrella, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2022
* USD 110,612.00

Engineering students learn to become engineers through a curriculum of
challenging, carefully sequenced courses. Disruption of this sequence may lead
to poor performance, exit from the major or college, and extended time to
graduation. These negative student outcomes could in turn damage national
economic competitiveness by limiting the number of engineers available to enter
the workforce. This project will gather time-sensitive data to investigate the
impact of the rapid shift to online instruction due to COVID-19. In contrast to
their highly structured in-person classes. virtual environments place much
greater responsibility on students to manage their own learning, As a result,
undergraduate students, including those at military academic institutions such
as the Citadel, are experiencing increased mental demands (i.e. cognitive load)
as they tackle the rigors of engineering coursework, while simultaneously
exercising self-directed learning skills. This project will gather and analyse
data about the impact of online courses on the cognitive load and self-directed
learning readiness of Citadel engineering students. This information has the
potential to be broadly applicable to undergraduate engineering education, as
well as to other STEM disciplines and to education levels before and beyond
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on a unique and under-
represented population of engineering students who, under normal circumstances,
must complete military training in addition to satisfying academic requirements.
Students’ cognitive load and self-directed learning readiness will be measured
using established survey instruments and student focus groups before and after
the shift to online learning, as well as after the return to on-campus
operations. Three research questions, undergirded by cognitive load theory, will
guide the investigations: (1) How do students’ cognitive loads and/or self-
directed learning readiness differ between in-person and online course? (2) To
what extent are changes in self-directed learning readiness associated with
changes in cognitive load? (3) Which demographic factors (if any) impact changes
in cognitive load and self-directed learning readiness? The project team will
use a mixed methods approach to analyze the qualitative and quantitative data
collected from surveys and focus groups to determine the magnitude and duration
of changes in students’ cognitive load and self-directed learning readiness.
Findings from the proposed work have the potential to advance knowledge related
to students’ online learning experiences that can aid in improving course
offerings as part of regular instruction, as well as situations in which
continuity of instruction is threatened. The intellectual merit of the project
lies in its potential to contribute to foundational knowledge relating to issues
of sudden and drastic shifts in educational environments as experienced by
diverse students at a military institution. The broader impacts of the project
lie in its potential to gather time-sensitive data that will permit significant
contributions to our understanding of how undergraduate military student
learners adapt to disruptive change in their learning environments. This RAPID
award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program in the
Division of Undergraduate Education (Education and Human Resources Directorate),
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.