* 2027261
* Collaborative research: Nitrogen recovery in postfire lodgepole pine forests: cryptic sources, uncertain futures
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Monica Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 806,831.00

Young conifer forests regenerating after wildfires are blanketing more of the
western US each year as fire frequency and area burned increase with rising
temperatures and longer fire seasons. Tree seedlings establish during the first
few years after fire, and young trees reach their peak growth within the first
few decades. Rapid tree growth is partly fueled by nitrogen (N), a critical
plant nutrient. However, some of the N stored in forests is lost to the
atmosphere via combustion during forest fires. How this lost ecosystem N is
replenished after high-severity fires is not known, especially where nitrogen-
fixing plants (such as legumes) that can convert atmospheric N to biologically
available N, are rare. Historically, western conifer forests have recovered from
fire long before they burn again. Whether more frequent high-severity fires will
further reduce ecosystem N and affect forest recovery is not known. Building on
long-term research since the 1988 Yellowstone Fires, this research aims to
identify and quantify the sources of N recovery in young postfire lodgepole pine
(Pinus contorta var. latifolia) forests and to determine how ecosystem N
responds to more frequent fire. The researchers will engage journalism students
to communicate their findings to broad audiences and develop new approaches for
teaching students about N in forest ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological
N fixation (BNF) is the likeliest source of the new N needed to sustain postfire
stand development, and the researchers hypothesize that the new N inputs reflect
the combined activity of multiple inconspicuous N sources. Using field
observations and a multi-year N-fertilization experiment in Greater Yellowstone
(Wyoming, USA), this study will address three questions: (1) What are the
sources and rates of N inputs in aggrading lodgepole pine forests (&lt; 40 yrs
postfire), and how do sources and rates vary with stand structure and time since
fire? (2) How does N availability regulate N fixation and N limitation in
aggrading young (&lt; 40 yr) lodgepole pine forests with increasing time since
fire? (3) How do short-interval (&lt; 30 yr) stand-replacing fires affect N
fixation, N availability, and N stocks? This research will test expectations
that total N fixation rates will increase with lodgepole pine biomass and N
stocks, and that sources of biological N fixation will shift from symbiotic to
cryptic, free-living N fixers as tree demand increases over time and across
space. These well-integrated studies will directly address critical unknowns
that constrain the ability to anticipate the future of western forests as fire
activity accelerates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.