* 2027102
* SemiSynbio-II: Toward Biological-Level Power in Information Processing, Storage, Sensing and Bio-interfacing
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Jun Yao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,474,272.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The electrical systems that living organisms
employ for bio- computations, such as sensing, intelligent responsiveness, and
adaptation, require much less power than currently available man-made electronic
systems. This project is developing ultralow-power electronic components and
systems for signal retrieval, processing, and storage with power consumption
comparable to biological systems. The project takes a fundamentally new approach
to improving computing efficiency and storage capacity that can form the basis
for self-sustained living or hybrid micro-electronic systems. These electronics
that have power requirements similar to biology can naturally interface with
biological systems, which is important for potential applications in brain-mimic
computation, self-sustained microbots, advanced human-machine interfaces, and
prosthetics. The interdisciplinary nature of the research provides an excellent
platform for outreach and broadening participation in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Bioinspired electronics, such as
sensing, computing, and memory devices, have generated substantial interest
because of their potential high efficiency in information retrieval, processing,
and storage. Although functional emulation of biological systems has led to many
emerging high-performance electronic devices, there is a fundamental difference
in the signal amplitude and power requirements. Biological signal processing,
such as sensory detection, neural computation, and memory consolidation, uses
action potentials (50-100 mV) that approach the thermodynamic limit, whereas
conventional electronic systems function with much higher amplitude (&gt; 0.5
V). As a result, the functional emulation of biosystems has not yet reached the
ultralow-power information processing found in biosystems, ultimately limiting
the integration density or capacity of computation and storage. The goal of the
project is to investigate mechanisms and integrate principles in synthetic
materials, electronics, and biology to realize computing devices, memory, and
sensors that can function at biological-power levels. Borrowing materials and
principles from microbes, the general method is to develop hybrid electronic
materials, components, and systems. The research team employs specific
approaches including: (i) harnessing catalytic principles in microbial systems
to lower the functional voltage in electronics, (ii) incorporating bio-derived
materials in devices to improve performance, and (iii) creating efficient
interfaces between electronics and microbes to enable self-supported systems.
These advances are expected to establish the foundation for future ultralow-
power information processing, which is fundamentally related to the ultimate
computing efficiency and storage capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SemiSynBio-
II program (NSF 20-518) grant supports research on biological signal processing,
such as sensory detection, neural computation, and memory consolidation with
funding from the Division of Materials Research (DMR) of the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate (MPS), the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences (MCB) of the Biological Sciences Directorate (BIO),the Division of
Computing and Communication Foundations (CCF) of the Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorate (CISE), and the Division of
Electrical,Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) of the Engineering
Directorate (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.