* 2027314
* I-Corps: Spatial computing learning system for early literacy development
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Jin Montclare, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new method for children with language-based learning
disabilities (dyslexia) to practice early literacy skills with an augmented
reality system. Approximately fifteen percent of children and adults have
dyslexia, a language-based learning disability that makes it difficult to read,
write, and spell, no matter how hard the person tries or how intelligent he or
she is. Conventional remediation therapies include systematic phonics-based
instruction or a highly trained speech-language therapist. Computerized
therapies offer more intensive instruction at lower costs, but existing programs
do not fully address the social-emotional anxieties seen among children with
dyslexia or language-based learning disabilities. The proposed method offers
personalized, automated interaction, along with an interactive curriculum

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a multi-sensory learning
loop within a spatial computing system (augmented reality) for end-users
(children) to practice the structured literacy approach on mobile devices.
Informed by research suggesting that playing 3D-platform video games has been
shown to promote grey matter in the hippocampus region of the brain among young
adults and behavioral improvements occur among children with developmental
dyslexia after reading intervention, this technological method uses
3-dimensional game objects and touch inputs from the end-user to stimulate
motivation, emotion, learning and memorization of the structured literacy
approach within a spatial computing system. These principles, which includes
English phonology-phonics, morphology, grammar rules and syntax are transformed
into 3D game objects and embedded within the virtual simulation model where the
end-user interacts and manipulates these objects, thus providing a new method to
practice the early literacy skills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.