* 2027922
* RAPID: Internet Traffic and Compliance with Government Stay-at-Home Measures
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Fabian Bustamante, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 193,987.00

Public health measures such as quarantine, stay-at-home and shelter-at-home are
considered effective ways to limit the spread of infectious diseases. This
research effort is motivated by a simple observation - as citizens comply with
such measures and move to e-learning and to work remotely, one expects to see
significant changes in daily network traffic patterns. This project explores the
potential for using such changes as a privacy-preserving proxy of citizen
compliance with stay-at-home-like measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort
will leverage the vantage point of a global content distribution network (CDN)
service to understand changes on demand before and after official lockdowns or
stay-at-home policies take effect at different locales. To understand the
relation between these public health measures and network traffic, it will rely
on natural experiments, in which users in a region in a treated group (where
public health measures are in place) will be matched with similar users in an
untreated group, in order to effectively assess compliance and network traffic
changes across geographic regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
enable understanding how state-at-home measures are working and characterizing
the degree of compliance by observing network traffic demand in different
regions over time, while preserving privacy. The results from this work will
help provide public health authorities with a basis for an evidence-based
analysis of their effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools developed and
the derived data will be made available to the community. All research products
will be made available at the following website
http://aqualab.cs.northwestern.edu/projects/elpis/ &lt;br/&gt;The site will
remain accessible for at least a year after the completion of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.