* 2027786
* RAPID: Dynamical Modeling of COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Drake, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,916.00

This project will develop a set of mathematical models of the spread of SARS-
CoV-2, the cause of COVID-19. The 2019-2020 global coronavirus pandemic is
ongoing. Much remains unknown about the epidemic trajectory and potential paths
to containment. The researchers will map the spatial spread of the virus,
estimate key parameters related to transmission, compile clinical and
epidemiological information, and assess the effectiveness of public health
interventions on containment. In doing so the work will develop concepts and
mathematical theory essential for the understanding of the spread of COVID-19
with possible applications to other emerging infectious diseases. The proposed
work will provide estimates of key epidemiological parameters necessary for
understanding the spread of SARS-CoV-2 as a public health emergency, in
particular, and the future control of other emerging zoonosis. This research
will provide timely information on the COVID-19 epidemic immediately useful to
the operations of the CDC, as well as contribute to the training of two graduate
students and a postdoc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this project
are, first, to contextualize COVID-19 in comparison to previous outbreaks of
infectious respiratory diseases and estimate infectiousness, incubation period,
transmissibility, case severity, and case fatality rate. Second, it will
estimate and visualize epidemiological parameters for COVID-19, including: the
epidemic curve, the basic reproduction number (R0), the case detection rate, the
incubation period, transmissibility, and the lag between symptom onset and
isolation. Third, it will develop and parameterize a U.S. spatial model to help
determine the optimal allocation of resources such as personnel, funding,
supplies at multiple spatial scales such as states, cities, and hospitals.
Fourth, it will fit stochastic dynamical models to case notification data to
draw conclusions about the effectiveness of interventions such as lockdowns,
curfews, and school closures. These aims will be accomplished by leveraging
public, crowd-sourced, and government data with stochastic dynamical models for
transmission and spatial spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.