* 2027293
* RAPID: DETER:  Developing Epidemiology mechanisms in Three-dimensions to Enhance Response
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Debra Laefer, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 04/30/2021
* USD 98,856.00

The DETER project will collect data sets that can transform the study of virus
transmission from two-dimensional mapping exercises into highly detailed, three-
dimensional propagation models to better equip communities with the information
they need for improved disease tracking, community-transmission prediction, and
preventative disinfection strategies. The project will provide new types of data
related to human behavior when leaving healthcare facilities that will allow
more localized disease transmission models to be created. The project will track
human behavior in terms of where people go (e.g. bus, coffee shop) and how they
physically interact with the environment (i.e. what they touch and for how
long). The project will immediately make publicly available data that could be
critical for modeling virus-based outbreaks including predicting further
community transmission during the current COVID-19 pandemic.

Community-transmission is responsible for over three-quarters of the COVID-19
cases in the US. Yet, current models do not consider localized behavior to
predict virus transmission or the extent of propagation within individualized
settings and their surrounding communities. The DETER project will provide such
data and demonstrate new three-dimensional means to understand community-level
risk. The DETER project investigates how generalizable human behavior is in
terms of destination selection after visiting a healthcare facility and the
extent and types of hand-based interaction with the built environment. These
questions will be answered through tracking individuals when leaving healthcare
facilities and recording touch-based behaviors on public transportation and
public accommodations. The project will provide a transferable framework and a
data integration strategy that can be adopted into a wide variety of three-
dimensional models and schema that will help equip researchers and local
communities with better methods for predicting community-based transmission.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.