* 2027069
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Introducing DIVOT: A Novel Architecture for Runtime Anti-Probing/Tampering on I/O Buses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Qing Yang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 624,000.00

This project introduces a new security technology that protects data
confidentiality, data integrity, and correctness in computer systems.
Specifically, the new technology is able to instantly detect malicious hardware
attacks so that appropriate actions can be taken to prevent information from
stolen and alteration when information is transmitted between components inside
a computer system. The new technology can be realized using a simple digital
hardware as part of a computer system. One of the objectives of this project is
to design, develop, and implement the new hardware structure to be incorporated
in future secure computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direct outcome of this
project is fundamental knowledge gained from theoretical study and experimental
implementation of the new security architecture, referred to as DIVOT
(Detecting Impedance Variation Of Transmission-lines).  DIVOT is a generic,
scalable, and low-overhead security solution for any computer system. It is made
possible by several new concepts including analog-to-probability conversion
(APC) and probability density modulation (PDM). A runtime-accessible, CMOS-
compatible, and I/O-integrated DIVOT hardware structure will be designed,
implemented, and tested in this project. Integrating DIVOT with a variety of
interconnecting transmission-lines will lead to a transformative secure and
trustworthy architecture that substantially reduces attack
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of DIVOT architecture is
significant.  It represents a universal countermeasure to fight against many
physical probing/tampering threats and significantly enhances hardware security
of various computing platforms ranging from servers to embedded computers in
mobile devices and IoTs (Internet of things). Moreover, the outcomes of the
project pave the way for many other future applications, including smart grid
security, health care security, robotics security, etc. Many innovative
architecture designs and security protocols will be generated that are likely to
be published or transferred to the computer industry. Research results will be
incorporated into our computer engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental data will be stored in ASCII
format, source codes will be in C language, FPGA implementation will be in
Verilog or VHDL format, and technical papers/reports will be in PDF format.
Besides technical publications, annual and final reports will be presented to
NSF on research progress and discoveries. All the data will be retained for at
least four years after conclusion of the project on PIs’ website: www.ele.uri.ed
u/~wei and www.ele.uri.edu/~qyang.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.