* 2027399
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Agency COVID-19 Risk Communication on Social Media: Characterizing Drivers of Message Retransmission and Engagement
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2020
* Jeannette Sutton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 93,161.00

Public health and emergency management agencies are on the front lines of
informing and educating the public about the science of virus transmission and
prevention. In response to a threat such as COVID-19, their mission requires the
communication of accurate and credible information to local populations using a
variety of media channels. Increasingly, social media is a critical component of
their communication toolbox - but using it to rapidly and effectively inform the
public in a crowded media environment remains a significant challenge. In prior
work on online communication associated with the Zika and Ebola outbreaks, the
PIs established that effective messaging depended upon employing a combination
of content, style, and structure features - but that the right mix seemed to
depend upon properties of the disease event (including the uncertainty and
ambiguity of the threat, the nature of the consequences involved, and the need
for public information). COVID-19 poses a distinct risk profile, with a
disruption potential to the American public and the built environment not seen
by any threat within decades. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will
identify the key drivers of effective messaging in an emerging pandemic, and
strategies for improving effectiveness in social media communication involving
COVID-19 by public agencies. The specific focus will be on the outcomes of
message retransmission (essential for both high levels of message penetration
and ensuring multiple exposures critical for behavioral influence) and
engagement (a critical indicator of attention and a driver of trust), both of
which are measurable and established as core outcomes in prior studies of
effective social media communication. By establishing evidence-based guidance
for agencies to effectively warn, inform, and engage the general public during
an emerging pandemic, this project will provide critical guidance needed to
mount effective interventions that save lives, reduce economic losses, and
protect the security of the nation against health threats, in alignment with the
broader mission of the NSF.

This objective will be pursued through the following core activities: (1)
collection of perishable social media data on COVID-19 messaging by public
agencies, and public engagement with/retransmission of those messages; (2)
content coding of COVID-19 messages, to typologize information that is specific
to the present event; (3) characterization of messaging strategies used by
public agencies in the evolving COVID-19 response; (4) predictive analysis of
message outcomes based on message context, content, style, and structure; and
(5) development of evidence-based guidance for effective social media messaging
by public agencies in response to this and similar events. This research
strategy builds on successful prior work in response to emergent infectious
disease threats and in the context of anthropogenic and natural hazard events.
The intellectual merit of the research includes: Risk communication messages on
social media are real time traces of online in/formal communication shared under
conditions of imminent and ongoing threat; Research on communication and
messaging dynamics online provides insights into the social amplification of
risk, via diffusion of information; and strategies to design effective messages.
This project will test the risk communication on social media model in response
to a global pandemic by analyzing official communication from state, local, and
national public health and emergency management Twitter accounts. The findings
from this work will lead to the further development and refinement of the social
amplification of risk framework and the risk communication on social media
model. The broader impacts of this work most prominently include the
accumulation of an evidence base for social media messaging, as noted above.
This research will have immediate benefits to organizations and agencies tasked
with communicating to at risk populations about emergent infectious disease in
the context of the built environment. Our findings will inform the design and
dissemination of risk communication messages and will be immediately applicable
to public health and safety organizations in the context of COVID-19. Results
will be shared via fact sheets, webinars, published papers, and presentations
with academic and practitioner audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.