* 2027748
* RAPID: How do vertebrate endolysosomal Ca2+ channels control coronaviral tropism?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Amy Hudson, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,909.00

This research advances the national prosperity and the bioeconomy and enhances
our understanding of the mechanisms that allow the spread of corona viruses
between species. Results of this research may be the basis for identifying
biomarkers of severity of disease or spread of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 or COVID).
This project will produce an understanding of why some coronavirus strains that
normally infect specific animals (such as birds and bats) sometimes also infect
humans, whereas other strains do not. This knowledge is critical for
understanding how viruses break species barriers to colonize new hosts and
precipitate widespread infections, as experienced during the ongoing COVID
pandemic. Coronaviruses infect cells by binding to specific cell surface
receptors and passing through organelles known as endosomes and lysosomes to
access the cell interior. This project will investigate how the environment
within these cellular structures regulates the intensity of viral infection.
Through the use of comparative biology across different vertebrate species, the
goal will be to identify conditions in endosomes and lysosomes that facilitate
infection in particular organisms. This research may be the basis for
identifying biomarkers of severity of disease or COVID spread. This research
will also provide tools to enable a broad research community working on COVID
and other viruses. This proposal also uses funding to train graduate and
undergraduate students. As such this funding is training the next generation of
leaders in science. Results expected from this work will facilitate
identification and control of COVID spread in humans and other animals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coronoaviridae (CoVs) are a family of single-stranded
RNA viruses that infect three vertebrate groups: mammals, birds and fish.
Understanding the molecular determinants underpinning this tropism, namely why
CoVs naturally and efficiently infect these species, and target specific tissues
within these animals, is a fundamental biological concept. Definition of the
mechanisms restricting CoV tropism is therefore critical for our understanding
of how CoVs break species barriers and colonize new hosts. In this RAPID
proposal, the role of the luminal microenvironment of the endolysosomal system
in determining the efficiency of CoV infection will be studied for different
CoVs in different vertebrate species. The central hypothesis is that the
cellular proteins called ion channels resident in endosomes and lysosomes are
differentially present in lower mammals and humans. Furthermore, these ion
channels uniquely create environments within endosomes and lysosomes in lower
mammals that are critical for supporting coronaviral infection and the
differential expression of endolysosomal ion channels between tissues and
species regulates the effectiveness of CoV infection. This hypothesis will be
tested using a variety of cell models, imaging approaches and infection assays.
This research is supported by the Symbiosis, Defense and Self-recognition
program of the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.