* 2027624
* RAPID: A Portal to Support Models for Assessing Strategies for Hospitals in the COVID-19 and other Pandemics - MASH-Pandemics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Elise Miller-Hooks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will develop the Models for Assessing
Strategies for Hospitals (MASH) in Pandemics (MASH-Pandemics) Portal with
requisite modeling capabilities urgently needed by hospitals and regions in
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. Important perishable, time-sensitive data
and information to support this effort will be collected. MASH-Pandemics will
build on previously developed sophisticated, detailed discrete-event simulation-
based hospital capacity and capability analysis models of typical U.S. urban
hospitals. This RAPID project will support the re-specification of these models,
data collection, model runs, and results analysis, outcomes from which will aid
hospital administrators and regions in making optimal operational changes and
collaboration plans enabled through state and national emergency declarations in
response to the COVID-19 outbreak. An online portal will be constructed on which
details of the modeling capabilities, practical findings and recommendations,
along with potential policy implications, for responding to the COVID-19
pandemic will be posted. Additionally, run requests from hospitals, hospital
collaborations and geographical regions will be taken through the portal. This
work will generate crucial synthetic data needed to develop quick
recommendations and analyses in a period where time is of the essence. Key
outputs will include, for example: potential for various modified operational
strategies to benefit hospital performance and patient survival, hospital
collaboration strategies to aid regional response, anticipating critical supply
needs to mobilize and prioritize support from supply chains (or Federal response
capabilities), and recommendations for effective implementation of capacity
enhancement strategies (alternative standards of care, modified operations,
demand management). The project will provide input to educational activities in
the future, once the project is complete and the pandemic subsides. The focus of
this work during the period of performance will be on providing, as quickly as
possible, crucially needed recommendations to hospitals and regions based on
results from runs of high-quality models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award
will advance mathematical modeling techniques for capturing critical hospital
services during crises. It employs concepts of open queuing networks, discrete
event simulation, stochastic modeling, transient system analysis, and
statistical methods. The work will collect critical, perishable data, and will
generate crucial synthetic data for rapid analysis and prediction urgently
needed in this period of a global COVID-19 pandemic. With its quantitative
approach, the project will enhance hospital readiness, capacity and capability,
by identifying means for efficiently using severely limited, critical personnel
and physical resources, the allocation of which will affect the survival of
potentially thousands of lives and the safety of health care workers along with
support staff. Findings from this effort will directly support hospitals at the
front line, or regions in COVID-19 “hot spots,” by providing the opportunity to
request runs and receive analyses of the effectiveness of COVID-19 response
strategies and collaboration mechanisms. It is anticipated that the run requests
will come in a variety of forms, requiring data collection, modeling work,
investigation to capture stochastic processes with input distributions and
parameters, and results analyses. The models can be quickly enhanced and
mobilized, and initial findings and recommendations made public in only
weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.