* 2027908
* RAPID: Collaborative: Transfer Learning Techniques for Better Response to COVID-19 in the US
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Simon Levin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This project will use available data sets for COVID-19 in other countries, and
in NYC, Virginia, and Maryland to build compartmental and metapopulation models
to quantify the events that transpired there, and what interventions at various
stages may have achieved. This will permit gaining control of future situations
earlier. The epidemic models developed during this project will lead to
innovations in computational epidemiology and enable approaches that mitigate
the negative effects of COVID-19 on public health, society, and the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on publicly available data sets for COVID-19
in other countries, and in NYC, Virginia, and Maryland, the researchers propose
to build compartmental and metapopulation models to quantify the events that
transpired there, understand the impacts of interventions at various stages, and
develop optimal strategies for containing the pandemic. The basic model will
subdivide the population into classes according to age, gender, and infectious
status; examine the impact of the quarantine that was imposed; and then consider
additional strategies that could have been imposed, in particular to reduce
contact rates. The project will apply and extend the approach of "transfer
learning" to this problem. The research team is well positioned to conduct this
research; they have a long history of experience tracking and modeling
infectious disease spread (e.g., Ebola, SARS) and are already participating in
the CDC forecasting challenge for COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.