* 2027458
* Collaborative Research: CSBR: Ownership Transfer: Living Stocks: International Culture Collection of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (INVAM)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* James Bever, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 460,935.00

Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi are soil fungi that associate with plant roots
and improve resource uptake of the majority of plant species, including most
crop plants. They also impact plant defenses and build soil quality. The
functioning of AM fungi varies tremendously between species and isolates. As a
result, studies of AM fungi can improve management of agriculture, grasslands
and forests. Progress in understanding the importance and optimal management of
AM fungi depends upon tests of AM fungi cultures. Unfortunately, few researchers
have the expertise or facilities necessary to develop or maintain their own AM
fungal cultures, and therefore the availability of cultures can limit scientific
progress. This project will enable the study of this important group of soil
fungi through support of a culture collection called the International culture
collection of (Vesicular) Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (INVAM). This is the
largest culture collection of this type of fungi in the world and includes
hundreds of individual isolates. This collection will enable advancement of
knowledge on AM fungal biology, genetics, ecology, and taxonomy, as well as
applications of AM fungi for commercial purposes. This project will also promote
the exploration of science by the private sector and by students of all ages and
abilities. The project will develop modules on experimentation using INVAM
cultures that support the K-12 Next Generation Life Science Standards. Standards
related to plant growth, soil health and the importance of biodiversity can all
be supported by the collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INVAM has been the largest
provider of cultures to the scientific community and has been the primary
resource for identification of AM fungal species. INVAM maintains the largest
number of reference cultures, cultures that are linked to a library of voucher
specimens and to species descriptions. These reference cultures are a critical
resource for the development and testing of new approaches to environmental
sequencing, a potentially powerful method to study patterns of AM fungi in the
field. The project will maximize the value of the reference cultures through
sequencing efforts. The core mission of INVAM is to preserve accessions and
provide living cultures to the user community. INVAM also provides comprehensive
information on collection protocols and policies, methodology, taxonomy, and a
searchable database for accessions and active/stored cultures via the INVAM
website. Users include teachers and students from high schools through graduate
programs at universities, researchers, and industry clients. Stocks include
representatives of 95 AM fungal species, and high value germ plasm including
strains used for genome projects and strains known to be highly effective as
mycorrhizal symbionts. Dr. Joseph Morton, who built and curated INVAM since
1990, retired in 2017. This project secures the future of the INVAM collections
by moving it to the University of Kansas. The move occurs in phases through the
duration of the project to ensure culture viability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.