* 2027617
* RoL: Coordination of collective cell migration in complex tissues
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bradley Olson, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 938,885.00

The development of animals requires the movement of cells to create and shape
tissues and organs in the embryo. Cells often cooperate with each other by
moving as a united group, but how this works is unclear. This research uses the
simple fruit fly model, along with genetics and live cell imaging, to probe how
groups of cells come together, adapt their shapes, and move as one within a
whole tissue. This project will define the way that cells move together in the
tissues and organs of many animals. A broader impact will be the recruitment of
college students from underrepresented groups to perform in-depth research.
Workshops for 6th-8th grade and 9th-12th grade girls will use a low-cost ‘build
your own’ microscope (the Foldscope) to learn about nature and science. Lastly,
engineering students will design and make a device to alter the tissue and find
out the impact on how cell groups move. These activities will help students get
excited about biology and inspire them to become scientists or
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Movement is a fundamental property of life, that
crosses many levels, from molecules to cells and tissues to organisms. Cell
migration is fundamental to how diverse tissues and organs form and are
remodeled during animal embryonic development. Migrating cells must sense,
respond, and adapt to changes in the immediate tissue environment. Cells that
move collectively are further challenged to stay together, communicate, respond,
and adapt cooperatively as multicellular units to tissue-scale forces and
signals. An integrated understanding of the mechanisms that keep cell
collectives moving inside tissues is lacking. The proposed studies will fill
this knowledge gap by elucidating the dynamic molecular, cytoskeletal,
organellar, cellular, and tissue-level mechanisms that promote collective cell
motility in complex environments. Specifically, this project uses the Drosophila
border cell collective because it is a tractable model amenable to real-time
live cell imaging, genetic tools, and optogenetic cellular manipulation, all
within the native developing tissue. Building on previous studies, this project
will uncover: (1) how the critical signaling nexus Rap1 coordinates adhesion and
the cytoskeleton to keep border cells moving inside the developing tissue; (2)
how nuclear deformation, along with connections to the cellular cytoskeleton,
helps border cells adapt to changes in the tissue microenvironment and
morphology; (3) how alterations in gene expression facilitate movement inside
crowded tissues. These studies will uncover conserved mechanisms that drive and
regulate collective cell movement within tissues, thus linking principles of
cooperativity and adaptability in the movement of cell nuclei, single cells,
collectives, tissues, and animals as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
award is funded by the Developmental Systems, Cellular Dynamics and Function,
and Rules of Life Programs, all within the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.