* 2027266
* RAPID: Preventing the Spread of Coronavirus with Efficient Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Song Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 125,000.00

The novel coronavirus, COVID-19 is a pandemic infecting people in the United
States and around the world. It is of utmost importance to prevent the fast
spread of the virus. This project will use artificial intelligence (AI) methods
to slow down the infection by encouraging proper wear of Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) by hospital staff and by supporting social distancing. The
planned method will help monitor dangerous activities pointed out by Center for
Disease Control (CDC), such as hand-to-face contact, touching inside or crossing
arms when taking off the gown and masks and social distancing. It will advance
the national health, protect the healthcare workers and help the whole nation
combat the pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Video understanding and activity
recognition have made great progress in recent years. This project will apply
artificial intelligence on a mobile platform for efficient activity recognition
techniques to guide people's activities in healthcare settings, including
patients', health care workers' and community residents'. To protect privacy in
transmission to the cloud, the project applies the team's work on model
compression techniques and neural architecture search to make the AI more
compact and efficient so that it can be deployed on edge devices. As a result,
videos can be locally processed; only key information or the detection result is
sent over the cloud, preserving people's privacy. Finally, the project will
efficiently deploy such algorithms on mobile devices and make it freely
available in the hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.