* 2027792
* RAPID: How Scientific Data, Knowledge, and Expertise Mobilize in Online Media during the COVID-19 Crisis
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Kate Starbird, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 197,538.00

Alongside the COVID-19 pandemic, people around the globe are experiencing an
information ecosystem flooded with information—some accurate, some less so.
Crisis events are inherently times of uncertainty and anxiety, and under those
conditions, people try to make sense of the flood of information. This process,
called collective sensemaking, has psychological and informational benefits, but
it also makes us vulnerable to the spread of misinformation. The collective
sensemaking process around the COVID-19 pandemic is addressing acute and
persistent scientific uncertainty about the disease itself, such as how it
spreads and the best protective actions people can take. This proposal addresses
these challenges to help inform and educate the public about the science of
virus transmission and prevention—by helping to surface accurate and scientific
data and knowledge, alongside the voices of trustworthy experts. The project
will use artificial intelligence, statistical analysis, and expert coding to
create an open data archive of scientific data and expertise as it is
communicated over time and updated in news and social media. The goal is to
offer the public current, accurate information about the science of virus
transmission and prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to
understand how scientific knowledge, expertise, data, and communication affect
the spread and correction of online misinformation about an emerging pandemic.
The project team is investigating how information moves through social media
platforms and jumps to and from other media platforms, including traditional
journalism—online, print, and broadcast outlets. It aims to uncover how claims
and statistics related to scientific knowledge and expertise shape, and are
shaped by, these information and influence dynamics. Methodological
contributions include expanding infrastructure for collecting and analyzing
social media data in a time- and safety-critical information environment, and
developing techniques for aggregating variable statistics, moderated by
scientific expertise, over large-scale, dynamic social media
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.