* 2027339
* RAPID: COVID-19 Coronavirus Testbed and Knowledge Base Construction and Personalized Risk Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Xingquan Zhu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 04/30/2022
* USD 90,000.00

The 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an evolving epidemic. There is
little knowledge about COVID-19’s outbreak and spread patterns, and the impact
of viral evolution, demography, social behavior, cultural differences, and
quarantine policies on the outbreaks. As the battle against COVID-19 continues,
a deluge of information is being produced. Academia, news agencies, and
governments continuously publish advances in the understanding of the virus
clinical pathologies, its genome sequences, and relevant administrative policies
and actions taken. Nevertheless, the dramatic outbreak differences with respect
to diverse geographies, regional policies, and cultural groups also raise
confusion, contradictions, and inconsistencies in disease outbreak modeling. It
is therefore crucial to build a knowledge base of COVID-19 to understand the
correlations and roles that different factors play in predicting the spread of
the virus, thus enabling both individuals and health care officials to implement
appropriate policies to mitigate the effects of the epidemic on public health
and society at large. This project will create a COVID-19 coronavirus testbed
and knowledge base, as well as a personalized risk evaluation tool for
individuals to assess their infection risk in a dynamic environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project include two thrusts. The
first creates a testbed and knowledgebase that includes information for modeling
outbreak and mutation of COVID-19. This testbed will serve as a benchmark for
the public to model and understand the spread of COVID-19, and eventually
mitigate the negative effects of COVID-19 on public health, society, and the
economy. The second thrust develops a multi-source deep neural network-based
predictive tool to combine demographics, policies, regional infections, and
individual information for personalized risk evaluation. As a result, the public
can employ personalized information to estimate their infection risk level,
using social and behavioral information (e.g., family size, shopping patterns,
and dining patterns), local authority policies (e.g., school, restaurant, and
movie theater closures as well as night time curfew), demographics (e.g.,
population age, density, and income), health condition (e.g., heart disease
incidence, cancer prevalence, and substance abuse), and regional virus condition
(e.g., number of infection cases in the region studied and infection
rate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.