* 2027693
* STTR Phase I:  Autonomous Disinfecting Robot for Crowded Spaces
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Chinmay Soman, EarthSense, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed
work will rapidly create new autonomous robots for sanitization in hospitals and
other high-traffic areas with high risk of surface-borne pathogen transmission.
The autonomous sanitizing system produced by this effort would fill a crucial
void in ensuring hospital spaces are kept sanitized as the health care system
scrambles to respond to the evolving COVID-19 crisis. In addition, the solution
will be widely applicable in controlling Hospital Acquired Infections, affecting
over 2 million people in the US annually, with an overall economic impact of $45
B. The proposed autonomous high-dexterity robots are projected to successfully
keep the high-touch areas in about 10,000 square feet of commercial space
reliably sanitized and could be applicable to the over 50 billion square feet of
public commercial space (office, industrial, healthcare, hospitality, retail,
etc.) in the US. Faster, more efficient, and targeted santization has potential
to dramatically reduce downtime of these spaces and the labor required for
sanitization.

This STTR Phase I project, in response to the ongoing COVID-19 crisis, will
rapidly develop new robotic systems and algorithms for robots capable of
precisely navigating surfaces in crowded environments. This new system will be
capable of selective sanitization in the proximity of humans, removing the key
limitation of existing full-room single-source UV radiation based robots
requiring the room to be unoccupied. UV light technology has tremendous promise
in improving sanitization at hospitals and reducing costs by minimizing chemical
use, but the technology has had limited application due to ill effects on
mammalian cells. The selective exposure capability with the use of the robotic
arm and focused lighting will alleviate that limitation, opening up further uses
of UV lighting in hospital sanitization. Toward this goal, this project will
advance key areas of robotics, including Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) algorithms in the presence of dynamic obstacles, and the control of arms
over surfaces with varied objects and in the vicinity of humans. These efforts
will advance the science and practice of robotics for applications in healthcare
and other industries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.