* 2027330
* EAGER: Nanostructure-Enabled Solution Catalysis with Concentration Gradients
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Chong Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 239,823.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is funding Dr. Chong Liu of the University of California, Los Angeles to explore
new chemistry and reactivity in solution catalysis where the concentrations of
reactants and catalysts are controlled in space. Chemical transformations
ranging from fundamental investigations to industrial manufacturing are often
conducted in solution. It is usually true that the various chemical species are
uniformly dispersed throughout the solution. While this often simplifies
chemical processes it can also be a limitation. For example, some reactants may
not be compatible with each other, with their reactions leading to undesirable
side reactions and waste. In these cases it is advantageous to keep these
species separated. Dr. Liu is accomplishing this challenge with electrochemistry
using arrays of nanometer scale wires. Successful implementation of the proposed
work would potentially offer a new paradigm in chemical synthesis with a
multifaceted approach involving nanoscience, electrochemistry, and catalysis.
Dr. Liu's research team, including women and students from underrepresented
groups, will be engaged in highly interdisciplinary research in this project.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Liu and his team hypothesize that the
electrochemistry of nanowire arrays yields controllable local O2 gradient
microscopically, which enables O2-sensitive organometallic catalysts to perform
oxidative reactions such as direct methane (CH4) to methanol (CH3OH) conversion.
Dr. Liuâ€™s research group will design and characterize concentration gradients
generated by wire array electrodes, establish a selective CH4-to-CH3OH
conversion of O2-deactivating catalysts with O2 oxidant at ambient condition,
and explore additional scenarios of solution catalysis that benefits from
concentration gradients. This project establishes the design principle of
homogenous catalysis with concentration heterogeneity, by addressing two
important questions: (1) How can one use electric potential to control and
generate a pre-designed concentration profile at microscopic scale? (2) What
improvements can be attained for solution catalysis via the establishment of
microscopic concentration gradients? The integration of nanoscience and
homogenous catalysis provides a unique and potentially powerful approach to
control reactions at both molecular and microscopic length
scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.