* 2027615
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: A Dual-Band Radar for Measuring Internal Ice Deformation: a Multipass Ice-Penetrating Radar Experiment on Thwaites Glacier and the McMurdo Ice Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Fernando Rodriguez-Morales, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 216,082.00

This project will develop a new ice-penetrating radar system that can
simultaneously map glacier geometry and glacier flow along repeat profiles.
Forecasting an ice-sheetâ€™s contribution to sea level requires an estimate for
the initial ice-sheet geometry and the parameters that govern ice flow and slip
across bedrock. Existing ice-sheet models cannot independently determine this
information from conventional observations of ice-surface velocities and glacier
geometry. This introduces substantial uncertainty into simulations of past and
future ice-sheet behavior. Thus, this new radar capability is conceived to
provide the needed data to support higher-fidelity simulations of past and
future ice-sheet behavior and more accurate projections of future sea
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new radar system will integrate two existing
radars (the multi-channel coherent radio-echo depth sounder and the accumulation
radar) developed by the Center for the Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets, as well as
adding new capabilities. An eight-element very high frequency (VHF; 140-215 MHz)
array will have sufficient cross-track aperture to swath map internal layers and
the ice-sheet base in three dimensions. A single ultra high frequency (UHF;
600-900 MHz) antenna will have the range and phase resolution to map internal
layer displacement with 0.25-mm precision. The VHF array will create 3D mappings
of layer geometry that enable measurements of vertical velocities by accounting
for spatial offsets between repeat profiles and changing surface conditions. The
vertical displacement measurement will then be made by determining the
difference in radar phase response recorded by the UHF antenna for radar
profiles collected at the same locations at different times. The UHF antenna
will be dual-polarized and thus capable of isolating both components of complex
internal reflections. This should enable inferences of ice crystal orientation
fabric and widespread mapping of ice viscosity. Initial field testing of the
radar will occur on the McMurdo Ice Shelf and then progress to Thwaites Glacier,
Antarctica. The dual-band radar system technology and processing algorithms will
be developed with versatile extensible hardware and user-friendly software so
that this system will serve as a prototype for a future community radar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.