* 2027375
* RAPID: Geospatial Modeling of COVID-19 Spread and Risk Communication by Integrating Human Mobility and Social Media Big Data
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Jonathan Patz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2021
* USD 199,888.00

This project will investigate the gap between the science of epidemic modeling
and risk communication to the general public in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. With the rapid development of information, communication, and
technologies, new data acquisition and assessment methods are needed to evaluate
the risk of epidemic transmission and geographic spreading from the community
perspective, to help effectively monitor social distancing policies, and to
understand social disparities and environmental contexts in risk communication.
This project will make theoretical, methodological, and practical contributions
that advance the understanding of the COVID-19 spread across both time and
space. The communication aspects of this research will serve to educate
communities about the science, timing, and geography of virus transmission in
order to enhance actions for addressing such global health challenges. This
project explores the capabilities and potential of integrating social media big
data and geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) technologies to enable and
transform spatial epidemiology research and risk communication. Results will be
disseminated broadly to multiple stakeholder groups. Further, this project will
support both researchers and students from underrepresented groups, broadening
participation in STEM fields. Lastly, the Web platform developed in this project
will serve as an education tool for students in geography, communication,
mathematics, and public health, as well as for effectively engaging with
communities about the science of COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past health
research mainly focuses on quantitative modeling of human transmission using
various epidemic models. How to effectively communicate the science of an
epidemic outbreak to the general public remains a challenge. When an epidemic
outbreak occurs without specific controls in place, it can be particularly
challenging to improve community risk awareness and action. The research team,
composed of experts from geography, mathematics, public health and life sciences
communication will (1) develop innovative mathematical predictive models that
integrate spatio-temporal-social network information and community-centered
approaches; (2) integrate census statistics, human mobility and social media big
data, as well as policy controls to conduct data-synthesis-driven and
epidemiology-guided risk analysis; And (3) utilize panel surveys and text mining
techniques on social media data for better understanding public awareness of
COVID-19 and for investigating various instant message and visual image
strategies to effectively communicate about risks to the public. The results of
this project will lead to a better understanding of the geography and spread of
COVID-19. Additionally, it is expected that the methods developed in this
project can be applied to mitigate the outbreak risks of future
epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.