* 2027296
* RAPID: Investigating the Causal Propositions of the Affect Heuristic During an Ongoing Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,11/30/2021
* William Burns, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2021
* USD 199,997.00

The unprecedented pandemic wrought by the coronavirus has infected many people
around the world, triggering anxiety and panic and disrupting all facets of
life. In addition to the growing numbers of cases and deaths, the social,
economic, and political impacts are vast. Lacking a vaccine or effective
therapeutic cure, the front line of defense against the spread of this disease
depends on human behavior, following guidelines about social distancing,
sanitation, and other recommended measures. There is great uncertainty about the
future trajectory of the disease and its impacts. Against the backdrop of this
catastrophic threat this research forecasts public perceptions of risks,
including hopes and fears, using a new theoretical model based on what is known
as “the affect heuristic.” The researchers build and test this model in two ways
that increase understanding of how positive and negative emotions, influenced by
daily news reports, interact to guide behavior. Understanding the changing
reactions to news information not only advances understanding of risk
perception, but enables the creation of effective risk communication messages.
The research provides insight into the behaviors that will determine the course
of the disease and can help to mitigate its harmful social and economic
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies have consistently found an inverse
relationship between judgments of benefits and risks associated with a wide
array of hazards. This relationship occurs because perceptions of risk and
benefit are derived in opposite ways from an affective sense of the importance
of the risk. This process became known as the affect heuristic. The causal
dynamics that underlie the relationship between affect and perceived risks and
benefits remain poorly understood. This project does three things: (1a)
constructs a system dynamics simulation model that explicitly incorporates the
informational feedback loops that allow affect to play this moderating role and
(1b) simulates the trajectories of affect and perceived risk and benefits as the
coronavirus pandemic unfolds, (2) constructs a hybrid agent-based model that
incorporates findings from the systems model but allows for heterogeneity (e.g.,
different levels of medical vulnerability) among agents, and (3) conducts a
longitudinal national panel to survey the public’s response to the pandemic over
a 6 month period. These data together with data from an independent panel are be
used to estimate and validate both models. This project has broad impacts
because understanding how we manage our perceptions of risk and benefits is
critical to the decisions we make and our behaviors. The project helps to
explain this entanglement and predict public reaction to the current pandemic
and, potentially, to other crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.