* 2027113
* From seaside to bedside: evolution of bioluminescent genetically encoded Neurotransmitter Indicators and activators for neuromodulation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nathan Shaner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,882.00

Bioluminescence is a naturally occurring phenomenon used by various animals to
produce light. For example, the firefly uses this mechanism, as well as several
deep-sea creatures. Capitalizing on biological systems to emit and received
light, the investigator will design a system that can be used to treat
neurological disorders. They propose to genetically engineer neural cells to
express two unique proteins. The first set of proteins will emit photons (light)
every time that they bind the neurotransmitter glutamate. The second set of
proteins will receive the photon and harvest its energy to allow the entry of
ions onto neurons. This new genetically encoded pair of proteins will enhance
the communication between the neurons at site of lesion and potentially augment
recovery after spinal cord injury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioluminescent light is
produced as a result of the catalytic interaction of a specialized enzyme
(luciferase) and its specific substrate (luciferin) resulting in the production
of photons. They are working to engineer these enzymes to develop BioLuminescent
INdicators of Glutamate (BLING) for direct optical detection of the excitatory
neurotransmitter glutamate. BLING will allow neuroscientists to study the
central nervous system in behaving animal models in ways not previously
possible. Next, they use BLING for neuromodulation as an approach to spinal cord
injury rehabilitation. They will take advantage of existing light sensitive ion
channels that can activate or inhibit neuronal activity in response to light.
Since BLING generates light in a glutamate dependent manner, they will utilize
BLING as the activation source for these light sensitive ion channels to control
neuronal activity for glutamate dependent neuromodulation. The goal is to
enhance neuronal connections by amplifying excitatory synaptic activity from the
brain to the spinal cord below the level of injury to compensate for damage
caused by injury. They anticipate this approach to be highly effective for the
treatment of a variety of other neurodegenerative
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.