* 2027486
* Collaborative Research: Research: Intersections between Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) and Ethics in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Andrew Katz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,339.00

Efforts focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) and ethics are often
siloed in engineering. While generally pursued as separate lines of
investigation, we hypothesize that the aims, objectives, and goals pertaining to
ethics and DEI often overlap. By investigating this potential overlap, we
hypothesize that we can help improve overall efforts at promoting DEI and ethics
in engineering. Our primary research objective is to synthesize intersections
between ethics and DEI among engineering academic and workforce communities. In
this study, we begin with a systematic literature review that explores potential
overlap in literature in ethics and DEI. Second, we will study how engineering
academics view (consciously and subconsciously) ethics and DEI as related.
Finally, we will study how industrial practitioners view (consciously and
subconsciously) the potential overlap between ethics and DEI. Collectively, this
study will enable us to compare how literature, academics, and practitioners
view ethics and DEI as related. We will use findings to generate curricular and
workforce training efforts to better integrate ethics and DEI in engineering.
This study will benefit society by promoting the formation of engineers who can
engage with different values and perspectives in ethical
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite various models, initiatives, and pockets of
innovation by scholars and programs, we have not realized widespread changes in
the diversification of the engineering workforce. We theorize that one barrier
to change is the disjuncture between lines of scholarship from engineering
education researchers in the intersecting spaces of DEI and engineering ethics.
This study seeks to find ways for these communities to support one another by
making explicit hidden structural issues that mask the intersections between
ethics and DEI in the context of engineering. This study is comprised of three
phases, addressing the following respective research questions: (1) How are
engineering ethics and DEI related based on theoretical and empirical
understandings of affective and cognitive development of students and
practitioners within these communities?; (2) How are engineering ethics and DEI
related based on mental models elicited from academics active in these two areas
of research and scholarship?; and (3) How are engineering ethics and DEI related
based on mental models elicited from a diverse cross-section of industrial
practitioners? To address RQ1, we will use systematic literature review
procedures to synthesize peer-reviewed scholarship on approaches to, and
outcomes of, interventions centered around ethics and DEI. To address RQ2 and
RQ3, academics (Phase 2) and industrial practitioners (Phase 3) will respond to
an ethics/DEI challenge in multiple formats, including graphically, textually,
and verbally. We will critically analyze the literature and mental models via a
discourse analysis approach, guided by seven building tasks identified by Gee
(significance, practices, identities, relationships, politics, connections, and
sign systems). We will triangulate Phase 1, 2, and 3 findings to identify how
discourses vary across the academic and industrial contexts. This triangulation
will enable us to generate actionable modalities for supporting educational
efforts aimed at the intersection of ethics and DEI both in curricular and
workforce contexts. We will adopt an activist-oriented approach to disseminate
findings to the research community and professional organizations through
multiple mechanisms. This will directly benefit society by facilitating the
professional formation of engineers who are more ethically adept and capable of
engaging with difference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.