* 2027378
* Collaborative Proposal: MRA: Teleconnections Among Great Plains NEON Sites by Wind and Wing
* BIO,DEB
* 02/06/2020,12/31/2023
* Christopher Patrick, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 286,318.00

While most wetlands and ponds are physically isolated, their communities are
linked over years and long distances, through a process called
"teleconnections." These exchanges occur via atmospheric processes, temporary
aquatic connections, natural 'hitchhiking' on other migrating animals, and
dispersal by humans. Aquatic systems where these can be studied include Great
Plains ephemeral wetlands. These systems, such as playas and prairie potholes,
are abundant in grassland ecoregions and support resident invertebrate species,
amphibians, and migrating waterfowl. Their ephemeral nature requires residents
to periodically seek other aquatic systems or produce resistant eggs that allow
them to survive dry periods lasting months to decades. Their 'signature' species
are tiny fairy and tadpole shrimps. These lay resistant eggs which can be
dispersed by 'wind and wing.' The former includes egg transport by prevailing
Great Plains winds, and the latter by eggs hitching rides in the guts of
migrating waterfowl to be deposited later in other wetlands. The research will
manipulate community composition in outdoor tanks to determine competitive
abilities of invertebrates from different sites and to check for migrating
branchiopods in the digestive tracts of waterfowl shot by hunters. The project
will use this accessible system to develop ecology programs for K-6th grade
students; employing young students in science studies; educating under-served
student populations, including Native Americans and students from our Hispanic
Serving Institution; and working on wetlands-focused
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on the question: how
do teleconnections (dispersal by wind and wing) and climatic factors influence
macroinvertebrate community composition and synchrony (temporal links) in
ephemeral ponds within a macrosystem network? This project will test 6
hypotheses on factors shaping community composition that are related to: strong
dispersal, geographically variable dispersal, strong climatic synchrony,
geographically variable climatic synchrony, equal roles for dispersal and
climate, and a null hypothesis on stochasticity. The study will be 25 sites in
the greater region, including 5 sites within the National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON). The study will consist of: (1) sampling pond invertebrate
densities and diversities; (2) analyzing genetic signatures of branchiopod
crustacean populations; (3) conducting tank experiments on community assembly;
(4) obtaining data on waterfowl migrating through NEON sites; (5) correlating
effects of winds and rainfall on species traits; and (6) extracting, hatching,
and identifying crustacean eggs from gut contents analysis of waterfowl.
Overall, this research will test the validity of a poorly understood phenomenon,
that the biota of systems can be coupled without respect to geographic proximity
but instead tele-connected by wind or wing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.