* 2027678
* RAPID: Combining Big Data in Transportation with Hospital Health Data to Build Realistic "Flattening the Curves" Models during the COVID-19 Outbreak
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Debbie Niemeier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2022
* USD 89,240.00

The outbreak of COVID-19 in the U.S. provides an important opportunity for
researchers to improve flattening curve models which can be used to assess and
even spatially optimize health care during a rapidly expanding pandemic. This
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will take advantage of the large-scale
availability of location-sensing devices and apps that produce big data on
mobility patterns that can be used to better optimize the use of healthcare
facilities. This research brings together rapidly unfolding health data with
real-time data on mobility. We will examine how these two critical data
resources can be linked to better inform policy, identify emerging hotspots, and
target critical actions during a pandemic. This research will help public
officials to better understand and adapt to changing conditions as a health
emergency arises and expands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread of the “flattening
curves” graphic was significant in promoting public understanding of the
criticality of social distancing. These curves, however, were based on simulated
data. This research will collect and examine mobility data and public health
data to model flattening curves using real data. We combine big data from
location-based apps and cellphones with Electronic Medical records from UMMS
hospitals, including data on COVID-19 tests, and patient demographics and
prognostics. New modeling approaches that quantitatively measure change in
collective movement behaviors in response to the fast-evolving COVID-19 outbreak
will be linked to hospital usage and capacity. The methods of this research will
extend our knowledge of highly integrated systems, like transportation and
health, and better prepare the public for future
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.