* 2027260
* EAGER:  Student Mission Control for the International Space Station
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Daniel Garcia, Center for the Advancement of Science in Space, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 04/30/2023
* USD 298,944.00

This EAGER award tests a bold concept, to engage high school students with
direct access to data and experiments on the International Space Station, and to
use these assets in computer science courses to help students develop skills of
data inquiry, analysis and exploration. Results from this pilot project will
lead to subsequent work to develop and integrate these resources and activities
into widely used high school computer science courses. This innovation confronts
a real problem in computing education – how to have the data analysis components
of computer science courses have richness, depth and engagement, so that
students can develop and apply these essential skills. Taking advantage of the
educational power and appeal of space exploration, and the many connections to
key domains of computer science, the project will create and test an open-source
Student Mission Control, providing high school students with centralized access
to a wealth of data from on-orbit sensors, student experiments, science research
and NASA’s own mission control. They will also create and test a set of related
learning activities with computer science applications, focusing specifically on
data literacy, since this is of growing importance and a perennial challenge in
computer science courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will design
and implement a pilot curriculum to improve data literacy by engaging students
with real data from the International Space Station. They will also design a
Student Mission Control interface system that mimicks NASA’s own Mission
Control. The team will address the technical challenges of accessing data from
the ISS, manage it in a dynamic data engine and create an engaging and
informative user interface and API. They will also develop the related inquiry-
based investigations and simulations that engage students’ curiosity and promote
data literacy skills. This pilot will work initially with the co-PI’s computer
science course for non-majors, and then deploy and test in high schools, with 20
teachers of computer science and their students. Lessons learned from this pilot
project, if warranted, will in turn lead to a full proposal for large scale
development, dissemination, training, and expansion of functions, learning
activities and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.