* 2027092
* Collaborative Research: Enabling control of Bacillus subtilis growth using non-standard amino acids
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Aditya Kunjapur, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 488,999.00

This project seeks to create tools that control the abundance of specific
essential proteins in Bacillus subtilis by making them depend on unnatural amino
acids. B. subtilis is a soil-dwelling microbe used to stimulate plant growth and
to improve intestinal health in animals and humans. B. subtilis is also a model
system for studying cell shape and division. The cellular machinery that
orchestrates cell elongation and division include numerous components, several
of which are poorly understood, and for which there are few tools to carefully
control their abundance. This project aims to modify B. subtilis such that the
abundance of target proteins is controlled by the concentration of non-standard
amino acid supplied in the culture media. An analogy for this project is the
construction of a dimmer switch for a light in a room. The new switch allows one
to dim the brightness of a light that must stay on, where previously the only
option was to increase brightness relative to the default setting. If one can
dim the light in a room, then it is possible that one will see new features in
the room and understand how little light is needed to keep the room functional.
In addition to this research, undergraduate students who participate in the
nascent International Genetically Engineered Machines (iGEM) team at the
University of Delaware will receive lab space and mentoring to conduct projects
related to non-standard amino acids. This project is jointly funded by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imposition of
translational control allows precise control of expression, including weaker and
stronger expressions than natural promoters in B. subtilis. This will complement
existing approaches that are geared towards transcriptional control for
overexpression. This project will explore the use of engineered aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase and tRNA pairs in both E. coli and B. subtilis to compare amber codon
suppression across enzyme families and across organism. Upon achievement of non-
standard amino acid incorporation in B. subtilis, the project will investigate
the ability to titrate extracellular amino acid concentration and achieve dose-
dependent translation of a model fluorescent protein. This project then aims to
use this new control strategy to interrogate cell wall synthesis and to explore
the extension of synthetic auxotrophy. Cell morphology and length will be
studied as components of the cell wall synthesis machinery are titrated,
shedding light on what protein concentrations are required to achieve normal
cell shapes. Synthetic auxotrophy is a promising intrinsic biological
containment technique where an organism is engineered to depend on a synthetic
nutrient for its growth. Because this biocontainment technique has only been
demonstrated thus far in E. coli, this project will examine whether similar
auxotrophic markers or the modifications to cell wall synthesis machinery can
achieve robust reliance of the organism on non-standard amino acids for its
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.