* 2027456
* RAPID: COVID-ARC (COVID-19 Data Archive)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Dominique Duncan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 408,000.00

The goal of this 12-month project is to develop a data archive for multimodal
(i.e., demographic information, clinical-outcome reports, imaging scans) and
longitudinal data related to COVID-19 and to provide various statistical and
analytic tools for researchers. There is an immediate need to study SARS-CoV-2
and COVID-19, and this archive provides access to data along with user-friendly
tools for researchers to perform analyses to better understand COVID-19 and
encourage collaboration on this research. The COVID-19 pandemic is spreading
rapidly across the world, and governments are imposing travel bans, quarantine
laws, business and school closings, and many other restrictions in efforts to
contain the virus and limit the spread. However, much is still unknown about
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. There is an urgent need for scientists around the world
to work together to model the virus, study how the virus has changed and will
change over time, understand how it spreads, and discover a vaccine. The work
from this project can also prepare scientists for future pandemics by putting
the infrastructure in place to enable researchers to aggregate data and perform
analyses quickly in the event of an emergency. Existing resources track how many
cases are tallied per region, but lack imaging and other modalities that, when
combined, will facilitate the ability for researchers to truly understand
COVID-19 beyond the spread of the virus, in search of potential
vaccines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to develop a platform of
networked and centralized web-accessible data archives to store multimodal data
related to SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 and make them broadly available and
accessible to the world-wide scientific community to expedite research in this
area due to the urgent nature of the COVID-19 pandemic. The data will include
clinical-evaluation (symptoms), vitals (spirometry, temperature, respiration
rate, heart rate, etc.), demographic, geolocation, electrocardiography (EKG),
computed tomography (CT), X-rays, position emission tomography (PET) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data as well as other data that may be
collecting in the coming months. By leveraging previous work in developing data
repositories and archival capabilities at the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging at the
University of Southern California, COVID-ARC (COVID-19 Data Archive) aims to
provide an efficient and secure data-repository platform that facilitates data
access and analysis. COVID-ARC provides tools for researchers to visualize and
analyze various types of data as well as a website with tools for training,
announcements, virtual information sessions, and a knowledgebase wherein
researchers post questions and receive answers from the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.