* 2027701
* In-Cell Discovery of Functional RNA Tertiary Structures
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Kevin Weeks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

RNA molecules play special roles in cells because they encode information both
in the linear sequence of nucleobases (abbreviated A, C, G, and U) that make up
an RNA strand and by forming intra-strand interactions. These intra-strand
interactions result in "secondary" structures stabilized primarily by Watson-
Crick base pairing, which can now be readily measured in many cases, and
"tertiary" structures that result in complex and compact three-dimensional
shapes, which have been very difficult to measure. Measuring tertiary structures
is important, however, as they affect how RNA molecules function in cells,
including in synthesis of proteins, in regulation of how much protein is made
from a particular gene, and in other important tasks. Until recently, it was
nearly impossible to detect most RNA tertiary structures, especially in living
cells. Through this project, a new technology will be created to identify sites
of RNA tertiary structures. Within the context of this project, this technology
will be used to understand how tertiary structures in RNA molecules influence
their functions in human cells. This project also incorporates undergraduate
researchers with the goal of inspiring these students to become informed about
how research creates knowledge and enriches our understanding of cellular
processes, both of which are important for scientific advances, economic
development, and innovations in technology and quality of life. Novel RNA
pockets will be explored through a completely undergraduate-driven research
endeavor, the Undergraduate Transcriptome Project. Both undergraduate and
graduate students who participate in this research are expected to achieve
leadership roles in STEM fields in industry and academics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit and overarching vision of this
research project is to create a rigorous, easily implemented technology that
specifically detects true higher order tertiary structures in large RNAs in
living cells. Although it is clear that many RNAs form complex structures and
that these structures have important consequences for cellular function, there
are only a handful of known distinct classes of motifs that form true tertiary
structures. By discovering RNA tertiary structures in living cells, this project
will define numerous new functions of RNA molecules. This research project will
use a recently developed chemical reagent that specifically detects higher order
tertiary interactions in RNA molecules. These conformations only occur at sites
where multiple RNA helices pack together to create an electronegative RNA
pocket. These rare but highly diagnostic sites are detected efficiently by the
small, positively charged reagent, revealing sites of tertiary interactions
(termed T-sites). This technology will be used to examine T-sites across the
human transcriptome in living cells and to understand a preliminary finding that
relationships exist between T-sites and translational regulation. The technology
will be advanced to the point where it can be widely used by non-experts.
Results of this work are expected to be multi-fold. First, T-sites are expected
to be strongly correlated with nexuses of gene regulation. Second, many new
classes of RNA motifs will be discovered, substantially extending the important,
but relatively few, classes of RNA tertiary structures currently known. Third,
subsequent biophysical and functional studies will support numerous new
discoveries regarding the fundamental principles of RNA structure and folding
and their impacts on processes that regulate gene expression. This project is
supported by the Molecular Biophysics and Genetic Mechanism Clusters of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.