* 2027943
* Biosynthetic Pathways with Artificial Metalloenzymes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* John Hartwig, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,172,955.00

Microbes can make organic molecules with complex structures. Many of these
molecules or their analogs are central ingredients in a variety of products, but
the diversity of these molecules is limited by the range of the reactions
catalyzed by natural enzymes. Engineering cells to produce artificial
metalloenzymes (AMEs) will expand the range of possible reactions. Novel
biosynthetic pathways will be created by complementing natural enzymes with
AMEs. Graduate students and postdoctoral associates will be trained in this
convergent field of synthetic chemistry and synthetic biology. Outreach
activities to encompass topics related to artificial biosynthesis will be
offered to underserved high school students and teachers, as well as to K-8
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon the
general concept of creating artificial biosynthetic pathways containing
artificial metalloenzymes and preliminary results showing the feasibility of
creating these pathways in bacteria. We will increase the numbers and types of
microorganisms that can host the chemistry catalyzed by artificial
metalloenzymes to expand the range of natural products that react with AMEs;
expand the types of metallo-cofactors that are incorporated intracellularly into
AMEs to increase the scope of unnatural reactions in these pathways; and combine
the abiotic chemistry with natural biosynthesis in varying sequences.
Specifically, we will 1) introduce AMEs into Streptomyces strains and test
activity on heterologously produced terpenes and polyketides; 2) incorporate new
cofactors into AMEs expressed in E. coli and Streptomyces; 3) broaden the scope
of transformations catalyzed by AMEs in the artificial biosynthetic pathways to
encompass abiotic C-H bond functionalizations; 4) create pathways in which the
unnatural chemistry occurs in the middle of the artificial biosynthesis; and 5)
elucidate the pathways for diazo-containing small molecules. By doing so, we
will generate the fundamental knowledge and demonstrate guiding principles to
create artificial biosynthetic pathways that convert simple carbon sources to
valuable unnatural products in whole microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.