* 2027525
* RAPID: Education, Work, and Life during COVID-19: Supporting Families at Home with Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Julie Kientz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2022
* USD 124,548.00

In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, American families are rapidly adapting
to new conditions that disrupt how we work, perform childcare, and conduct
education. Workforce, education, and social experiences are suddenly
transformed, as millions of families are forced to take ownership of their
children's education while working full-time or enduring hardships of new
unemployment. Technology’s role is crucial, as this new social distancing
context requires everything outside the family unit to now be performed
remotely, over computer networks. This research project will develop
understanding of the effects of these extraordinary circumstances on family
life, educational outcomes, and work. The research team will investigate how
digital technologies offer solutions, negatively impact, and perpetuate or
reduce the digital divide and other disparities. To help families mitigate the
negative effects of COVID-19 on society and the economy, the team will develop
guidance—involving technologies in the home—about how to simultaneously support
remote education, remote work, and family life. The research team will regularly
communicate this guidance through blogging and social media targeted to
families, educators, and technology designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute empirical understanding of the experiences of families
during COVID-19 social distancing and other times of disruption, in conjunction
with computing and information by (1) collecting and analyzing data about how
families’ social and educational experiences are transformed by social
distancing in the COVID-19 pandemic; (2) investigating aspects of technology
designs that are helpful and unhelpful to families and their relationships to
social and economic institutions during COVID-19; (3) designing and discovering
new technologies to support work-life balance, education, and family
connectedness; and (4) deriving theories and models of how families in a
pandemic crisis adapt technologies for distance learning and workforce
participation. Thirty diverse families--each with at least one child between the
ages of 3 and 13--will be remotely engaged in interviews, surveys, and design
activities. The Asynchronous Remote Communities (ARC) method will be used to
collect experiences and co-design new technologies. This method can benefit
participants through increased reflection, social support, and resource-sharing.
The team will develop new design artifacts based on remote co-design sessions
with families. The work will contribute new methodologies, as the researchers
adapt the ARC method for use with families with younger children in rapidly
evolving situations. The research will be informed by, and potentially extend
and further validate theoretical frameworks, including strength of weak ties,
joint media engagement, family resilience theory, and funds of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.