* 2027168
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC:Conjugate Experiment to Investigate Sources of High-Latitude Magnetic Perturbations in Coupled Solar Wind-Magnetosphere-Ionosphere-Ground System
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Calvin Robert Clauer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 794,406.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work. This project is to (1) operate,
maintain, and expand a high-latitude array of autonomous instruments to support
research of the wider geospace research community into the sources of inter-
hemispheric asymmetries, (2) conduct focused science investigations to develop
understanding of the sources of high-latitude magnetic perturbations in the
multi-scale, global, solar wind - magnetosphere – ionosphere – ground (SWMIG)
system, including during the 2021 solar eclipse and (3) conduct education and
outreach to facilitate broader access to polar research efforts. These
objectives will be achieved through an unsurpassed network of closely-spaced
magnetically-conjugate magnetometers in Antarctica and in the Northern
Hemisphere near the 40 degree magnetic meridian, most of which have already been
deployed. This project expands an existing Virginia Tech/Technical University of
Denmark partnership to include the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), Space Science
Institute, and UCLA. Graduate and undergraduate students will be supported,
including a special research program to engage students from minority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of surface magnetic field
perturbations are important to remotely sense and characterize the SWMIG
phenomena that affect technology – such as geomagnetically induced currents –
and thereby to develop physical models and forecast space weather impacts.
However, understanding the sources of magnetic perturbations in the coupled
SWMIG system is challenging due to their simultaneous dependence on driving
conditions, ionospheric conductivity and ground conductivity. We seek to address
the following science questions, "How do magnetosphere-ionosphere current
systems couple to high-latitude ground magnetic perturbations? What roles do
current system spatial scale, inhomogeneous ionospheric conductivity, and
inhomogeneous ground conductivity play?" By combining British Antarctic Survey,
Technical University of Denmark, and NSF-supported magnetometers, a new combined
array will provide unprecedented coverage throughout the auroral zone/cusp in
both hemispheres simultaneously. These data enable novel experiments to isolate
the respective contributions of driver spatial/temporal scale, ionospheric
conductivity, and local ground conductivity in the generation of ground magnetic
perturbations. This project includes field work in the Antarctic, supported by
both the U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) and the BAS. USAP and BAS have agreed to
support maintenance visits to receiver site locations and to support the
retrograde of equipment at the end of the program. BAS and USAP will work
collaboratively to deploy an additional instrument to a logistically feasible
location that best serves the project. The USAP and BAS have agreed to support
this program logistically, with the first field deployment year to be determined
after the uncertainties related to the coronavirus pandemic are
resolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.