* 2027410
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Diversity of Bacterial Flagellation and Motility Through Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey Guasto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2023
* USD 312,457.00

The ability of bacteria to swim crucial to survival. Swimming is made possible
by rotating thin filaments called flagella. There are many different ways that
flagella are arranged on bacteria, and many different movement patterns, all of
which enable swimming. Despite the success of bacteria swimming, few of these
mechanisms are well understood. The objective of this project is to determine
how the arrangements and flexible mechanics of flagella combine to produce
differences in bacterial motility. The results of this project will have
numerous potential societal impacts, since motility enables bacteria to spread
through water supplies, and to establish microbiomes or infections in humans.
This work will have important effects at multiple levels. At the cellular level,
better understanding bacterial motility will help us understand cell resource
uptake. At the ecosystem scale, motility affects the food web. The results of
this work could lead to new approaches to mediate bacterial infection, further
our understanding of bacterial evolution, and inspire biomimetic microrobots
with enhanced functionality. In addition, the award will support outreach
programs that teach the public about bacterial locomotion and its importance to
society through health and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial
flagellar motility has largely been relegated to two idealized paradigms for
uni- and multiflagellated cells, respectively. However, mounting evidence
suggests that bacteria exhibit a plethora of flagellar arrangements and
associated motility patterns that do not fit into the existing paradigms. It is
not understood how flagellar motility patterns emerge from variations in
arrangements and the flexible mechanics of flagella. This work will develop a
mechanistic understanding of the vast understudied diversity of flagellar
arrangements and motility patterns by linking them to the geometry and mechanics
of flagella. This biomechanical understanding has been hindered by a lack of
quantitative imaging of flagella, limited ability to experimentally perturb
flagellar properties, and overly simplified models. We will overcome these
challenges by using unique imaging capabilities, which enable data-driven and
experimentally validated numerical modeling and hypothesis testing.
Experimentally, this work incorporates advanced high-speed video microscopy
techniques to capture the time-resolved kinematics of 10-nanometer diameter
flagella, pushing the envelope of existing quantification methods for fluid-
structure interactions. Numerically, this work advances the state-of-the-art in
modeling elastohydrodynamics of actuated filaments. This work will establish a
unique data set comprising the mechanical properties of flagella and the
kinematics of bacterial motility from diverse species. It will use modeling to
determine the physical mechanisms leading to observed motility patterns, and
combine physical and numerical experiments to elucidate and classify the
origins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.