* 2027169
* RAPID: Development of Rapid Point of Care SARS-CoV-2 Detection System
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Robert Chin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This award is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Biosensing Program in the
Division of Chemical Bioengineering Environmental and Transport Systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for a rapid coronavirus test platform is critical
for confronting the COVID-19 pandemic which is pervasive throughout the world at
the moment. The current lab testing time for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes
the disease COVID-19, could be up to several days. The delays associated with
such testing have already contributed to substantial lag times for diagnosis and
data acquisition; therefore, urgent action is needed for the development of
sensitive, rapid and simple-to-use platforms. The PI is developing one-pot
sample-to-answer assay automated process that would detect the SARS coronavirus
and yield information and process flows that prove to be generally informative
for creating ergonomic point-of-care diagnostic platforms. The modular design of
the method preserves rapid assay programmability for navigating constraints such
as evolving viral genomes and low resource field deployment. Further
translations of this foundational technology will aid detection efforts for
other established and emerging pathogens such as Influenza and Dengue viruses.
Development of the method involves both graduate and undergraduates students
with research, development, marketing and commercialization efforts. Assays are
being developed in conjunction with the University of Texas at Austin Freshman
Research Initiative where undergraduate students from many backgrounds are
involved in cutting edge research from their first days on
campus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ellington Lab at the University of Texas at
Austin and Fabrico Technology Inc. are developing a complete and rapid point-of-
care detection system for the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The system provides accurate
detection of the virus in a test format that can be performed in both clinical
and field settings. The SARS-CoV-2 assay uses multiplex loop-mediated isothermal
amplification integrated with a sequence-parsing probe system designed using
principles of oligonucleotide strand displacement and a Boolean network to
compute an accurate positive readout only when all intended viral signatures are
identified in a single reaction. The modular design preserves rapid assay
programability for navigating both biological and logistical constraints such as
evolving viral genomes and low resource field
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.