* 2027426
* RAPID: Trust in Public Health Information During a Pandemic
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Bo Xie, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2022
* USD 194,774.00

This research in crisis informatics will provide evidence of how the general
population is reacting to the COVID-19 pandemic and share the findings broadly
with healthcare workers to help them limit the negative effects on society and
encourage citizens to take appropriate actions to reduce the spread of the
disease. Over the longer term, the results will contribute to improvements in
our preparedness for future pandemics. It will increase our understanding of the
role that social media plays in public understanding of and response to a
pandemic, and also will advance work on message framing within health
informatics and health communication. Some of the results could help society and
government prepare for potential contingencies such as bioterrorism and other
unexpected large-scale emergencies. During a global health crisis, public health
interventions such as quarantine and isolation can limit the spread of the
virus, reducing morbidity and mortality while reducing the impact on the health
care system. Health education interventions, particularly via social media, are
critical for ensuring that the general public heeds recommendations from
experts. Given the generally low e-health literacy of older adults, and in light
of the increased impact that pandemics have on older adults, as is particularly
the case for COVID-19, ensuring that older adults and their caregivers
understand and trust public health information is critical for saving
lives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This mixed-method study will allow quick and safe
collection of data from people currently experiencing a pandemic, to understand
the factors that influence trust in current public health information
interventions in a real setting. Its online data collection will not risk the
health of researchers or participants, seeking a stratified sample including a
significant number of older adults and employing a robust recruitment strategy.
The work will be done in three rigorous but swift stages: (1) a survey,
including a battery of previously validated instruments along with open-ended
questions specific to the current COVID-19 pandemic; (2) an experiment to
compare the effectiveness of different health messages; and (3) a set of
recommendations that can guide public health officials in deciding how to tailor
messages for particular audiences based on factors such as age and e-health
literacy. Human subjects perform differently in real versus hypothetical
scenarios, so the best time to evaluate how people react to public health
interventions during a pandemic is when a very significant one is in process.
COVID-19 represents a rare opportunity to collect data from people while they
are experiencing the phenomenon under investigation. This project will identify
factors that influence trust in public health information, and how public health
information interventions can be tailored to be effective for people of various
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.