* 2027970
* RAPID: Understanding the Transmission and Prevention of COVID-19 with Biomedical Knowledge Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Fei Wang, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,966.00

COVID-19 has been a global pandemic affecting millions of people across hundreds
of countries. Great efforts have been devoted to the research on the
understanding of the transmission and prevention of COVID-19. Staying up-to-date
with the latest research is crucial to the researchers and practitioners.
However, the rapid growing of the number of the relevant literature makes this a
challenging task. This project proposes to build a COVID 19 specific knowledge
graph to facilitate the acquisition of COVID-19 related knowledge. The knowledge
graph will also be continuously updated with the information extracted from
latest biomedical literature with natural language processing techniques. A
software pipeline that integrates and makes the knowledge graph publicly
available as a web service with user friendly interface supporting information
retrieval and question answering. Interactive visualization will be provided for
the users to explore the knowledge graph and derive the inference paths to
obtain the answers. All associated data and source codes for constructing the
knowledge graph will be made publicly available.

This project constructs a COVID-19 specific knowledge graph by 1) integrating
the existing knowledge bases on biomedical entities from biological, clinical
and epidemiological scales; 2) extracting new knowledge from latest biomedical
literature and enhancing the constructed knowledge graph continuously. Although
the knowledge graph targets COVID-19, the developed pipeline and techniques can
be easily extended to other critical diseases as well. The technical content of
the proposed research will impact public health, biomedical informatics,
computer science and epidemiology. The results of the proposed research will be
incorporated into the classes. Females and underrepresented researchers,
undergraduates and K-12 students, will be actively engaged in the research
effort of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.