* 2027689
* RAPID: Tackling the Psychological Impact of the COVID-19 Crisis
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Munmun De Choudhury, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,871.00

The physical isolation of shelter-in-place, as demanded during the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic, stresses psychological well-being. It pushes people to
connect via social media. While social media platforms enable online connection,
they can sensationalize some narratives and ignore others, fomenting anxiety and
fear. This project will use artificial intelligence to analyze social media data
and model psychological wellbeing, distress, and vulnerability. It will provide
tools to help understand community social anxiety in relationship to nearby
COVID-19 outbreaks. The outcomes of this work have the potential to support
public health organizations in (1) responding to the psychological needs and
demands of communities affected by the COVID-19 crisis in a timely and proactive
fashion; and (2) brainstorming strategies to counter experiences of COVID-19
related anxiety and improve people’s quality of life through resource allocation
and prioritization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess COVID-19
pandemic impacts and improve the nation’s resilience by: (1) developing data-
and theoretically-driven scientific computational methods to identify social
media based linguistic and social network markers associated with COVID-19
crisis-related anxiety, stress, and other downturns in psychological wellbeing
in affected communities within the United States; (2) developing predictive
models to forecast which communities will be most vulnerable to these
psychological downturns; (3) leveraging epidemiological models of disease spread
to derive holistic views of communities’ online activity and their offline
spatiotemporal geographical context in relationship to their proximity to the
virus; (4) conducting a human-centered evaluation; and (5) providing data, an
open-source toolkit, and data-driven presentations of how particular communities
are vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic to support public health workers and the
general public in creating timely and proactive interventions. On the whole,
through the iterative involvement of transdisciplinary domain experts, new
computational artifacts will transform the COVID-19 response, taking into
account the larger sociotechnical context of the
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.