* 2027290
* Collaborative Research: Climate effects on Mn oxidation states in soils and Mn/SOM interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Vitousek, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 506,851.00

This research project seeks to understand the role that the element manganese
(Mn) plays in driving the degradation of soil organic matter (SOM). Mn takes
multiple chemical forms in the soil, depending on oxygen availability and
acidity in the soil; some of these forms are more active in driving the
degradation of SOM than others. This proposed research will use a combination of
high-technology tools to evaluate the forms of Mn, and experiments to evaluate
the interactions of these forms with SOM and with the populations and activity
of soil bacteria and fungi. The project will also afford research training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and opportunities to
broaden participation of members of underrepresented groups in science,
including community outreach to Native Hawaiians.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SOM is
the largest pool of potentially active carbon (C) in the biosphere, but much of
that C turns over slowly because it is chemically recalcitrant and/or physically
protected. Mn can override this recalcitrance, driving SOM breakdown through
multiple pathways that relate to its three oxidation states. This project will
evaluate how the oxidation state of Mn varies as a function of rainfall, and how
the different oxidation states of Mn drive the decomposition of SOM. Fieldwork
will take place on a well-defined precipitation gradient in the Hawaiian
Islands, on which most potential controls of ecosystem processes can be held
relatively constant while climate varies widely (from &lt;300 mm/yr annual
precipitation to &gt;3200 mm/yr) and in well-defined ways; it also draws upon
information from National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and other sites
to evaluate Mn oxidation states and their implications in a broad range of sites
that differ in other factors in addition to precipitation, as a test of the
hypothesis that precipitation is the dominant driver of Mn oxidation states and
its consequences to SOM stability. This project will build upon an ongoing
partnership with a Native Hawaiian community organization (Ulu Mau Puanui [UMP])
that is restoring a traditional agricultural system at the same field sites will
be used in this research project. Scientists and students in this project will
work with UMP to develop curricula and to reach many of the 600+ learners (about
half of whom are Native Hawaiian) who visit the site each year; it will also
collaborate with Native Hawaiian scientists to evaluate the role of Mn in
traditional Hawaiian agricultural systems. The project will include
undergraduate and graduate students who belong to underrepresented groups in
science. Finally, the project will take part in a well-established summer
program at the University of Wyoming to broaden participation of members of
underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.