* 2027438
* RAPID: Analysis of Multiscale Network Models for the Spread of COVID-19
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The current pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has upended the
daily lives of more than a billion people worldwide, and governments are
struggling with the task of responding to the spread of the disease. Uncertainty
in transmission rates and the outcomes of social distancing, "shelter-at-home"
executive orders, and other interventions have created unprecedented challenges
to the United States health care system. This project will address these issues
directly using advanced mathematical modeling from dynamical systems, stochastic
processes, and networks. The mathematical models, which are formulated with the
specific features of COVID-19 in mind, will provide insights that are critical
to people on the front lines who need to make recommendations for intervention
strategies and human-behavior patterns to best mitigate the spread of this
disease in a timely manner. The project will train a postdoctoral scholar, a PhD
student, and two undergraduate students in the research needed to solve these
complex problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The standard approach for epidemic
modeling, at the community scale and larger, is compartmental models in which
individuals are in one of a small number of states (for example, susceptible,
infected, recovered, exposed, latent), with individuals moving between states.
The COVID-19 epidemic can be modeled in this way, with resistance as part of the
dynamics. The simplest examples of such models for large populations are coupled
ordinary differential equations that describe the fraction of a population in
each of the states. To model the stochasticity of infection and latency, models
with self-exciting point processes can be fit to real-world data. This project
compares the dynamical systems and stochastic models of relevance to COVID-19
transmission. The models also incorporate network structure for the transmission
pathways. The project extends prior research on contagions on multilayer
networks by incorporating multiple transmission methods and coupling between the
spread of the contagion itself and human behavior patterns. The project
leverages high-resolution societal mixing patterns in epidemics, as they
influence both (1) observations and demographics of who has been diagnosed with
COVID-19 and (2) who transits the disease, sometimes without being
diagnosed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded with the
Applied Mathematics program and the Computational Mathematics program (Division
of Mathematical Sciences), and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.