* 2027600
* RAPID: Park Usage During Mandated Social Distancing
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Franco Montalto, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,856.00

Comprising a complex network of interconnected subsystems, cities are
particularly vulnerable to pandemics like COVID-19 due to high population
densities and the fact that a single event can trigger cascading effects across
functionally interdependent physical, social, and economic domains. By observing
the behavior of park users, this study focuses attention on the complex and
potentially opposing roles that parks and other natural and engineered forms of
green infrastructure (GI) play in residential neighborhoods of Philadelphia and
New York City during the pandemic. The role of parks is complex because while on
one hand, visits to these sites can build social resilience by promoting social
contact, recreation, leisure, and other psychosocial processes that build trust,
generate place attachment, social support, and feelings of belonging and
empowerment, on the other hand visits to parks could potentially accelerate
spread of this highly contagious disease by creating more person to person
contact and/or transmission of the virus to playground surfaces, benches,
handrails, bike racks or other surfaces. The overarching hypothesis is that as
the pandemic progresses, fewer and fewer people will engage in risky park
behavior, but parks will eventually become havens for homeless who seek social
distance as infection rates rise in shelters and the weather improves through
the spring and summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the national shortage of
COVID-19 testing, swabbing, sampling, and laboratory testing of parks surfaces
is deemed impossible. The focus of this study is instead on the observed
behavior of park users, and documentation of usage patterns that potentially
pose an elevated risk of infection. This goal is approached through
implementation of a novel approach through paid citizen scientists, enabled by
digital technology, and designed to promote economic resilience in the very
neighborhoods to be studied. The work will be conducted over the course of one
full year and contains 12 discreet but interconnected tasks performed in 20-40
strategically selected parks in residential neighborhoods of Philadelphia and
New York City. An Advisory Panel will be formed to help guide the work and
interpret results. The research will advance knowledge in the fields of urban
green infrastructure, citizen science, urban resilience, and social-ecological
systems in the context of an unprecedented international pandemic. The PI has
extensive interdisciplinary research experience in these fields and has worked
collaboratively with governmental and nongovernmental stakeholders in the two
cities before. The research will generate novel data sets regarding public use
of parks as COVID-19 spreads and will search for correlations between these
observations and park and neighborhood characteristics. It will also evaluate
the feasibility with which unemployed urban residents can rapidly become crucial
human "sensors" who collect important fine spatial resolution observations
within these two large cities. The study will generate results of relevance to
urban parks and natural resource managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.