* 2027007
* RAPID: ReCOVER: Accurate Predictions and Resource Allocation for COVID-19 Epidemic Response
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2021
* USD 158,592.00

The recent outbreak of COVID-19 and its world-wide impact calls for urgent
measures to contain the epidemic. Predicting the speed and severity of
infectious diseases like COVID-19 and allocating medical resources appropriately
is central to dealing with epidemics. Epidemics like COVID-19 not only affect
world-wide health, but also have profound economic and social impact. Containing
the epidemic, providing informed predictions and preventing future epidemics is
essential for the global population to resume their day-to-day work and travel
without fear. Shortage of resources puts undue stress on healthcare system
further risking health of the community. Preparedness and better management of
available resources would require specific predictions at the level of cities
and counties around the world rather than solely at the level of countries. The
project will provide a predictive understanding of the spread of the virus by
developing machine learning based computational models to study the transmission
of the virus and evaluate the impact of various interventions on disease spread.
The project will learn infection prediction models for COVID-19 considering the
following. (i) Predicting at state/county/city-level rather than country-level
as finer granularity is essential in planning and managing resources. (ii) How
infectious a person is changes over time. Learning the model through observed
data will help in understanding of the temporal nature of the virality. (iii) At
such granularity travel is a significant reason for the spread and needs to be
accounted for. (iv) Available data needs to be “corrected” by finding the number
of underlying unreported cases that are not observed and yet influence the
epidemic dynamics. The project will also solve the resource allocation problem
based on the prediction – for instance if a certain number of masks will be
available next week in a certain state, how should they be distributed across
different hospitals in the state (which hospitals and how many in each
state)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed project ReCOVER will use a novel fine-
grained, heterogeneous infection rate model to perform predictions at various
granularities (hospital/airports, city, state, country) while accounting for
human mobility. ReCOVER will integrate data from various sources to build highly
accurate models for prediction of the epidemic across the world at various
granularity. Due to the ability to capture temporal heterogeneity in infection
rate, the approach has the potential to provide insights into infectious nature
of COVID-19 which are not fully understood yet. The project will address the
issue of unreported cases through temporal analysis of historical infections and
correct the data. The right granularities of modeling will be automatically
identified, e.g., when to model a state over its cities to trade-off precision
for higher reliability in predictions. The proposed project also formulates and
solves a resource allocation problem that can guide the response to contain the
epidemic and prevent future outbreaks. This is provided by optimal solutions to
resource allocation over a network where each node (representing a region) has a
function that captures probabilistic response. While the project obtains data
with COVID-19 in consideration, the model and algorithms developed under the
project are applicable to a wide class of contagious diseases. The project will
culminate into an interactive customizable tool that can be used to perform
predictions and resource management by a qualified user such as a government
entity tasked with managing the epidemic response. The data and code will also
be shared with research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.