* 2027000
* Collaborative Research: Cellular Metamaterials that Localize Stress - Towards a Topological Protection against Fracture
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Joseph Labuz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 351,094.00

One of the main challenges in designing engineering structures that can
withstand severe loading conditions is the development of materials that can
intelligently manage stresses to avoid or retard the onset and propagation of
fracture. Most traditional approaches towards this goal involve improvements in
the microstructural composition of the material to increase toughness. This
award revisits fracture in the context of lattice materials featuring a cellular
architecture, where protection can be sought not only by adjusting the material
composition but also through changes in the morphology of the cellular
structure. The focus will be on a special class of lattice materials in which it
may be possible to concentrate the stresses due to external loading at known,
desirable locations, providing the ability to prevent or delay the onset of
damage processes. The knowledge gained from this research will contribute
towards the longevity and reliability of structural systems across engineering
applications, from infrastructural engineering to the aerospace industry. The
project will also support design of innovative demonstration kits on stress
analysis for undergraduate students and demonstrations of basic principles of
structural analysis for high-school students and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate the
potential of topology in cellular metamaterials in managing internal stresses
and protecting against fracturing. The project is centered on Maxwell lattices
that can contain topologically polarized states, including topologically
protected states of self-stress along internal domain walls or interfaces. When
these lattices are loaded and deformed, the stress tends to focus predominantly
on these interfaces, even in the presence of cracks in the domain. As a result,
the detrimental stress concentration and subsequent fracturing, which is
typically observed at crack tips can be avoided or significantly retarded. The
project will assess how this property, which depends on the bulk architecture of
the lattice, is preserved in going from ideal lattices endowed with perfect
hinges to realistic lattices featuring structural ligaments. This objective will
be achieved through an experimental characterization based on digital image
correlation accompanied by theoretical development that will extend the
topological fracture protection to the continuum limit. Efforts will be also
devoted to determining how deep into the topological protection the material
itself is affected by failure, an assessment of which will be sought
experimentally using acoustic emission monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.