* 2027094
* RAPID: Evolution of Public Risk Perception and Mental Models Regarding COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Andrew Parker, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,717.00

In crises such as the emergence of COVID-19, the public is a critical response
partner. Novel threats are concerning to the public, but often poorly
understood, with misunderstanding leading to inappropriate reactions. Clarifying
when and why misperceptions occur is important because resulting behavior can
contribute to disease spread, supply shortages, and unnecessary health-care
system burden. Central are individual mental models, intuitive theories made up
of related beliefs or perceptions individuals have about a risk, which may or
may not align with scientific consensus. Mental models form a foundation for how
people conceive risk, structure decisions, and their risk-related behaviors.
This project follows individuals’ risk perceptions, mental models, and risk
behaviors over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, capitalizing on a time-
sensitive opportunity to push forward the science on public risk responses to
crises, within a concrete public health context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal is to longitudinally track risk perceptions, mental models, and
risk-related behaviors within individuals over the course of the COVID-19
pandemic. Secondary goals are to develop new methodological approaches to
process and analyze large-sample mental models data and engage experts on our
approach and needs for larger infrastructure. The project leverages existing
data and planned survey data collection, building out a longitudinal assessment
to be able to capture changes in risk perceptions, mental models, and behaviors.
The surveys use freelisting, a simple free-association technique from
anthropology, to gather a large-sample picture of people’s risk mental models.
The research team employs automated lexical analysis tools to process the data
and network analytic techniques to map out the mental models. The team uses
regression analysis to examine relationships among mental models, risk
perceptions, behavior, and their change over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.