* 2027376
* Engaging Students in Scientific Practices: Evaluating Evidence and Explanation in Secondary Earth and Space Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Doug Lombardi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,501,288.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will develop, implement, test, and revise instructional
approaches and materials for high school students that focus on the links
between scientific evidence and alternative explanations of phenomena relating
to Earth and space education. Students will examine alternative explanations for
natural phenomena associated with extreme weather events, freshwater resource
availability, and related topics in learning how to evaluate scientifically
valid lines of evidence and explanation. Students will learn to construct
diagrams showing the links between explanatory models of natural phenomena and
lines of evidence, and then evaluate the plausibility of various alternative
explanations for events. It is expected that engagement in these activities will
help students gain proficiency in model-based reasoning, critical thinking,
planning and analyzing scientifically valid investigations, constructing
plausible explanations, engaging in collaborative argumentation, and critically
evaluating scientific information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 4-year Design and
Development project will examine use of Model-Evidence Link (MEL) diagrams that
are intended to help students cognitively construct mental scaffolds that assist
their engagement in the practices of critical evaluation, plausibility
appraisal, and knowledge construction related to science topics that are
considered by some as controversial. Prior research has demonstrated the
potential educational outcomes of using MEL diagrams, but this project will
extend the previous work by examining an approach where students construct their
own MEL diagrams (build-a-MELs, or baMELs). The project will examine the use of
both pre-constructed MELs and baMELs for effectiveness in promoting student
engagement in scientific reasoning and practices. The project will employ
design-based research methodologies in pursuing answers to three research
questions: (1) Do baMEL activities tested in multiple high school classroom
settings promote critical evaluation, plausibility reappraisal, and
 scientifically accurate knowledge construction about controversial Earth and
space science topics? (2) How do these additional baMELs differ from pre-
constructed MELs in promoting critical evaluation, plausibility reappraisal, and
knowledge construction? And (3) To what extent does repeated use of both pre-
constructed MELs and baMELs result in student engagement of scientific practices
(i.e., asking critical questions, using model-based reasoning, planning and
analyzing scientifically valid investigations, constructing plausible
explanations, engaging in collaborative argumentation, and critically evaluating
scientific information)? The project will engage high school students taking
Earth and space classes in selected schools of Georgia, New Jersey, and within
Philadelphia. Teacher professional development opportunities associated with the
project will include summer institutes, classroom supports, and mentoring
sessions.