* 2027555
* SWQU: NextGen Space Weather Modeling Framework Using Data, Physics and Uncertainty Quantification
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gabor Toth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,860,000.00

This project will initiate development of the NextGen Space Weather Modeling
Framework (NextGen SWMF) by bringing together experts in space and plasma
physics, data assimilation, uncertainty quantification and cyberinfrastructure.
Space weather results from solar activity that can impact the space environment
of the Earth and damage our technological systems as well as expose pilots and
astronauts to harmful radiation. Extreme events could knock out the power grid
with a recovery time of months and cause about $2 trillion damage. Much of the
impacts can be avoided or mitigated by timely and reliable space weather
forecast. The NextGen Space Weather Modeling Framework will employ computational
models from the surface of the Sun to the surface of Earth in combination with
assimilation of observational data to provide optimal probabilistic space
weather forecasting. The model will run efficiently on the next generation of
supercomputers to predict space weather about one day or more before the impact
occurs. The project will concentrate on forecasting major space weather events
generated by coronal mass ejections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current space weather
prediction employs first-principles and/or empirical models. While these provide
useful information, their accuracy, reliability and forecast window need major
improvements. Data assimilation has the potential to significantly improve model
performance, as has been successfully done in terrestrial weather forecast.
However, to allow for the sparsity of satellite observations, different data
assimilation methods have to be employed. NextGen SWMF model will start from the
Sun with an ensemble of simulations that span the uncertain observational and
model parameters. Using real time and past observations, the model will
strategically down-select to a high performing subset. Next, the down-selected
ensemble will be extended by varying uncertain parameters and the simulation
continued to the next data assimilation point. The final ensemble will provide a
probabilistic forecast of the space weather impacts. Finding the optimal
algorithm that produces the best prediction with minimal uncertainty is a
complex and very challenging task that requires developing, implementing and
perfecting novel data assimilation and uncertainty quantification methods. To
make these ensemble simulations run faster than real time, the most expensive
parts of the model need to run efficiently on the current and future
supercomputers, which employ graphical processing units (GPUs) in addition to
the traditional multi-core CPUs. The main product of this project will be the
Michigan Sun-To-Earth Model with Quantified Uncertainty and Data Assimilation
(MSTEM-QUDA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made as a part of the joint
NSF-NASA pilot program on Next Generation Software for Data-driven Models of
Space Weather with Quantified Uncertainties (SWQU). It is supported by NSF
Divisions of Astronomical Sciences, Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences,
Mathematical Sciences, and Physics. All software developed as a result of this
award will be made available by the awardee free of charge for non-commercial
use; the software license will permit modification and redistribution of the
software free of charge for non-commercial use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.