* 2027237
* NSF-BSF: Exploiting the evolution of odorant discrimination in ants to decipher the olfactory code
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jocelyn Millar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2024
* USD 630,927.00

One of the properties of life is the ability to detect and respond to
environmental stimuli, which is facilitated in animals by sophisticated sensory
systems such as vision, audition, and olfaction. However, compared to vision and
audition, large gaps exist in our understanding of olfactory space and the
evolution of odor discrimination. This project investigates the interplay
between odors and their specific receptors by using ants as a new olfactory
model system to help decipher the olfactory code. Ants depend on their olfactory
sense to communicate with each other and to differentiate between colony members
or non-members. For this purpose, they use chemicals that occur on their body
surface and that provide a large vocabulary of chemical “words”. Their
importance in ants is reflected in the large repertoire of olfactory receptors
that are sensitive to these compounds. Discrimination bioassays, analyses of
olfactory receptor tuning to these compounds, analyses of receptor evolution and
a structure/function analysis of the olfactory receptors will decipher how
discrimination of compounds can be improved at the receptor level. The outcome
of this research will help fill a gap in our fundamental understanding of
olfaction and communication through olfaction. The project will be used to train
undergraduate and graduate students as well as high-school students from
underrepresented groups in modern approaches of behavioral analysis and
experimentation. An educational game about olfactory discrimination will be
produced that can be integrated into classroom lessons for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms of odorant
discrimination is still a challenging problem in the sensory physiology of
animal behavior that includes the receptor level and the processing of olfactory
information in higher brain centers. This project focuses on mechanisms of
odorant discrimination at the receptor level and uses the compound group of
cuticular hydrocarbons for this purpose. Cuticular hydrocarbons occur as complex
mixtures of long-chain hydrocarbons on the body surface of almost all insects
and are used in many important contexts, including mate communication and colony
discrimination, which require classification of individuals based on their
cuticular hydrocarbon profiles. In social insects, discrimination against non-
colony members is especially important to avoid any form of colony exploitation.
Therefore, strong selection on these discrimination abilities is expected in
social insects. The rich olfactory receptor repertoire in ants will be exploited
to identify key receptors in the discrimination of cuticular hydrocarbons.
Tuning curves of these hydrocarbon sensitive olfactory receptors will be
determined and compared. These analyses will be combined with bioassays to
determine differences in the discrimination of individual hydrocarbon compounds.
The abundance of cuticular hydrocarbon sensitive olfactory receptors in the
receptor phylogeny of ants, and the presence of many closely related olfactory
receptors following gene duplications, provide the foundation of
structure/function analyses. The combination of functional analyses of ligand
specificity of closely related olfactory receptors with the three-dimensional
reconstruction of the receptor molecules will establish how molecular sequence
changes lead to the expansion of olfactory space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.