* 2027208
* CloudLab Phase III: Expanding the Frontiers of Cloud Computing Through World-Class Community Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kuang-Ching Wang, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 9,000,000.00

Cloud technologies underpin many of the apps and computing services that we use
every day, including social networking, online commerce, email, video
conferencing, and many more. To be able to do research that drives forward the
fundamental architecture of the cloud, scientists need an environment in which
they can experiment with the primary building blocks of the cloud: compute
power, storage, and networks. CloudLab provides an environment where researchers
can build their own clouds, observing and changing how they operate all the way
to the bottom layers of software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CloudLab is a large
facility, consisting, as of the start of this award, of more than 1,800 servers
hosted at the University of Utah, Clemson University, and the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. These servers include cutting-edge compute (such as several
different processor architectures, graphics processing units, and field
programmable gate arrays), networking (OpenFlow, user-programmable switching),
and storage (hard drives, solid state drives) technologies. This phase III award
will support the expansion of this facility by several hundred servers to meet
high demand. It will also add new technologies, such as Internet of Things
devices, programmable network cards, and non-volatile random access memory,
which will in turn support research on data-intensive computing and computing at
the edge of the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CloudLab is available to
researchers who work on the fundamentals of cloud computing. These users do
research in areas such as networking, security, and databases; in turn, this
work has broad impact, as these are the fundamental technologies upon which we
build things such as smart cities, telehealth, online education, and other
socially important computer services. Because it is offered at no cost for
research and education to academic users, it acts as a level playing field on
which institutions large and small, and those with many resources and those with
few, can conduct work on an equal footing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CloudLab can be
found online at https://cloudlab.us/, which is the primary interface through
which research users interact with the facility, making it accessible from
anywhere. This award will support continued operation of the facility, including
the aforementioned hardware expansion, development of new features, and user
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.