* 2027610
* Collaborative Proposal: Developmental Mechanisms of African American Ethnic and Racial Identity During the Transition to Adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Enrique Neblett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 260,821.00

This project will examine the multifaceted ways in which African American ethnic
identity and racial identity (ERI) - the personal significance and meaning of
race and ethnicity to an individual - shapes the association between racial
discrimination experiences and biopsychosocial development during the transition
to adulthood. Specific aims of the study are to investigate whether ERI
mitigates or worsens the association between racial discrimination and
development as well as identify mechanisms by which ERI influences development
during the transition to adulthood. This project will improve understanding of
how ERI operates and the role social context plays in the associations between
racial discrimination and development. The project will also address theoretical
debates about the presumed positive impact of ERI. Developmental outcomes during
the transition to adulthood will be assessed using questionnaires and
physiological stress reactivity tests. Broader impacts are significant, because
findings can be used to improve the social and psychological well-being of
vulnerable youth. Moreover, findings can potentially support and further
evidence-based prevention-intervention efforts aimed at fostering positive youth
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Racial discrimination constitutes a
significant risk to the healthy development of African American youth during the
transition to adulthood. Some evidence suggests that ERI protects against the
harmful effects of racial discrimination, but there have been few systematic
attempts to disentangle mixed findings. Participants will be African American
young adults attending a southeastern, predominantly White institution and a
mid-Atlantic historically Black college/university. Students will complete a
series of questionnaires assessing key study variables followed by two
laboratory challenges, once a year, for three consecutive years. Autonomic
reactivity (as indexed by cardiovascular psychophysiology) will be assessed
during the laboratory challenges. The central questions of the study are whether
the protective or vulnerability function of ERI is influenced by the social
context in which the youth are embedded and whether the impact of ERI on
biopsychosocial development can be explained by coping skills, self-esteem, and
perceptions of racial discrimination. Key hypotheses are: 1) ERI will act as a
vulnerability factor in the link between racial discrimination and development
in contexts with lower levels of diversity; 2) Initial levels of racial
discrimination will lead to changes in ERI, which, in turn, will be associated
with changes in development; and 3) Racism appraisals and coping will explain
the association between ERI and changes in development during the transition to
adulthood. Hypotheses will be tested using latent growth curve modeling. These
results will be used to inform recommendations for the development of a
contextually-tailored pilot ERI intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.