* 2027611
* RAPID: Factors Contributing To Sequence Conservation in the SARS-CoV-2 Genome
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Andrey Grigoriev, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2024
* USD 188,253.00

A novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in Hubei, China in December 2019 and
has since spread rapidly to become a global pandemic. There is a critical need
for fundamental research on the biology of this virus and its interactions with
the human host to stem the spread of the disease and mitigate its devastating
impacts on the global human population. The research supported through this
RAPID award will enhance knowledge of how this virus evolves, and it may provide
vital clues about its interactions with the human host. Previous research has
shown that a critical region of the viral genome is highly conserved, harboring
very few mutations compared to the rest of the genome. Exploring the underlying
basis for this sequence conservation will reveal new information on factors that
could influence the spread, diagnostics and treatment of SARS-CoV-2. The project
also offers training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, and
will support development of a web-based tool for the community to study viral
genome evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has identified a region of the
SARS-Cov-2 genome, which includes the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), which
has extremely high conservation at the nucleotide level. This finding suggests
that selection is acting to maintain sequence motifs in this region, possibly
pointing to structural constraints on the RdRp RNA or RNA-mediated interactions
between the virus and host. The project will explore a range of hypotheses about
selection factors, including noncoding RNAs, RNA secondary structure and RNA
binding sites for host proteins, among others, that could account for the
sequence conservation. The project will also attempt a study relating these
factors to human susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2, if access is gained to patient
data on genome variation and corresponding infection severity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.