* 2027455
* Towards Mechanical Resonators With Zero Leakage Using Elastic Metastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Raj Kumar Pal, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 312,223.00

This grant will support research to generate new knowledge related to mechanical
resonators, promoting the frontiers of technology and advancing national
prosperity. Examples of mechanical vibrators include communication devices,
vibration isolators and energy harvesting devices. Existing resonators suffer
from intrinsic limitations due to leakage of energy into the surrounding
structure and offer limited or no means to release energy on demand. This
research will introduce and investigate a class of artificially engineered
structures, known as metastructures, that can achieve zero energy leakage. It
will also investigate the possibility of confining and releasing energy by
applying a force. These novel mechanical resonantors will open new avenues for
elastic wave-based computation and signal processing, with potential
applications in robotics and Internet of Things devices. Therefore, results from
this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society. Furthermore, the
accompanying educational and outreach activities will help broaden participation
of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the possibility
of achieving mechanical resonators that have zero leakage, are defect-
insensitive and can confine and release energy on demand using metastructures.
Current designs suffer from the fact that they leak energy into the surrounding
structure and are unable to release energy on demand. The research will overcome
these limitations by drawing inspiration from two recent advances in wave
physics: the demonstration of electromagnetic bound modes in the continuum
(BICs) and topologically protected elastic waves that enable defect-insensitive
energy transport. It will test the hypothesis that exploiting the symmetry and
topology of the dispersion surfaces can lead to topologically protected BICs in
elastic media. The research will use a combination of analytical calculations
based on the plane wave expansion method, numerical simulations using finite
element analyses and experimental measurements on fabricated samples by using
laser Doppler vibrometry to measure the displacement field. Metastructures of
increasing complexity, i.e., beams, plates, shells and three-dimensional
architected solids, will be introduced and investigated. The results of this
research are applicable across a wide spectrum of length scales and will
translate across disciplines to acoustic, electromagnetic and plasmonic
metastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.