* 2027569
* GEM: Developing a Highly Predictable Canonical Geomagnetic Index to Gauge Space Weather
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Joseph Borovsky, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 359,679.00

Geomagnetic indices are sensitive to diverse current systems, such as
magnetospheric convection, auroral activity, and cross-polar-cap current. They
are constructed from measurements, such as magnetic fields from ground
magnetometers, and are used to characterize and predict geomagnetic activity.
Magnetospheric activity, including geomagnetic storms, occurs in reaction to the
solar wind. This project will devise a new geomagnetic index that more
accurately predicts upstream solar-wind measurements. This will improve space
weather predictions – important to preparing sensitive systems like satellites
and high frequency communications for impacts from the dynamic space
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A composite geomagnetic index will be derived
that is highly predictable from a knowledge of the upstream solar wind. This
“canonical” geomagnetic index will be constructed from multiple geomagnetic
indices measuring different current systems and activity types in the
magnetosphere-ionosphere system and will describe global activity. Once the
index is derived, along with its canonical solar-wind driver function,
superposed-epoch analysis and other statistical techniques will be used to
familiarize the index by gauging coronal mass ejection driven storms, high-
speed-stream-driven storms, substorms, and steady magnetospheric convection
intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.