* 2027127
* RAPID: AI- and Data-driven Integrated Framework for Hierarchical Community-level Risk Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 04/30/2022
* USD 108,000.00

The fast evolving and deadly outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
created one of the most challenging issues facing global public health.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), before a
vaccine or drug becomes widely available, community mitigation, which is a set
of actions that persons and communities can take to help slow the spread of
respiratory virus infections, is the most readily available interventions to
help slow transmission of the virus in communities. A growing number of areas
are reporting community transmission of the virus, which would represent a
significant turn for the worse in the battle against the novel coronavirus; this
points to an urgent need for expanded surveillance so we can better understand
the spread of COVID-19 and better respond with actionable strategies for
community mitigation. By advancing capabilities of artificial intelligence (AI)
and leveraging the large-scale and real-time data generated from heterogeneous
sources, the goal of this project is to design and develop an AI- and data-
driven integrated framework to provide real-time hierarchical community-level
risk assessment to help combat the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will have three main parts. First, the research team will construct a
novel heterogeneous graph architecture to comprehensively model the large-scale
and real-time pandemic related data collected from multiple sources. Second, the
team will develop conditional generative adversarial nets for graph enrichment
to address the challenge of limited data that might be available for learning.
Third, the team will develop algorithms to model potential community
transmission routes and design an innovative heterogeneous graph auto-encoder
model for hierarchical community-level risk assessment. Through the potential
community transmission route modeling, the developed framework will facilitate a
predictive understanding of the spread of the virus; by providing the dynamic
and real-time COVID-19 risk assessment, the planned work will enable the general
public to select appropriate actions for protection while minimizing disruptions
to daily life to the extent possible (i.e., mitigate the negative effects of
COVID-19 on public health, society, and the economy). The planned research will
benefit intelligent information management where multiple data sources are
involved and secure and trustworthy cyberspace with applications such as malware
detection and mitigation. The project integrates research with education through
curriculum development, the participation of underrepresented groups, and
student mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.