* 2027977
* PPoSS: Planning: THINGULARITY- Taming the Heterogeneity of IoT Across the System Stack
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The "Internet of Things" (IoT) describes the idea that the ordinary objects in
our environment (e.g. buildings, streets, cars, refrigerators, packages,
clothing, food, even pets) are equipped with small electronics capable of
performing data collection, analysis, communication, and autonomous operation.
However programming literally everything requires new design principles, new
software architectures, and new security mechanisms that make it possible to
unify and simplify the development of IoT. The vast array of different embedded
devices, computers, networks, and storage media must be made to work together by
the software they support. Unfortunately, existing software systems require a
similarly complex and heterogeneous amalgamation of technologies, making IoT
software development for them very difficult and error prone. This planning
project will pursue a technology-enabled integration of new software
abstractions, tool chains, hardware specialization, programming and deployment
support, verification and security advances, and program portability
infrastructure that together tame this heterogeneity, complexity, and scale that
today is impeding IoT innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By simplifying software
engineering and deployment for IoT, this project will broaden participation in
innovation and enable development of new applications that extend human
perception and control of the physical world through digital infrastructure. In
the same way that Internet search has made it easier for people to "remember"
information, essentially enhancing human memory, IoT has perhaps greater
potential to revolutionize society by enhancing human perception and control
over everything people encounter in their day-to-day lives. To facilitate this
next "digital quantum leap" for society, this project will develop research
prototypes, system design artifacts, and educational and outreach activities,
and establish new multidisciplinary collaborations that guide and inform the
research. To ensure that the results are immediately useful to developers and
researchers across disciplines, the project will also use "real-world" IoT
testbeds and applications from a number of scientific domains (e.g. agriculture,
astronomy, and physics) for end-to-end validation, evaluation, and demonstration
of the research potential and impact. Finally, it will accelerate this impact by
making all of its digital artifacts -- its design technologies and its software
-- freely available as open source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.