* 2027723
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Inference of Human Dynamics from High-Dimensional Data Streams: Community Discovery and Change Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Wei Biao Wu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 162,500.00

In the mobile and big data era, data on human mobility and interaction in both
physical space and virtual space are pervasively available. The study of human
dynamics with the assistance of big data analytics becomes a timely effort. The
outcome from this study helps understand how human activities change over time
and how they may change the environment, economy, and politics. At the micro
scale, research on communities, influence propagation, anomaly detection, and
mobility prediction can benefit marketing research, mitigate crimes, as well as
mitigate and contain epidemics. Therefore, this project will advance not only
mathematics and statistics, but also many other fields including human
geography, business, and public health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to analyze multi-relational data in large spatiotemporal datasets, and covers a
broad range of topics pertaining to the study of human dynamics, including
anomaly detection, trend discovery, hidden community detection, pattern mining,
and role prediction, etc. The types of data analysis covers statistical
inference on both unstructured data and structured data that are supported on a
graph. The work includes four major thrusts: 1) latent network estimation from
non-stationary time series, 2) online change-point detection and synchronization
testing for high-dimensional time series, 3) multi-relational data analysis
based on tensor factorization and validity testing, and 4) spatial and spectral
analysis of graph signals. These research projects will contribute to not only
time series analysis, tensor analysis, and graph signal processing, but also
machine learning from large spatiotemporal datasets. The synergy between the
three areas and machine learning enables powerful methodologies for modeling
multi-relational data and mining data defined on both regular and irregular
structures. This research will result in theoretical foundations underpinning
time series and dynamic complex networks as well as practical software tools for
a broad range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.