* 2027997
* RAPID: Accelerated Testing for COVID-19 using Group Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 114,612.00

COVID-19 has resulted in an unprecedented global health crisis that may become
even more widespread over the upcoming months. Extensive and immediate testing
of symptomatic and asymptomatic people is known to be important for implementing
containment policies and to ensure that medical resources can be apportioned to
different geographic regions appropriately. Individual testing can provide the
necessary information; however, this requires enormous amounts of medical and
human resources. This project will facilitate widespread testing for COVID-19
while using fewer tests. The main approach is based on the idea of pooling
samples from multiple patients and performing tests on combined samples. If the
result of a test is negative, one can conclude that no one in the pool is
infected, and if the result is positive, then further fine-grained testing can
be performed. Pooling-based testing, also known as group testing, can be very
effective in reducing the number of tests required for both identifying infected
people in a population and for obtaining coarse-grained population-level
information about infection rates. In this project, effective group-testing
schemes that minimize the total number of tests required and/or the total time
taken to conduct tests will be designed, and their performance will be analyzed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, group-testing schemes that do not require
precise knowledge of the infection rates and multi-stage group-testing schemes
will be designed and optimized. The trade-off between the number of tests
required and the total time taken to complete testing will also be
characterized. The robustness of group-testing schemes to correlation in the
infection status among the tested population and to errors in the tests will be
studied. Using mathematical tools from group testing and hypothesis testing,
strategies for rapid classification of infection rates will also be designed and
analyzed. Finally, a smart-phone application which guides laboratory technicians
through the group-testing process will be developed. The focus will be on small
pool sizes and population sizes. Successful completion of the proposed
activities in this project will advance the state of the art in the field of
group testing, and provide practical and efficient solutions for COVID-19
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.