* 2027506
* RAPID: Investigating Effects of the Disruptive Shift to Online Courses on Identity Formation and Self-Efficacy of Students and Faculty in a First-Year Engineering Course
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Jessica Menold, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 04/30/2022
* USD 196,136.00

This project will gather time-sensitive data needed to investigate the impact of
the rapid shift to online instruction due to COVID-19. The project focuses on
students in a project-based first-year engineering design course. Although it is
effective in slowing viral infections, the sudden change to online instruction
will also have a significant impact on undergraduate student experiences and
learning. Successful online courses typically are developed over months or
years, with substantial support from instructional designers or other
specialists at the institution. In this case, the development of online courses
had to be accomplished within weeks, and institutions did not have the capacity
to scale assistance to all faculty as they converted their in-person courses to
online courses. Courses that include hands-on experiences, such as design
courses, are a particularly thorny challenge to effectively deliver online.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-quality instruction is critical in first-
year courses, where students begin to form their identities as engineers and
develop confidence in their engineering abilities. Understanding the effects
that the rapid shift to online courses has on student experiences in project-
based engineering courses could fundamentally change the way administrators,
educators, and industry prepare for and adapt to the unique needs of first-year
students. The findings of this work will provide insights that can guide
informed decisions about the future of engineering education. Three research
questions will guide the investigations: 1. How do the self-efficacy beliefs and
identity of students evolve during this transitional period? 2. How do the self-
efficacy beliefs and the experiences of instructors evolve during this
transitional period? 3. Are the results of the first two questions conditioned
upon individual differences or the use of mediating technologies? To answer
these questions, the project will use a mixed methods approach that features
qualitative interviews, surveys, data mining from learning management systems,
and natural language processing. The research plan will be broken into two
phases: 1) in-situ data collection and analysis; and 2) analysis of the
collected data. The analysis will enable the research team to explore the
implications of this sudden shift on future course offerings, instructor
behaviors and beliefs, and student persistence, particularly the retention of
first-year engineering students from underrepresented groups. It can also
provide insights about how to improve online versions of laboratory, design, and
other courses that require students to do hands-on work. This RAPID award is
made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program in the Division of
Undergraduate Education (Education and Human Resources Directorate), using funds
from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.