* 2027745
* RAPID: Cultural Differences in Shaping Diagnostic Testing Regimes in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Shobita Parthasarathy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The primary objective of this RAPID research project is to further our
understanding of the role of political culture in shaping diagnostic testing
regimes during the COVID-19 epidemic. The researcher will use qualitative case
study methods in four geographical regions. The results of this project will
serve to expand our understanding of how political culture shapes the
development, implementation, and governance of diagnostic testing particularly
during emergencies. It will also help us identify other aspects of political
culture including whether citizen responses to and frustrations with emergency
diagnostic testing systems take different form across the four regions. Project
findings will be widely disseminated to academic, public, and policy audiences.
The project will generate articles for academic audiences in the fields of STS,
public health, political science, and public policy. Dissemination to the public
will be via op-eds and podcast episodes. A white paper will be sent to relevant
policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methods include conducting
interviews, collecting documents, and doing ethnographic observation; when
possible and relevant, ethnographic observation of press conferences and
government hearings will also be conducted. Documents, interviews, and
ethnographic field notes will comprise the data, which will be analyzed using a
grounded theory approach. A “snowball” sampling strategy will be used to select
interview subjects; initial interview subjects will be asked to suggest others
for interview. Initial subjects will be identified through the collected
documents; important participants in each testing regime will be recorded. For
each of the four case studies to be developed, this will likely include
government officials involved in developing COVID-19 responses or regulating
diagnostic testing regimes; organizations developing and offering testing; and
civil society groups attempting to influence public, private, and non-profit
sector action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.