* 2027054
* IMAGINE: Collaborative Research: Epigenetic potential and range expansion in the house sparrow
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Aaron Schrey, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 346,108.00

Some species have managed to colonize much of the planet, but others have narrow
geographic ranges. Answering why some species can live so many places is
interesting to basic biology, namely because it reveals the details of
evolutionary processes. However, this form of research also has practical value,
as it could help us understand how species come to be pests, causing economic
damage and sometimes spreading disease. Our goal here is to ask if the secret to
the success of one globally-distributed bird, the house sparrow, has to do with
the way it uses its genome to combat parasites. No place on Earth is safe from
infection, so when animals colonize new places, they must kill or control new
parasites, or the invasion fails. Preliminary data show that house sparrows have
an exceptional ability to adjust their immune systems via a process called DNA
methylation. We liken this ability to knobs on a radio; more knobs mean more
sophisticated control of sound quality. For house sparrows, more successful
birds seem to have more knobs in their genomes, which we expect helps them
adjust their immune gene expression and thus control especially new parasites
well. With this grant, we’ll perform experiments to test directly if more genome
control knobs mean better protection from infections, then we’ll compare genome
knob number between native and introduced groups of sparrows, expecting more
knobs in invading birds. We’ll also study sparrows in museum collections, asking
how knob number has changed since introductions first happened in the
1850s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our plan is to leverage the near-ubiquity of the
house sparrow (Passer domesticus) to learn how the CpG (i.e., cytosines proximal
to guanines in DNA sequences) content of gene regulatory regions influenced the
distribution of this avian species. CpG content, something we term epigenetic
potential (EP), might allow genotypes to mask and manifest phenotypic plasticity
reversibly within generations, as some CpG sites alter gene expression when
methylated. In support, preliminary data reveal that i) introduced sparrow
populations have more CpG sites in two immune gene promoters than native
populations, and ii) EP in promoters, but not exons, declined since introduction
~170 years ago in four independent populations. We expect that EP represents a
form of adaptive potential, providing organisms with a propensity to cope with
the novel conditions. In particular, we expect EP to be important to the
regulation of Toll-like receptors, major microbial surveillance mechanisms that
reside on and in leukocytes. In a series of experiments and descriptive field
and museum studies, we will ask how are EP, DNA methylation, and TLR expression
related within individual sparrows, whether EP for TLRs protective against gut
microbial infections, if EP in TLRs influences gut microbial communities in
ongoing range expansions, and finally whether EP for TLRs important to range
expansions historically? The term, adaptive potential, connotes a latent ability
of organisms to cope with or exploit novel conditions. The core concept of our
proposal, EP, could be one measurable form of adaptive potential, applicable to
many animal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.