* 2027306
* RAPID:Comparative quantitative microbial risk assessment of COVID-19 transmission through droplets, aerosols and contaminated surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Sunny Jiang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2023
* USD 172,088.00

The global COVID-19 pandemic caused by the virus SARS-CoV2 has caused
considerable human health and economic impacts because of its rapid spread and
high fatality rate. Examining the trend of COVID-19 data suggests other routes
of transmission beyond direct person-to-person transmission are likely. Recent
reports show that aerosols containing SARS-CoV2 could still infect an individual
for up to 3 hours later, and plastic surfaces contaminated with SARS-CoV2 can
remain infective for up to 3 days. Trace evidence of the virus was recovered
from Diamond Princess cruise ship cabins up to 17 days after the passengers
left. The goal of this project is to understand COVID-19 transmission through
virus-contaminated respiratory droplets, fine solid or liquid particles in air,
and contact with virus-contaminated surfaces. This study will model human
behaviors effecting disease transmission, the properties of the virus, and
environmental factors that may affect disease transmission to predict infection
risk. If successful, this project will help describe transmission patterns of
SARS-CoV2 and provide new ways to slow or halt the spread of this disease in the
US. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify the infection
risk of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV2 through different exposure routes in
order to prioritize measures for public health protection. The specific
objectives of this work are to: 1) model the spread of SARS-CoV2 through
droplets and aerosols from coughing/sneezing and through aerosols generated from
toilet flushing under different environmental conditions; 2) develop exposure
models through inhalation of droplets and aerosols to determine the dose of
single and repeated exposure; and 3) model repeated exposure through contact
with contaminated surfaces and hands-to-face transmission. The models will
incorporate mechanistic understanding of aerosol generation, transport, and fate
under different conditions, as well as data fitting to predict aerosol size and
concentration under different test scenarios. SARS-CoV2 viral shedding rate from
patients and its persistence in different environmental media will be used to
model the viral load through aerosol and contact exposure. Human physiology and
habits will be coupled with viral attack rates to quantify the risk using a
Monte Carlo probability simulator. The sensitivity analysis will also identify
data gaps for rapid data collection in collaboration with teams of researchers
from different disciplines. The results of this project will contribute to the
understanding of global spread of infectious disease beyond short and long-term
remediation strategies on COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.