* 2027324
* Workshop Proposal: Processing-In-Memory (PIM) Technology - Grand Challenges and  Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Yiran Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,999.00

Processing-In-Memory (PIM) is a promising technology that was proposed to
eliminate the costly data transmission between memory and computing units in
conventional computer architectures. An input data can be directly injected into
the memory that stores a constant for a computation without loading the constant
to the computing unit. Such a design is particularly suitable for many emerging
computations, such as graph analytics and neuromorphic computing, where one of
the operands is constant during the computation while only the input changes. By
eliminating the data transmission between the memory and computing units, PIM
can substantially improve the computational efficiency of these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project organizes a workshop to gather
leading researchers and experts who have spent considerable effort and time
studying Processing-In-Memory (PIM) technology. The proposed workshop will
provide a forum for leading experts to consider in a synergistic manner a view
of PIM technology from the perspective of circuits, architectures, systems, and
applications. These researchers will discuss their visions of the critical
challenges that need to be addressed in the near future. With the help of the
participants, the workshop will produce a comprehensive report on the current
state of the art and the outlook of PIM technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.