* 2027949
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Uncovering and re-engineering chromatin modification circuits that dictate epigenetic cell memory
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ron Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

The different cell types that make up our body, such as skin cells or blood
cells, have the ability to maintain distinct identities for the lifetime of an
individual even if they all have the same DNA. How is memory of cell’s identity
safeguarded for an individual’s lifetime? This project uncovers key molecular
interaction circuits that enable the same DNA sequence to give rise to distinct
and concurrent long-term cellular identities. This knowledge is valuable to
understand diseases linked to loss of cell identity, such as cancer, to educate
new approaches to stem cell reprogramming, and, ultimately, to program human
cells for cell therapy. This project involves creating and analyzing
mathematical models of molecular circuits that alter DNA compaction. These
mathematical models enrich current educational curricula in quantitative
molecular biology, systems biology, and synthetic biology. Graduate students
receive a highly interdisciplinary training grounded on molecular biology,
mathematical modeling, and mathematical theory of stochastic processes.
Education aspects of the project impact K-12 and undergraduate students, members
of underrepresented groups in science and women in mathematics through outreach
and curriculum development activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to uncover fundamental principles by which chromatin
modification circuits mediate epigenetic cell memory (ECM). ECM is the ability
of cells to maintain distinct cell-type-specific gene expression patterns
through subsequent cell divisions without a change in genetic sequence. The key
hypothesis of this project is that synergistic positive feedback loops within
chromatin modification circuits govern ECM in combination with time scale
separation between epigenetic erasure and read-write processes. To validate this
hypothesis, this project follows a “build-to-understand” approach driven by
rigorous mathematical analysis of the (quasi)-stationary probability
distribution of new multi-time scale stochastic processes. These processes
naturally arise from the dynamics of chromatin modification circuits and take
the form of small perturbations of non-ergodic processes, that capture time
scale separation. The project has three aims. Aim 1 and Aim 2 focus on a single
gene’s chromatin modification circuit, identifies biochemical parameters that
control time scale separation, and establish an experimental model system to
tune them. Aim 2 is focused on the extent to which DNA methylation biases ECM
towards a repressed chromatin state and proposes a positive autoregulation
mechanism to enhance ECM of an active chromatin state. Aim 3 investigates how,
by wiring multiple genes’ chromatin modification circuits together, a long-term
memory of arbitrary gene expression patterns could be created. As a proof of
principle, Aim 3 performs experiments on an epigenetic toggle switch test-bed, a
motif highly represented in gene regulatory networks involved in cell fate
determination, in which two gene mutually repress each other.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic
Biology and Genetic Mechanisms clusters in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of
Mathematics and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering program in the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.