* 2027773
* RAPID: Methods for Reconstructing Disease Transmissions from Viral Genomic Data with Application to COVID-19
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Haris Vikalo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The coronavirus causing COVID-19 was first detected in humans in November 2019
and rapidly developed into a pandemic. There is an urgent need to enhance the
ability to precisely track and predict spread of the disease. However, analysis
of classical epidemiological data such as the time of testing and lengths of
exposure provides limited insight. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project
aims to enable discovery of disease transmission patterns based on analysis of
genomic data, provide accurate identification of transmission clusters, and
enable detection of critical nodes in a network of pathogen hosts while also
providing insight into pathogen-mutation processes that occur during the spread
of the disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this project are to:
(1) Develop methods for the inference of a network of hosts based on genomic
information about viral pathogens infecting them. In particular, this research
thrust is focused on the reconstruction of a weighted directed graph whose nodes
represent hosts and edge weights reflect evolutionary distance between
corresponding pathogens. (2) Develop methods for the discovery of transmission
clusters and identification of critical nodes in the host network. The focus of
this research thrust is on deep-learning algorithms for the identification of
transmission clusters, and discovery of the host network nodes that played a
pivotal role in the disease outbreak. (3) Relying on the developed methods,
analyze publicly available COVID-19 datasets. The results of the outlined work
are expected to have an immediate impact on the understanding of the coronavirus
transmission and spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.