* 2027446
* BEE: Eco-evolutionary dynamics of disease-induced apex predator declines
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Menna Jones, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will study how the spread of an infectious disease can affect the
co-evolution of the pathogen and the host, and who those changes can create
changes in the rest of the animal community. Emerging infectious diseases and
the global loss of biodiversity are two leading challenges for the life sciences
in the 21st century. Declines of the iconic Tasmanian devil in Australia
represent an example of these two threats acting together to endanger a species.
Additionally, as such large predators decline, the role of other species shifts
in the food chain, which can lead to loss of biodiversity via secondary declines
and extinctions of other species. These community changes can then feed back on
the predator themselves, resulting in changes in developmental timing and
reproduction. Thus, it is critical to study how losses of top predators lead to
changes in food webs, population densities, and evolution of species with which
they interact. Through outreach to the general public, this study will increase
understanding of how infectious diseases affect biological communities and
influence biodiversity. It will also provide training opportunities for US
graduate students and post-doctoral scholars in an international
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tasmanian devils and their fatal transmissible
cancer, devil facial tumor disease (DFTD), represents an ideal study system to
elucidate the impacts of top predator losses on community dynamics. The east to
west spread of DFTD provides a rare, natural experiment to test how temporal
variation in extent of devil declines across Tasmania affects community
dynamics. Devils are indeed community architects, the declines of which cause
the direct effects of mesopredator release that then cascades through the food
web to indirect secondary declines of native species. The research will bridge
ecological and evolutionary theory to predict how co-evolutionary interactions
of devils and DFTD will affect current and future devil population densities.
These predictions will then be plugged into (structural equation) models that
incorporate field studies of ecological interactions within the Tasmanian devil
food web across the decline gradient. Feedbacks of these community-level changes
on Tasmanian devil life history evolution will be evaluated with genomic study
of the basis of a rapid developmental trajectory and precocial breeding in
female devils. Evolutionary feedbacks on mesopredators and prey will be assessed
using landscape genomics studies to test the influence of variation in devil
density on gene flow and adaptive potential across multiple
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.