* 2027405
* RAPID: How uncertainty about risk and conflicting messages affect preventive behaviors against Covid-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Stephen Broomell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,729.00

The coronavirus outbreak poses a major challenge for our health system. As
people become sick and need medical care, they need resources like hospital beds
and ventilators. However, if many people become sick in a short period of time,
there will not be enough of these resources to care for them all. If we are to
treat every sick person with the best possible medical care, we need to both
prevent and delay new infections. We know from history and medical science that
public behavior is the most important tool for this prevention. But for the
public to help, people need to know what to do and how to do it, as well as to
understand why these behaviors are so important. People take their cues from
those around them in making sense of new, uncertain situations. This makes it
important to make sure that everybody is getting good information about the
risks of Covid-19 and how to prevent it. Official messages need to reflect
scientific knowledge, and myths that pop up in communities need to be addressed
so that people can understand and debunk them. The research team has been
studying how people are thinking about the risks of Covid-19, and what they are
doing to protect themselves and their community. One key finding from that work
is that when people are uncertain about the risk, they are more likely to rely
on what other people are doing to determine what the right thing to do is. The
team also finds that people's main concerns about social distancing are that
they are worried about getting by without a paycheck and how they will get food
and meet other urgent needs. This project involves surveys and experiments to
better understand these concerns and provide new knowledge to help guide policy
action. First, we need to know whether helping people understand how to prevent
infection will actually lead them to protect themselves. The experiments test
and identify how best to help people understand, especially for those who are
not fully engaging in social distancing. Then, over the next few months as the
situation changes, the research team develops messages to help people understand
what is happening and how their behavior can help protect themselves and the
people around them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In early March 2020, the researchers
conducted an exploratory survey to determine whether some protective behaviors
were reported at low levels and identify predictors of poor compliance. The
research showed that compliance with the more extreme social distancing
behaviors appear to be dependent on social norms, with rates being lower when
other people do not seem to be engaging in such distancing. Furthermore, people
appear to rely on those norms particularly when they experience more uncertainty
about the risk. The findings also were that concerns about losing pay and
disruption of personal plans are most predictive of anticipated failures to
comply with orders to stay home, followed by the need to shop for food and other
urgent needs. These findings suggest that a policy approach aimed at getting
people through financial and logistical hardship is critically important and has
the potential to be highly impactful. The new research explores more deeply
these concerns and how they relate to protective actions. The first phase
establishes which predictive factors have causal influence on protective
behaviors. The second phase is an assessment of how well protective behaviors
are being performed and identifies causally predictive factors identified in the
first phase for a nationally representative sample (oversampling high-risk
geographical locations). In the third phase, iteratively for each causal factor,
the team develops and pilots messages in a test-bed environment, testing final
messages with an experimental design in a national sample (repeating regularly
as the environment and pandemic evolve), and following up on a subset of
critical messages with a 3-day retest to assess behavior change. Finally, again
iteratively for each effective message, the team disseminates recommended
messages along with the rationale for why they are useful and how they are
understood to work. The team shares its findings with its established network of
public health officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.