* 2027650
* RAPID: Assessing the Impact on Operational Mobile Networks in the Face of COVID-19 Public Health Crisis
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Chunyi Peng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This project proposes to measure and diagnose performance and reliability of the
national 4G/4.5G mobile networks in face of COVID-19 pandemic. The objective is
to meet the immediate need of assessing operational mobile networks, unveiling
technical issues, understanding their pressing challenges, and proposing
remedies without major infrastructure upgrade during this public health crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exploits a novel on-device measurement
approach. It leverages extensive efforts in building software tools and
conducting large-scale measurement in the recent years to conduct five thrusts.
First, it plans to conduct a longitudinal study to quantify how performance of
US carrier networks change in face of COVID-19 and analyze why behind the
pressing technical challenges. Second, it plans to design and assess data-driven
device-side solutions to boost data performance without any infrastructure
upgrade. Third, it plans to characterize and diagnose failures which likely
occur more often during this period of time. Forth, it plans to assess security
issues disclosed in prior studies and examine how possible attacks vary. Fifth,
it plans to open up data and facilitate researchers in the community to empower
long-term network innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help assess
the mobile users' experience during the COVID-19 pandemic. In the long term,
open datasets collected and released by this project will empower data-driven
software solutions to efficiently utilize enhanced network capabilities and
accelerate 5G innovations in mobile network research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software tools and collected data will be
available at http://milab.cs.purdue.edu/. The repository will be maintained for
at least five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.