* 2027923
* RAPID: Tuskegee University COVID Aware Program
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Crystal James, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,479.00

Because of the ever-evolving nature of COVID-19 information and need for a
nationwide response to prevention and containment methods recommended by public
health experts, there is an urgent need for all communities including
underrepresented minorities to trust and implement these prevention and
containment methods. This project is focused on understanding how minority
communities’ access and attend to these disease prevention messages during the
COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, with potential for understanding their responses to
future pandemics and disasters as well. This project will design and test
culturally-sensitive tools and materials that promote disease prevention. Based
on the successful outcome of this research project, the disease prevention
strategies developed can be institutionalized by federal, state, and local
agencies. The data may bear on the trustworthiness of communications to minority
communities in the deep south. The findings have the capacity to positively
affect the diversity of materials, and reduce the levels of mistrust that do
exist within minority communities across the deep south. Results from this
project will be disseminated in journals and at conferences. Materials produced
by the project will be made available to practitioners and other researchers.
Students will be trained as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is for research to mitigate the negative impacts of COVID-19 on public
health, society, and the economy. The objective of this proposal is to determine
the best ways of disseminating disease prevention messages to rural African
Americans and other vulnerable populations. The central hypotheses are that
minorities have doubts regarding the trustworthiness of these messages and that
mistrust can delay the effectiveness of, and innovations in, disease prevention
methods. Magnifying and/or delaying disease prevention interventions can lead to
increased morbidity and mortality in the this population. The research is non-
clinical in nature and involves a multi-state (Georgia, Florida, Alabama,
Mississippi, and Louisiana) data collection effort using a newly constructed
instrument to assess residents’ level of trust and fear related to disease
transmission and where and how they prefer to receive information regarding
prevention and treatment strategies. The project will provide health and other
organizations with unique information and data on how minority communities
access and attend to disease prevention messages and pandemic
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.