* 2027813
* Supporting Pathways to Success for Biology Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Irma Santoro, Reinhardt College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 08/31/2025
* USD 649,464.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Reinhardt University, a private liberal arts institution. Over its five-
year duration, the project will provide four-year scholarships to 14 unique
first-year, full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in the
biological sciences. The Scholars will be admitted in two cohorts. The project
will provide the Scholars with an educational experience that emphasizes
problem-based learning aided by mentors, research opportunities, and career
guidance through the use of an electronic portfolio. The project intends to
increase retention of Scholars in biology by providing them with enhanced peer
and faculty mentoring and a coherent suite of student support services. A major
expected project outcome is preparation of a diverse group of graduates who are
prepared to contribute as leaders in the STEM workforce. A major component of
this project’s intellectual merit is its potential contribution to understanding
how ePortfolios may contribute to the success of young scientists in training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Project objectives include to: 1) recruit and provide financial
support to 14 undergraduate biology majors; 2) provide academic and other
supports that increase retention and graduation of the Scholars. Project
components include early mentored research experiences, project-based learning,
and extensive faculty and peer mentoring, alongside the use of ePortfolio. The
project’s research plan will examine the value of ePortfolios for promoting
scientific identity and stimulating future research interests. Considering the
challenges institutions face in successful retention of STEM majors, this study
is potentially noteworthy. Project evaluation will quantify the effects of the
overall project and its individual components on the academic success of the
Scholars. The University expects to institutionalize promising project elements
so that future students will benefit from lessons learned. Project outcomes will
be disseminated on the University website, within the University administration,
at national conferences, and in publications. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.