* 2027130
* NSF 2026 #Why Not Me?  A Holistic, Developmental Response to Promote Diversity in STEM
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Jaclyn Canas-Carrell, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/28/2023
* USD 91,577.00

With support from the NSF 2026 Program in the Office of Integrated Activities,
Professors Sharp, Cañas-Carrell, Harris, Talley, and Weiser at Texas Tech
University, a Hispanic-Serving Institution, are hosting a conference to discuss
approaches to improve inclusiveness and diversity in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The main goal of the conference is to learn
more about why some individuals go into and stay in STEM fields and others do
not, and to ultimately assist STEM fields in recruiting, training, hiring, and
maintaining a more diverse workforce. The conference brings together community
members and researchers from many different fields. The activities focus on
exploring research approaches to address issues on human development,
relationships, and societal messages with the actual life stories of a diverse
group of everyday people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enriching ideas in #33:
#WhyNotMe: STEM Diversity Drivers, the conference engages a variety of
multidisciplinary academic and practitioner stakeholders in order to create
innovative, actionable research agendas to address the persistent problem of
effective involvement of students and researchers from underrepresented minority
groups in STEM. The #WhyNotMe: STEM Diversity Drivers framework collects and
synthesizes a wide range of narratives to further understanding of both
supportive and unsupportive mechanisms that affect the involvement in STEM of
individuals from different underrepresented groups. The conference focuses on
holistic, developmental, relational, structural, and methodological innovations,
with the aims to generate actionable research themes. The conference brings
together a multidisciplinary team with a variety of substantive expertise and
methodological skillsets. The team will consider the role that factors such as
interpersonal relationships, familial support, developmental trajectories, and
larger societal messages (e.g., meta-narratives, policies, history) play in
supporting and discouraging underrepresented individuals from pursuing STEM. It
will also engage with stakeholders to develop innovative methodological
approaches to better capture the complex, fluid landscape of diverse
representation in STEM. The conference participants will develop specific
research themes and facilitate methodological innovations to expand the NSF2026
ideas in #WhyNotMe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.