* 2027664
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: COVID-19, Crises, and Support for the Rule of Law
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Amanda Driscoll, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 03/31/2021
* USD 29,876.00

The rule of law is at the foundation of modern liberal democracy. Crises like
the Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, however, pose a challenge to this long-
standing norm that buttresses modern democracies the world over. In the midst of
a crisis, a person’s support for the rule of law is tested as their fundamental
concern for the health, safety, and welfare of themselves, their families, and
their friends is pitted against an abstract belief that the government “check
all the boxes” before carrying out potentially lifesaving policies. In these
situations, one’s desire for decisive government action may overwhelm, and
subsequently lead to a decline in, one’s commitment to abstract democratic
principles like the rule of law. Consequently, evaluating how crises affect
support for fundamental democratic norms is critical for understanding their
impact on the health and stability of the liberal democratic
order.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the COVID-19 outbreak to
examine this relationship and determine (a) whether governmental responses to
crises affect citizens’ support for the rule of law; (b) whether citizens’ faith
in government efforts is buttressed or undermined in response to elite and
expert cues; and (c) whether citizens’ attitudes change after a crisis has
dissipated. Each of these theoretical aims is tied to one of three unique
features of the research design, which relies upon surveys of European
democracies. First, to examine the effects of governmental responses, the
project will make collect survey data on support for the rule of law across four
Western democracies in April 2020: Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the
United States. Second, an original panel survey in Germany will enable the
evaluation of changes to individual-level rule of law judgments in the short,
medium, and long term. Lastly, embedded survey experiments will provide causal
evidence on how elite and expert cues affect both the acceptance of policies and
support for key aspects of the rule of law like compliance with laws and support
for judicial constraints on executive and legislative power. Findings from each
part of the project will provide insights into the individual-level dynamics
crises activate in citizens’ relationship with democratic
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.