* 2027082
* CMMI-EPSRC: Thermoacoustic Response of Additively Manufactured Metals: A Multi-Scale Study from Grain to Component Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* John Lambros, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 748,425.00

This research project was funded under the NSF Engineering–UKRI Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council opportunity, NSF 20-510. The grant will
support research towards understanding the potential for additive manufacturing
(AM) in the production of metallic components subject to extreme
thermomechanical excitation. Structures in demanding environments where high
temperatures and vibratory loads are combined (e.g., sustained hypersonic
flight, space re-entry, exhaust-wash structures, breeder blankets in fusion
reactors) often experience fatigue which shortens their lifecycle. It is likely
that these types of structures will be produced only in small quantities, making
it appropriate to consider additive manufacturing for their construction.
Successful design, manufacture and service deployment of such components
requires an understanding of the component's progression from its virgin state,
through shake-down, towards initiation of detectable non-critical damage, and
ultimately to failure. To date, this failure evolution process is fairly well
understood for traditional subtractive-manufactured metals. However, there is
very limited fundamental understanding of the multi-scale material-structure
interactions for failure of AM metals. Because of the unique microstructure of
AM metals, their complex thermal history during manufacture, and the presence of
significant residual stresses, it is hypothesized that their response under
extreme thermoacoustic loading will be significantly different from their
traditional counterparts, especially in defect-driven processes such as failure.
By understanding the details of this failure process in AM metals under extreme
thermoacoustic loading, the results of this study will shed light onto how to
better tailor the additive manufacturing approach to produce materials and
structures most suitable for operating in such adverse
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken jointly by
the PI in collaboration with researchers at the University of Liverpool in the
United Kingdom, focusing on key aspects that link material-level (micro- and
mesoscale) response to the structural-level (macroscale) response. Damage
accumulation at the microscale for additively-manufactured metals subjected to
cyclic loading and global and local thermal gradients will be quantified using
high resolution digital image correlation. At a larger length scale, additively-
manufactured plates with geometric reinforcement subjected to thermal buckling
during thermo-mechanical excitation will be studied using real-time optical and
thermal imaging. A key aspect will be to explore the interaction of the complex
thermal processing history of AM metals (including any existing residual
stresses) with the transient and coupled thermomechanical loading applied.
Finally, the project will identify the fundamental rules governing AM for
reliable components subject to high-temperature broadband
excitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.