* 2027802
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Operational COVID-19 Forecasting with Multi-Source Information
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Georgiy Bobashev, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2022
* USD 89,755.00

This project aims to develop a new deep learning predictive platform for
COVID-19 transmission, integrating multi-source information under model and data
uncertainties. In contrast to other viruses such as influenza, SARS, and MERS,
COVID-19 differs in a number of ways, including uncertainties in response to
weather conditions, history of the disease, as well as the effectiveness of
responses from public health officials or from the general public. An important
aspect is to integrate multi-source data such as official reports, atmospheric
variables, and social media data into operational biosurveillance and real-time
prediction of COVID-19. The proposed biosurveillance framework will be used to
forecast COVID-19 dynamics and to enhance mitigation strategies. In addition, it
could also be applicable to tracking many other infectious diseases, thereby
contributing to security of our society as a whole. Furthermore, the project
will build innovative connections within and across mathematical biology,
statistics, and deep learning, with a strong focus on interdisciplinary graduate
research training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the main forecasting framework, the
widely used Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered (SEIR) dynamic models can
accurately describe the disease dynamics, but only with precise knowledge of
disease parameters, which can take a long time to accurately estimate. Deep
learning algorithms can potentially have superior predictive ability, but they
require extensive training. Another key challenge in the statistical modeling of
these events is how to timely and systematically integrate multiple sources of
surveillance, anecdotal, and other health-related information under uncertainty.
The proposed new predictive approach is based on the interaction between
multiple data sources, dynamical SEIR models, and deep learning algorithms. The
key idea is to view simulation SEIR models as “surrogate” pre-trainers for the
deep learning models, resulting in less real data needed to retrain the
predictive model to reflect “real world” COVID-19 progression. Deep learning
predictive models can then be used for making predictions about the future
COVID-19 dynamics, which can be compared to the predictions made by the original
SEIR model. Depending on which mathematical model makes better predictions,
another model can be updated with the better prediction as inputs, thereby
representing reinforcement learning from both data and the best mathematical
model. As a result, the new predictive framework will allow one to assess
impacts of the immediate responses such as declaration of a national emergency,
a school closing, or a quarantine, and can be considered as a step toward
interpretable AI for COVID-19 biosurveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
is being awarded using funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act supplemental funds allocated to
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.