* 2027299
* Collaborative Research:  A Mathematical Framework for Generating Synthetic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Roman Vershynin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,999.00

Progress in threat detection research is greatly hindered by the fact that many
data sets related to areas of national security cannot be shared with experts in
academia or industry due to security clearance barriers. The limited access to
meaningful data sets prevents many researchers from contributing their expertise
in algorithm development and verification. This research effort is poised to
solve this important problem by developing a rigorous mathematical framework for
the faithful and privacy-preserving generation of synthetic data. The goal is to
create an as-realistic-as-possible dataset, one that not only maintains the
nuances of the original data, but does so without endangering important pieces
of sensible information. The results of this project will play a key role in
advancing research in threat detection and many other fields where privacy is
key. Strong expectation for success of this project is based on solid
theoretical achievements by the investigators in high-dimensional probability,
signal processing, and mathematical data science, as well as their expertise in
turning advanced mathematical concepts into real-world applications in the areas
of artificial intelligence, signal processing, medical diagnostics, threat
detection, and communications engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
effort is a fusion of several areas of cutting edge mathematics with state-of-
the-art artificial intelligence. It seeks to bring advanced techniques from
optimization, probability, and machine learning to data science in form of
robust and efficient computational methods. Theoretical deliverables are
expected to be in the form of new mathematical concepts for the development of
multimodal scalable synthetic data. Computational deliverables will be in the
form of numerical algorithms for privacy-protecting artificial intelligence.
Beyond the project's broad technological impact, it will serve as a model for
the kind of cross-disciplinary activity critical for research and education at
the frontier of mathematics and data science. The payoffs for society at large
are many, including increased privacy protection while maintaining the benefits
of data-driven discovery. The users of synthetic data will include researchers
in the national security sector, computer scientists, privacy experts, health
administrators, medical information system developers, epidemiologists,
oncologists and health economists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.