* 2027694
* RAPID: The COVID-19 Pandemic and Changes in the Stress Response: Identifying Risk and Resilience in Adults and Children
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Patricia Smiley, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 164,138.00

For families with young children, the COVID-19 pandemic constitutes a major life
stressor that is accompanied by heightened daily demands, including lack of
childcare, altered work expectations, job insecurity, and social distancing. All
of these are compounded by pressing concerns about the direct and indirect
impacts of the disease on family members’ health. An abundance of research has
documented the negative effects of stress and instability within families and on
child development in particular. There is relative lack of data, however, on
factors that may protect children against the effects of such an unprecedented
set of stressors. The current study will evaluate risk and resilience factors
that influence how families respond to the stress, and identify family
characteristics and parenting behaviors that promote children’s well-being,
focusing on those from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds who are most
impacted by these unprecedented threats to health and social stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prospective studies investigating the effects of a
pandemic on psychological and physiological functioning in U.S. families have
the potential to greatly contribute to our understanding of how children and
adults cope with stress. The current study will capitalize on an ongoing
longitudinal study of stress and adaptation in families with young children. The
research will address fundamental questions about the effects of a chronic
stressor on psychological adjustment, as well as the biological mechanisms by
which stress affects health. Importantly, by examining patterns of socialization
and variation in parenting, results of the study will highlight parental
behaviors that may be protective. Utilizing a multi-method approach, the study
incorporates questionnaire, and observational and physiological assessments,
during the early period of the pandemic and approximately six months later.
Comparing these data to those collected prior to the pandemic onset will allow
modeling of trajectories, and the possibility of testing mediating and
moderating mechanisms. The study will examine not only longitudinal change and
individual variability in stress physiology and well-being, but also stress
proliferation within families and the extent to which self-regulatory
competencies and positive parenting including emotion socialization buffer
against negative outcomes in children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.