* 2027135
* NSF EAGER: Ionic communication: high resolution, non-invasive data communication for bioelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Dion Khodagholy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2021
* USD 80,000.00

The ability to send and receive information from inside the body is of key
importance for scientific and medical applications. Nearly all implantable
electronics devices require communication with the external world to be able to
transmit acquired bio-signals for analysis or receive instructions from external
devices to modulate their interactions with tissue. However, this task is
inherently challenging because the communication method should be (i) non-
invasive, meaning no components extruding through tissue, (ii) low-power, to be
able to acquire data continuously over an extended period of time (iii) high-
speed, to allow transmission of complex biological data acquired, (iv)
controllable, to allow communication over a defined depth in the tissue. The
overall objective of this work is to develop an ion-based, high-speed
communication scheme to enable non-invasive and safe transmission of signals
without the need of components that extrude through tissue. The rationale for
the proposed work is that ions in biological tissue can be used to transfer
information at high speeds and low power to the outside of body. The educational
goal of the project is to provide hands-on experience for students by developing
fully bio-compatible and inexpensive devices for ionic communication. The
proposed research is expected to not only advance the field of bioelectronics by
improving understanding of key principles governing communication across the
body, but also result in positive impact to society at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand and modulate physiologic functions,
implantable bioelectronic devices should be capable of safely communicating the
high spatiotemporal resolution bio-signals with high speed and low power
consumption to devices located outside the body. This communication and data
transfer should be accomplished through a non-invasive path with no elements
that extrude through tissue to minimize discomfort, mobility complications, and
risk of tissue damage or infection. Ionic communication, which leverages the
ion-rich nature of biological tissue to transmit signals through intact
surfaces, could fulfill these requirements and address the limitations of
current electronic charge carrier-based approaches. However, there is a clear
lack of knowledge regarding how to use ionic communication to establish a high
speed, low-power, and biocompatible communication medium across biological
tissue. The objective of the proposed research is to combine optimal properties
for an abiotic/biotic transmission interface: biocompatibility, conformability,
miniaturization, low power consumption, efficient interaction with the bodyâ€™s
ionic signals, and ability to transmit data at speeds relevant to
electrophysiological processes. Specific aims for the project are: (1) establish
the physical, material and geometrical requirements to enable ionic
communication; and (2) define the physical parameters that govern the spatial
propagation of ionic signals through tissue. Overall, ionic communication could
result in significant medical and social benefits by simplifying data
transmission from bioelectronic devices and enabling application to situations
in which use of transcutaneous connectors or bulky implanted electronics is
prohibitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.