* 2027784
* RAPID: Countering Language Biases in COVID-19 Search Auto-Completes
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Vivek Singh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 198,985.00

The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has resulted in sharp increases in online
search activity about the disease, its spread, and remedial actions. Hence,
search engines can significantly influence public perceptions of the disease and
the actions undertaken by the public. If there are language biases in the
results of searches, there may also be biases in perceptions and actions taken.
This project will systematically analyze the differences in COVID-19 related
search auto-completes that are provided to English and Spanish speakers. The
results will generate new knowledge on the emergence of algorithmic bias and
help ensure equity in health information dissemination at scale amid large-scale
health emergencies. The findings will be shared in easy-to-understand terms on
an urgent basis in multiple languages to help ensure equal access to health
information in the COVID-19 pandemic. This feedback could help improve the
health outcomes for numerous individuals facing the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to yield approaches for
countering language-based bias in COVID-19 related health information
dissemination by search engines using log analysis and interviews. The first
step in this project is to audit the search auto-complete results in Spanish and
English, and test if there are systematic differences in the way results are
generated across the two languages. The next step is to this utilize focus
groups with multiple users to understand how auto-complete queries affect the
way English versus Spanish speakers understand COVID-19 disease and take
necessary precautions. The findings from the two phases are to be combined to
generate guidelines on designing search experiences that support health equity
amid a public health crisis. This research topic is likely to attract a diverse
range of student researchers, which could help broaden participation in STEM
research career pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.