* 2027174
* Collaborative Research: Chameleon Phase III: A Large-Scale, Reconfigurable Experimental Environment for Cloud Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Paul Ruth, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Chameleon is a deeply reconfigurable experimental testbed supporting Computer
Science (CS) systems experimentation. The platform consists of two sites,
University of Chicago (UC) and Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), along
with support functionalities from Northwestern University and the University of
North Carolina. the platform balances investment in large-scale hardware to
support Big Compute and Big Data experimentation with diversity reflected by
smaller clusters of graphic processing units (GPUs), field programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs), specialized architectures, and innovative networking hardware.
Users can reconfigure this hardware at bare-metal level, boot from custom
kernel, get access to serial console, or provision and reconfigure Software
Defined Networking (SDN)-enabled switches. Since its public availability in July
2015, Chameleon has attracted a community of over 4,000 users working on over
600 education and research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase III,
Chameleon will greatly expand its core capabilities by adding new hardware and
new features. The range of supported experiments will expand to include Internet
of Things (IoT) and edge computing, a broader range of networking experiments,
and experimentation with disaggregated hardware. The system will also expand its
support for reproducibility by providing tools that allow investigators to
package their experiments for replication, and making it possible to publish,
discover, and cite them easily. Finally, phase 3 will see a continuation of work
on packaging CHameleon Infrastructure, known as CHI-in-a-Box, which allows
others to deploy and manage testbeds similar to Chameleon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chameleon project will continue its mission of
providing a platform for CS research and education in cloud computing, a
critical skillset for future computing professionals. Unlike traditional
experimental platforms, Chameleon is built on a mainstream open source cloud
technology (OpenStack); this not only means that its users and operators gain
familiarity with mainstream cloud functions simply by working with the testbed â€“
but also that open source contributions by the Chameleon project directly impact
a system widely used in the cloud industry. Finally, through its support of
experiment management and repeatability, Chameleon impacts CS experimental
methodology and makes more efficient research possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
use Chameleon or learn more about the system, visit www.chameleoncloud.org. For
anyone interested in the development side of the system or the packaging of
Chameleon, i.e., CHI-in-a-Box, visit the github repository at
https://github.com/ChameleonCloud/chi-in-a-box/wiki. If a user would like to
explore traces from Chameleon to date, see https://www.scienceclouds.org/cloud-
traces/. These sites will be maintained throughout the duration of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.