* 2027737
* ATD: Algorithmic Threat Detection and Mitigation with Robust Machine Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yuekai Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

With the recent explosion of scientific data, machine learning (ML) is
permeating many areas of science and engineering. Even areas that are
traditionally dominated by differential equation models are incorporating ML
into their models. However, confidence in and broader adoption of ML in science
and engineering face a number of challenges, in large part because existing ML
models were developed mostly with non-scientific applications in mind. This
project seeks to broaden the appeal of ML in scientific applications (hereafter
called scientific ML) by addressing three key issues with existing ML models
that are hindering their broader adoption in scientific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support one graduate
student each year of the three year project. First, we consider how to tailor
existing ML models to scientific applications by incorporating (scientific)
domain knowledge. In most scientific applications, there is a rich body of
domain knowledge to draw upon. If we can properly integrate this knowledge with
ML models, it allows the machine to focus on learning less well-understood
aspects of the underlying theoretical and physical processes. Ultimately, this
not only leads to ML models that can outperform human engineered models, but
also to new insights into the underlying physical processes. Second, we consider
how to train ML models that are stable and reliable under perturbations in the
training data, model choice, and computational errors. ML models are known to be
unstable under such perturbations, which undermines their credibility in
scientific applications. Third, we focus on training ML models that are capable
of predicting the effects of interventions on a system. This is an area in which
ML models are lacking compared to traditional differential equation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.