* 2027288
* Collaborative Research: Mitigating antibiotic resistance in drinking water by understanding the impact of corrosion inhibitors and corrosion products
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Patrick McNamara, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 223,302.00

The spread of antibiotic resistance threatens public health by rendering
antibiotics ineffective. Drinking water distribution systems are a source of
antibiotic resistance genes, the genetic material that makes bacteria resistant
to antibiotics. Water distribution systems are particularly concerning as they
are a direct conveyor of antibiotic resistance genes to vulnerable populations
including children, the elderly, hospital patients, and people with weakened
immune systems. Metals are known to promote the development of antibiotic
resistance. Some of these metals are also present in distribution systems due to
pipe corrosion and the presence of corrosion inhibitors. The goal of this
research is to determine which water pipe materials and corrosion inhibitor
choices result in minimal antibiotic resistance. This goal will be achieved
through experiments to examine the role of corrosion on antibiotic resistance
development. Collaborations between the research team and water utilities will
facilitate research to determine the interplay between resistance genes, pipe
surfaces, and drinking water chemistry in real-world distribution systems.
Further benefits to society will result from guidance provided to drinking water
utilities across the country. This guidance will help them decide which pipe
materials and corrosion inhibitors best prevent the spread of antibiotic
resistance in drinking water to protect public health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
spread of antibiotic resistance is a primary public health concern. Metals are a
known stressor for antibiotic resistance and are prevalent in drinking water
systems due to aging infrastructure and the use of metal-containing corrosion
inhibitors. The central hypothesis of this work is that corrosion inhibitors and
corrosion products yield metals in water distribution systems that increase the
abundance and alter the types of antibiotic resistant genes in municipal
drinking water. The research team combines expertise in chemistry and molecular
microbiology to address three complimentary objectives. Objective 1 is to
determine the impact of corrosion inhibitors on antibiotic resistance under
variable nutrient conditions. Objective 2 is to elucidate the effect of
corrosion products on antibiotic resistance using complimentary culture-based
and non-culture-based techniques. Objective 3 is to identify linkages between
corrosion products and the quantity and profile of antibiotic resistance genes
in real-world drinking water distribution system pipes. Surface chemistry
characterization will be coupled with Droplet Digital PCR to identify chemical
relationships to antibiotic resistance gene profiles. Knowledge generated from
this research will help utilities mitigate the spread of antibiotic resistance
in drinking water distribution systems. Results will be incorporated into an
annual two-day professional short course on emerging contaminants in water and
wastewater. Additionally, the PIs will build on previous summer outreach efforts
and host a high school course to engage underrepresented students in summer
research to increase the diversity of the Nationâ€™s STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.