* 2027389
* Transitions: Experimental Evolutionary Cell Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Holly Goodson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2024
* USD 728,528.00

Evolutionary cell biology is an emerging field that has the potential to provide
insight into the myriad ways cells work along with the evolutionary processes
and constraints which molds their structures and functions. The goal of this
project is to help provide valuable training to a cell biology group, which will
enable them to tackle important problems in this emerging field. Specifically,
the group will gain expertise in growing cells of an ecologically important red
algae, but one in which cell biology understanding is limited. In an
interdisciplinary collaboration, insight will be gained into how these algae
have evolved without the benefit of what is typically considered to be essential
proteins. The PI and the collaborating group will use the resulting broad
perspectives and interdisciplinary tools to identify proteins and mechanisms
that are common across divergent cellular organisms, helping to illuminate basic
cell biological and evolutionary processes. Broader Impact activities will
include the training of high school students, undergraduate and graduate
students in research methods and additional outreach work will target an older
generation on the interrelatedness of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research consists of two projects. Project 1 has two goals: a) to experimentally
test hypotheses developed from phylogenetic analysis of how the red alga
Porphyra umbilicalis accomplishes core biological processes (e.g., cell
movement, membrane transport, cell division) without key cytoskeletal proteins;
b) to deepen our understanding of the cytoskeletal evolution in red algae (and
plants more broadly) by conducting an initial study of the cytoskeleton in
Rhodelphis limneticus, a motile and predatory organism that belongs to a phylum
sister to red algae. In Project 2, in vitro evolution experiments will be
carried out, with the goal of testing the hypothesis (developed through
discussions with collaborators in population genetics and mathematical biology)
that constraints imposed by nutrient availability affect the rate of adaptation
to non-nutrient stresses. This pilot project has relevance for development of
resistance to pesticides and drugs. Together, these parallel projects are
designed to build a solid foundation for future research in experimental
evolutionary cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.