* 2027150
* Verification of predicted shear wave splitting due to strong seismic anisotropy in subducting slabs
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Yingcai Zheng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 322,546.00

The largest magnitude earthquakes such as those found in Japan, Alaska, and
Washington, occur at subduction zones. In these areas, one tectonic plate dives
into the Earth’s mantle underneath another plate. As the two plates slip and
grind against each other, shallow earthquakes - as well as deep earthquakes
occurring at depths greater than ~60 km (and up to ~700-km depths) - are
produced along the down-going slab. The mechanism by which deep earthquakes
occur is still unclear and being debated. Here, the researchers analyze seismic
waves produced by deep earthquakes in a subduction zone in Japan. Seismic waves
travel through the mantle and crust, carrying information about their sources
(the earthquakes) and the properties of rocks along their paths to the surface.
The team focuses on the properties of the subducting slab, namely its
anisotropy. Flows in the Earth’s mantle deform the constitutive rocks which can
develop rock fabrics such as crystal preferred orientations and aligned
inclusions. When a rock presents a strong fabric, its properties for the
propagation of seismic waves often show some anisotropy. It means that they
depend on the orientation of the wave propagation direction within the rock. By
analyzing the characteristic of seismic shear waves, and comparing them with
modeled predictions, the researchers infer the location of the rock fabric for
the subducting plate interface. They gradually unveil the structure and dynamics
of subduction zones. This project provides support and training for two graduate
students and a postdoctoral associate at University of Houston. It also provides
educational outreach to K-12 students and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic anisotropy can influence both earthquake seismic-
wave radiation patterns and shear wave splitting. Here, the team uses deep
earthquake radiation patterns (aka moment tensors) to map for high-resolution
anisotropy inside the slab. The researchers also verify the existence of the
inferred anisotropy by making forward predictions for the splitting pattern of a
shear wave propagating through the anisotropic slab. Predictions are then
compared with observations. They make the predictions using a propagator-matrix
method and a 3D full-wave anisotropic elastic finite-difference code.
Preliminary results show that for a seismic station above an anisotropic
subducting slab, the predicted fast-S polarization can be either trench-parallel
or trench-perpendicular depending on the incident angle of the S wave; a pattern
which has also been observed in seismic data. The work outcomes shed new light
on the understanding of the anisotropic rock fabric in the subducting slab and
the deep earthquakes. They also provide a pivotal element for geodynamics,
mineralogy, geochemistry, and petrology in their study of the nature of the
observed fabrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.