* 2027530
* EAGER: Electrical detection of individual biomolecular interactions and machine learning-assisted simulations: from single-molecule biophysics to the RISC complex
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Valeri Barsegov, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This EAGER award will fund the development of a novel nanotechnology based
method to measure biomolecular interactions between two or more proteins or
between proteins and nucleic acids. These types of interactions are interactions
are at the heart of most biochemical processes. The new method developed in this
work could be applied to numerous biological problems, paving the way to a whole
new body of knowledge in biophysics. This research will enhance the training and
education possibilities of the next generations of biochemists, scientists, and
engineers in general, and improve the workforce by training them to use the
modern machine-learning tools. This project will also promote the STEM
participation of women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will use novel nanotechnology methods to measure the
electrical conductivities related to biomolecular interactions. The overall
objective for this project is the electronic quantification of biomolecular
interactions, including both thermodynamic and kinetic information as a proof-
of-concept. The central hypothesis of this approach is that electronic
fingerprints from biomolecular interactions contain thermodynamic and kinetic
information that correlate with the biological function of this complex. The
direct observation of the dynamics of interaction between individual
biomolecules will allow a development of a complete biophysical picture
underlying the biochemistry of biomolecular interactions. The research offers
radically different interdisciplinary approach based on expertise in single-
molecule biophysics and biochemistry in the experimental front, and extensive
theory-driven computer simulations experience using Molecular Dynamics and
Quantum Chemistry on the computational side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.