* 2027332
* RAPID: Technology use to facilitate social distancing and coping with the disruption of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Shane Connelly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,859.00

This research will swiftly identify how computer-based and information
technologies can increase awareness of measures that prevent the spread of
COVID-19 and coping with the stresses of social distancing. The COVID-19
pandemic presents many challenges for day-to-day life. In addition to health
impacts, individuals face unprecedented changes in how they live, work, and cope
with the stresses of disrupted routines at work, home, and in how they interact
with friends and family. However, a wide variety of technologies enable people
to create new routines, continue working, connect with others, and cope with
health risks and rising levels of anxiety and worry. These types of technologies
have often been studied as the cause of anxiety and stress rather than as
solutions for mitigating negative emotions and facilitating people’s ability to
cope with challenges. Additionally, this research will contribute novel insights
about how technology facilitates work and daily activities affected by social
distancing and what role they can play in reducing stress and enhancing
psychological well-being through mindfulness and mindful use of technology. This
project is jointly funded by Cyber-Human Systems and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
four primary research goals. First, it seeks to get a deep understanding of what
technologies people are using to prevent the spread of COVID-19 through social
distancing, to manage daily life, and to cope with stress. Second, it will
explore whether and how people are using or adapting technologies in new ways to
meet new needs resulting from COVID-19. Third, it seeks to understand the
relationships of technology use to self-reported physical health as well as
emotional and psychological well-being and to anxiety levels gathered via social
media data collection and analysis. Fourth, it will design and test a
mindfulness intervention to increase people’s mindfulness, emotion regulation,
and coping with COVID-19. Using survey methods, social media analysis, and
quasi-experimental methods, this research will examine a range of technologies
being used during the COVID-19 pandemic to better understand how technology use
relates to participating in social distancing and other measures to prevent the
spread of the virus. This project fits most appropriately in the Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) funding mechanism due to its urgency with regard to
availability and access of data in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.