* 2027452
* Collaborative Research: Continuous-State Reinforcement Learning for Remanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Abhijit Gosavi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 167,972.00

This award will contribute to the national prosperity and U.S. manufacturing
competitiveness by developing new reinforcement learning (a subfield of
artificial intelligence) methods to address inventory-control problems arising
in remanufacturing industry. Remanufacturing is a product-management
manufacturing process that aims to reduce the energy consumption and carbon
footprint of traditional manufacturing. Effective production/inventory
management to match the supply with the demand is a key element to the success
of remanufacturing industry. However, the complexity of such problems and the
uncertainties involved in the remanufacturing process make the conventional
production planning methods difficult to apply. The resulting algorithms and
tools will be fully tested using real-world data collected from the industry and
are expected to achieve significant savings in raw materials and energy
resources, leading to practical management policies of industrial interest. The
PIs will involve both graduate and undergraduate students in this research and
incorporate case studies into the advanced courses taught at different
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be based on a fusion of
techniques from reinforcement learning and the field of simulation optimization.
Through novel adaptations of the-state-of-the-art variance reduction and
function approximation techniques from simulation optimization, the PIs will
investigate a new class of learning techniques especially tailored to
remanufacturing decision-making problems. These include an extension of
classical Q-learning for solving continuous-state semi-Markov decision processes
and more general gradient-free actor-critic-like algorithms that overcome the
local convergence of existing approaches. The algorithms developed will be
studied for their theoretical properties such as convergence and performance
consistency, and then assessed and validated on remanufacturing simulation
models built on real-world data to investigate their practical
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.