* 2027447
* RAPID: Impacts of COVID-19 Out-of-School Stressors on Executive Function and E- Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Lindsey Richland, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In the midst of COVID-19 pandemic, students are not only facing health concerns,
but also other stressors tied to mandated changes in their environments. These
include a near-complete reliance on technology for college participation and
learning, changes in access to peers and social support networks, changes in
works-spaces and possible financial uncertainties. At this juncture of many
upheavals, this project will collect data to understand how U.S. undergraduates’
experiences of stress may be impacting their ability to learn as universities
switch to on-line instruction. High quality learning through online instruction
is known to be challenging in the best of times; these difficulties are likely
to be exacerbated by the myriad stresses that undergraduates are experiencing
now. Focusing on the experiences of undergraduates at a diverse, minority-
serving public four-year college, the data collected will assess the
relationships between types of stressors, and student learning using e-learning
techniques. Gathering this information immediately will be crucial to supporting
students as the pandemic continues. Results will have broad impact on improving
instructional infrastructure and practices to better support student learning in
these stressful times. Moreover, this knowledge will be useful to colleges and
universities in the development of effective strategies to meet their students’
needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Executive Functions (EFs) are crucial to successful
learning; these are cognitive resources that control attention, allow students
to grapple with complex ideas and hold information in mind. EFs are taxed when
students are under stress, leading to increased load on verbal working memory
from external concerns or environmental vigilance. The implication is that
students experiencing high levels of stress will have fewer EF resources to
extend to their learning, potentially made more challenging by lack of
familiarity with e-learning. Two time-sensitive field studies will be conducted
to gather information about the types of stressors that U.S. undergraduates in a
minority-serving public four-year college are facing during the pandemic. The
goal is to assess the relative impacts of different stressors (or their
combinations) on learning, in order to best design interventions to mitigate
damaging effects. Two theory-driven approaches will be assessed as means to
counter potential adverse stress impacts: 1) management of attention as a key
aspect of executive function, and 2) management and regulation of emotions
during learning. In addition to advances in our understanding of how stress
affects student learning, findings of this project will help inform
institutional responses and instructional design for e-learning courses offered
during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. More generally, the work will inform the
field’s ability to improve e-learning in future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.