* 2027927
* RAPID: Variation in Resilience Under Shortages in the Medical Supply Chain
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Cassandra Thiel, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The research objectives of this proposal are to measure the effects of Covid-19
on the medical Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) supply chain, analyze
emerging hospital resource conservation policies, and identify short-term and
long-term solutions to increase resilience in the medical supply chain. The
research team will focus specifically on the effects of Covid-19 as a stressor
to healthcare end-users of PPE (i.e., hospitals and medical clinics). The team
will focus on the uncertainty of supply and demand and seeks to identify the
best policies to reduce the impact for these end-users while ensuring quality of
care and protection of medical staff. The primary aim of this study is to
collect data and use optimization and analytical methods to assist medical
providers during the Covid-19 crisis while also considering the longer-term
potential of mitigating environmental impact and increasing resilience in
healthcare supply chains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach of the study is
two-fold: (1) data collection on PPE usage and supply chains, and (2)
development of novel robust optimization models. A contribution of this study is
to be collection of data on the physical PPE supply chain, hospitals' historic
and current (emergency) use of PPE, and emerging PPE conservation policies and
practices enacted by hospitals during the Covid-19 pandemic. To gather
additional data, the research team has developed a novel crowd sourcing data
collection platform that can later be adapted for other healthcare data
collection as well. An additional feature parallel of this work lies in the
development of mathematical scenario-based and robust optimization models for
PPE supply chain and resource allocation. The research team will develop linear
and robust optimization models to allocate the scarce resources given large
uncertainty in demand and supply. These resource-allocation models will use the
collected data. The team will also develop scenario-base models to test and
validate the different hospital policies for the use of PPE during Covid-19
outbreak. The intended immediate impact of this research is to inform healthcare
workers about effective policies for PPE conservation that lead to optimal
health outcomes for patients and staff during the Covid-19 pandemic. The
findings and the data collected as a result of this work will be made available
to the medical community as soon as possible to help manage the need for PPE.
Specifically, PPE conservation policies will be compiled, and a paper
immediately released to the medical community to broadly help conserve resources
during the Covid-19 pandemic. In the longer term, the strategies developed to
effectively mitigate resource consumption and climate impacts of healthcare
activities will be shared with the medical and the wider academic communities.
The results of this study target increased resilience of medical supply chain
and healthcare operations during times of crisis, including future pandemics and
climate related disasters, as well as a general increase in emissions mitigation
by continuing reasonable resource conservation practices beyond the
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.