* 2027902
* Advanced Computational Modeling of Pathways for Epigenetic Regulation and Genome Maintenance
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ivaylo Ivanov, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 765,882.00

The project will apply cutting-edge computational modeling to advance knowledge
of how chemically modified or damaged DNA is processed to ensure integrity of
the genome. Despite its remarkable stability, DNA undergoes a multitude of
chemical modifications in cells. These include various types of DNA damage but
also regulatory modifications such as epigenetic marks. Left unchecked, DNA
damage interferes with replication, potentially impairing the transmission of
vital genetic information. Conversely, epigenetic marks in critical regions of
the genome are essential for regulated gene expression, cell differentiation and
normal development. Consequently, the biochemical pathways restoring genome
integrity are intertwined with pathways that alter the epigenetic state of DNA.
The project will unveil fundamental mechanisms governing the interrogation,
extrusion, and coordinated processing of modified DNA bases that link DNA
demethylation pathways to base excision repair. The project blends research with
curriculum enrichment and student training in high performance computing and
data-driven computational science, highlighted by a new project-driven course,
“Computation in the Biosciences: Modeling the Machines of Life”, aligned with
Georgia State University’s initiative to promote experiential
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research employs molecular simulation
technologies, novel path optimization and enhanced sampling methodologies,
large-scale supercomputing resources, and experimental analysis through
collaborations to gain mechanistic insights into base excision repair and DNA
demethylase enzymes. The specific goals are to: 1) uncover key principles
underpinning the ability of glycosylase enzymes to select epigenetic marks or
lesioned DNA bases; 2) elucidate the protein-nucleic acid interactions ensuring
enzyme specificity; 3) delineate handoffs from one enzyme to the next in the
pathway, which prevents accumulation of toxic intermediates. Broader impacts
include knowledge that could enable modulation of enzyme activities through
small molecules or rational design, as well as student training with a focus on
underrepresented minority students gaining analytic and computational
competencies through research and coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Genetic Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics programs of
the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.