* 2027070
* RAPID: Revealing the intermolecular interactions between the SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 fusion peptide and the host cell membrane that underlie its flexibility in host tropism
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Susan Daniel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Coronavirus is a membrane-enveloped package decorated with “spikes” that
protrude from its surface. These spikes interact with the host cell to initiate
infection of that cell. The ability of coronavirus to spread to other cells
depends on how well the spike interacts with its target host membrane. The part
of the spike that controls this interaction is called the “fusion peptide” and
its job is to insert into the host membrane to initiate the delivery its genetic
cargo into the cell. However, the specifics of how the fusion peptide interacts
with the membrane is still not known. In this project, various interactions
between the fusion peptide with membrane surfaces that mimic different kinds of
host cells will be studied. This information will provide insight into the
characteristics of both the fusion peptide and the host cell that promotes their
interaction, and ultimately, infection and viral transmission to new hosts. With
a better understanding of the science behind this critical interaction for virus
adaptation to new hosts, we will be better informed about how this virus spreads
and ultimately equipped to develop strategies to stop it. This fundamental
information has the potential to enable fresh approaches to the design of
antiviral drugs that target the fusion peptide. Given that the fusion peptide is
highly conserved across the coronavirus family, these studies will be directly
applicable to all coronaviruses, including the coronavirus that causes
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key determinant of the ability of coronavirus
to spread is how it interacts with its target host membrane. For coronavirus,
entry into a host cell is mediated by a single glycoprotein protruding from its
membrane envelope, called spike (S). Within S, the region that directly
interacts with the membrane is called the fusion peptide, FP. It is the physico-
chemical interactions of the FP with the host membrane that anchors it, thus
enabling the necessary deformations of the membrane that lead to delivery of the
viral genome into the cell. Thus, understanding FP interactions at the most
fundamental level will facilitate the development of strategies to limit those
interactions to stop the spread of infections. This information is expected to
be helpful in predicting the characteristics of emerging strains that could post
a threat to humans in the future. The objective of this project is to measure
and identify the specific intermolecular interactions responsible for insertion
of FP into membranes. Specifically, this project will: 1) elucidate the factors
that control hydrophobic interactions of FP using single molecule force
measurements with atomic force microscopy and models of biological membranes,
and 2) characterize the structure-function relationship of the FP using circular
dichroism and isothermal calorimetry to correlate specific interactions with
amino acid sequence and host surface properties. The intellectual merit of this
project is discovering how changes in host membrane chemistry or amino acid
sequence of the FP modulates the hydrophobic interaction and ultimately
influences activity critical to the spread of infection. The broader impact of
this project is providing information that will enable fresh approaches to the
design of antiviral drugs, as well as to identify basic design rules that inform
how the FP promotes the interaction with membranes of specific chemistry to
predict host susceptibility to infection. Given that the FP is highly conserved
across the CoV family, these studies will be directly applicable to all CoVs,
including those yet to emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.