* 2027097
* NSF2026: Conference Workshops to Identify Research Challenges at the Intersection of Energy and Equity in the Energy Transition
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Dhandapani Venkataraman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,999.00

With support from the NSF2026 program, researchers at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst are conducting national workshops to identify research
challenges associated with building a more efficient and effective energy
system. A transition toward a less carbon-intensive energy system is underway
globally. The challenge is to envision how the energy system might evolve in a
way that is consistent with resources and needs. As a complex global socio-
technical system with diverse stakeholders including individuals and
communities, businesses, non-profits, and governmental organizations,
understanding possible futures for the energy system requires synthesis across
diverse disciplines. This workshop series brings together stakeholders, scholars
from disciplines that include natural scientists and engineers with expertise in
energy technology, and researchers in the social sciences and humanities.
Together, they can systematically integrate science, technology, and human and
social dimensions. The goal of the workshops is the identification of a research
agenda at the intersection of the technological and social dimensions of future
energy systems. The broader impacts to society of a research agenda informed by
a diverse set of stakeholders include the emergence of more sustainable energy
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference workshop series consists of two
face-to-face workshops and several virtual meetings. The conference organizers
are inviting participants from diverse backgrounds drawn from energy science and
technology and social science and humanities fields. The organizers are
recruiting conference participants from diverse populations, including those
underrepresented in STEM research fields, to provide a broad range of
perspectives. The workshops include incorporation of best practices and
processes from team-based science that enable groups to jointly identify
research needs and priorities. The organizers are planning to disseminate
workshop findings widely to reach a broad audience. This conference workshop
series is expected to result in new synergies among a broad, inclusive community
of scholars and stakeholders that will advance research on the energy technology
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.