* 2027360
* RAPID: #COVID-19: Understanding Community Response in the Emergence and Spread of Novel Coronavirus through Health Risk Communications in Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Arif Mohaimin Sadri, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 79,380.00

Risk perception and risk averting behaviors of vulnerable communities in the
emergence and spread of COVID-19 are spatio-temporal functions of individual or
group interactions with their online social neighbors within or outside their
communities and such interactions need to be captured through diverse
information channels (e.g. traditional outlets such as radio, television,
internet and/or non-traditional outlets such as social media). The primary goal
of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is to collect time-sensitive
online social media and crowd-sourced data and analyze patterns of health-risk
communication and community response in the emergence and spread of novel
Coronavirus using data-driven methods and network science theories. The major
focus will be towards understanding how individuals are socially influenced
online, while communicating risk and interacting in their respective communities
as the disease continues to spread. The notion of influence will be captured by
quantifying the network effects on such communication behavior and
characterizing how information is exchanged among people who are socially
connected online and exposed to health risk in such outbreaks of disease. Given
that communities responded to COVID-19 with limited or no preparation and there
is uncertainty in the length of recovery for the communities already affected
while new communities being threatened, the data collection effort requires
rapid response for better coverage and careful monitoring. The data will include
large-scale ephemeral online interactions of people in the affected communities
and public officials who are involved in COVID-19 response, recovery, and
mitigation efforts, followed by a data-driven network analytics and infographics
of COVID-19 risk communication strategies and risk averting behaviors adopted.
The proposed research will not only expand the knowledge base of spatio-temporal
dynamics of risk perception and dissemination strategies in the emergence and
aftermath of a major disease outbreak, but will also result in data-driven
inference techniques to improve our understanding of how people express diverse
concerns and how to harness and embed such information for designing
intervention measures. The methodologies and findings of this rapid response
research will benefit emergency management and public health agencies to define
targeted information dissemination policies for public with diverse needs based
on how people reacted to COVID-19 and their social network characteristics,
activities, and interactions in response to similar public health
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public engagement in risk communication can lead
to more effective decision-making and enhanced public feedback to the regulatory
process. The primary goal of this RAPID project is to mine and analyze large-
scale time-sensitive perishable crowd-sourced and social media data (rich
spatio-temporal data) and reveal patterns of health-risk communication and
community response in the emergence and spread of novel Coronavirus using data-
driven methods and network science theories. The specific aims are threefold:
(1) to document how public interact and communicate health risk information
through their online social networks during a major disease outbreak; (2) to
authenticate data from multiple sources and detect anomalies to avoid
information overload and spread of misinformation; and (3) to examine how online
social networks influence protective actions (e.g., social distancing, self-
quarantine decisions) i.e. information cascades in health risk communication. To
achieve the goal and aims, the project will utilize ephemeral time and geo-
tagged social media interactions of users, agencies, news sources supplemented
with crowd-sourced information on COVID-19. This study will have five
theoretical and methodological contributions to the literature. It will: (1)
advance our understanding of how individuals are socially influenced online,
while communicating health risks and interacting in their respective communities
as the disease continues to spread; (2) inform the literature on how information
is exchanged among people who are socially connected online and exposed to
health risk in such outbreaks of disease; (3) use novel machine-learning and
network science models to quantify influence and network effects on such
communication behavior; (4) capture the variability in network composition, risk
communication strategies and risk averting behaviors adopted based on spatio-
temporal correlations of risk and disease contagion; (5) ensure authenticity of
the collected data from multiple sources and develop more accurate fully-
distributed computational algorithms tailored to health risk anomaly detection
in socio-technical systems. The findings from this research will be useful to
public health and emergency management agencies for tailoring effective
information dissemination policies for diverse user groups based on their social
network characteristics, activities, and interactions in response to similar
public health hazards. The methodologies, and implications of this research can
be transferred in designing effective intervention policies to other natural and
man-made disaster contexts in which public health risks become major concerns.
The project will engage, mentor, and offer an innovative active learning
environment for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students by giving priority to
disadvantaged and underrepresented communities in USA. The project will train
students on computational skills required for collecting, storing, processing,
analyzing and modeling large-scale data using high performance computational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.