* 2027412
* RAPID: Using location-based big-data to model people's mobility patterns during the COVID-19 outbreak
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Debbie Niemeier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 03/31/2022
* USD 82,087.00

The outbreak of COVID-19 in the U.S. provides an important opportunity for
researchers to study the impacts of a rapidly expanding pandemic on human
mobility. This research investigates how to measure changes in collective
movement of people in response to the fast-evolving COVID-19 outbreak using
large datasets of passively collected location data. It examines how locations
within a state respond to public policy implementation and times of critical
public messaging. Detailed knowledge on movement patterns of people can help
public officials identify hotspots and critically isolated populations, as well
as shed light on those groups who continue to travel for work or other purposes.
This research contributes to improving the public response to an emergency and
contributes to bridging different stakeholder mitigation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed knowledge of how people respond to a
fast-spreading global pandemic is very limited and our understanding of these
responses is mostly for small areas. This research will use a near real-time
location-based dataset passively collected through the use of location-based
apps during the period of pandemic. The project will develop scalable, big
location-based algorithms to extract trips and examine the evolution of mobility
patterns throughout the pandemic, and identify different mobility patterns. We
will develop map-reduce based distributed algorithms to scale up mobility
measure calculations based on the big location-based data as well as develop
entropy measures to capture the time-varying characteristics associated with the
travel patterns, and design strategies to correct biases that may be present in
the location data. The methods and results of this research will be useful for
understanding mobility during other hazards that affect communities, such as
severe flooding to understand how travel is changed as a result of imperatives
stemming from both the hazard and policy directives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.