* 2027440
* EAGER: Management and Organizational Issues in Technology Transfer at Federal Laboratories: Data Collection and Analysis to Advance Commercialization of Federally-funded Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* David Waldman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

It is well known that there is less technology transfer from federal labs to the
private sector, as compared to technology transfer from universities. That is
unfortunate since federal labs receive more government funding for research than
universities (e.g., the R&amp;D expenditures of the federal labs in California
consistently exceed those for all 10 University of California campuses). The
federal labs also have a technology transfer component, which arguably is not
currently being realized to its potential. Accordingly, the overall purpose of
this project is to collect data from scientists and managers at federal labs in
order to determine how we can advance commercialization of federally-funded
research. Our project has important policy and managerial implications for those
who govern and manage technology transfer at federal labs. It is also quite
timely, given that the technology transfer gap between universities and federal
labs has attracted considerable attention. Also, the Department of Energy, which
runs 17 major national labs (e.g., Sandia, Livermore, Brookhaven, Berkeley, Los
Alamos) is presently reviewing technology transfer policies and procedures at
its federal labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data we collect will be used to study
three potential mechanisms for advancing the commercialization of research at
federal labs: (1) assessing the “entrepreneurial orientation” of individual
scientists, labs, and organizations; (2) exploring the role of foreign-born
status of scientists on entrepreneurial identity, role conflict, and the
propensity to engage in technology transfer; and (3) managerial and
organizational issues, such as the role of incentives, organizational justice
(workplace fairness and equity), championing, leadership, work-life balance, and
organizational culture in technology transfer, and strategy formulation.
Specifically, the data that we collect on individual scientists and those who
manage these scientists, as well as the technology transfer process more
generally at the federal labs, will help identify managerial practices that
enhance commercialization and the design of more effective entrepreneurial
programs and initiatives. Our findings will also improve our understanding of
the potential roadblocks that exist for scientists at federal labs who wish to
pursue commercialization of their research. The project will be of great
interest not only to scholars of science and innovation policy and technology
transfer, but also to the broader community of “micro,” or organizational
behavior scholars in the fields of management and organizational psychology.
Moreover, this research will yield clear policy implications for managers of
federal labs, as well as legislators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.