* 2027836
* RAPID: Changes in risk perceptions and COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Abram Wagner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

More needs to be learned about how people throughout the world respond to
government actions during an infectious disease outbreak. At the beginning of
2020, a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) quickly spread across countries.
Governments worldwide encouraged people to stay inside and be more hygienic.
After a vaccine is available, governments will encourage people to get this
vaccine. However, during 21st century outbreaks of Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS), H1N1 influenza, and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS),
people did not always follow government recommendations. People grow more
apathetic towards government recommendations over time. This project looks at
how behaviors and acceptance of a COVID-19 vaccine change over time and how they
are related to risk perceptions and the number of cases and deaths in a region.
The research takes place in the United States and four other nations. This
international focus identifies what characteristics are associated with
sustained adherence to public health recommendations and why they vary globally.
Public health officials can use this information in the future to promote
vaccines and healthy behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid spread of the
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) throughout the world at the beginning of 2020 is a
testament to the need for sustained global responses to emerging infectious
diseases. In response to COVID-19, governments worldwide have instituted a
variety of countermeasures and encouraged citizens to practice certain hygienic
behaviors. This research assesses changes in behaviors and attitudes related to
the novel coronavirus (COVID-19). With the understanding that behaviors and
vaccine decision making throughout the world can contribute to global spread of
infectious diseases, this study collects several waves of Internet-based surveys
from individuals in the United States and four other countries. The survey asks
participants about their adherence towards countermeasures, risk perceptions,
and acceptance of a hypothetical vaccine for COVID-19. The survey is conducted
at multiple time points (eight times in the United States and four times in
other locations) through on-line surveys. Changes in the adherence to
countermeasures are linked to changes in the epidemiology of disease in each
country and globally. The aims of this study are (1) to characterize the
relationship between the epidemiology of disease and changes over time in risk
perceptions, knowledge, and attitudes towards hygienic behaviors, (2) to examine
if risk perceptions affect acceptance of vaccines, and (3) to contrast adherence
to public health recommendations across countries which have had different
governmental responses to the outbreak. This information can be used to better
understand how to sustain compliance with public health recommendations and how
to promote a COVID-19 vaccine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.