* 2027939
* Rapid: PBS NewsHour coverage of non-medical, non-clinical care research around COVID-19
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Patti Parson, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter related to
the COVID-19 pandemic. This award is made by the AISL program in the Division of
Research on Learning, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act. The public must be made aware – in a clear, responsible
way – about the role of science to help bring this pandemic under control and
prevent future outbreaks. This project will allow the NewsHour to go beyond
their daily reporting of the medical information about the pandemic, to inform
the public about the difference scientific research/ research conducted by
scientists and medical professionals can make in attacking such a dire threat.
The PBS NewsHour has the capability to quickly mobilize its science journalists
and national distribution infrastructure to produce at least six broadcast
segments and additional digital materials reporting on this on-going scientific
work. They will interview scientists, researchers and experts in genomic
analysis, computer tracking, vaccine production, and social epidemiology showing
what they are doing to test, treat, track and stop the spread of COVID-19, to
create vaccines that may prevent further transmission, and to measure the social
impact of the disease. These segments will be broadcast nationwide on local PBS
stations and distributed on their website, YouTube, and social media channels.
Viewership of the NewsHour is extensive reaching 2.5 million people nightly via
broadcast and almost 33 million YouTube views per quarter. During a recent
quarter, they reached 72.6 million on Facebook and garnered 86.8 million Twitter
impressions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team, Knology, will conduct a
study to assess 1) where US adults are primarily getting information about
COVID-19; 2) their perception of personal and public responsibility; 3)
behaviors they have taken and/or plan to take, and when; 4) their social values.
Knology will develop a survey instrument with adopted items and modules used in
prior collaborations to develop a baseline understanding of the relationship
between news consumption and attitudes about COVID-19 risk. The survey will be
hosted using Qualtrics. Survey data will be gathered from a representative
sample of US adults (N = 1000) recruited using the online software system,
Prolific. A recent PBS NewsHour/NPR/Marist poll will be used as a baseline. Once
potentially identifying information like demographics are aggregated, these
formative data and topline results will be shared openly through the Knology
website to support other researchers and journalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.