* 2027368
* RAPID: Rapidly building a collaborative network of informal educators to address extended school closures related to the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Adam Maltese, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,416.00

This RAPID award is made by the AISL program in the Division of Research on
Learning in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, using funds from
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. COVID-19
presents a national threat to the health of children and families, presenting
serious implications for the mental and physical health of children. This
project addresses two critical aspects of the impact on COVID-19 on families:
(a) the large-scale shift to at-home learning based on nationwide school
closures and (b) the critical need for families to understand the basic science
of virus transmission and prevention. To address these needs, the project team
will develop a series of STEM activities for families with children in grades
K-6 that make use of items readily available in most households. The activities
help children and their families learn about viruses, virus transmission, and
virus prevention while also developing other STEM-skills, particularly related
to engineering design. Importantly, the project team also considers the
emotional well-being of children and families during the disruption of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Led by researchers from Indiana University and Binghamton
University, and experts in educational resource development from Science Friday
(a non-profit organization dedicated to increasing the public’s access to
science and scientific information through podcasts, digital videos, original
web articles, and educational resources for teachers and informal educators) the
project is further supported by partnerships with the New York Hall of Science,
Amazeum (AR), the Gulf of Maine Research Institute (ME), The Tech Museum of
Innovation (CA), the Indiana State Museum, and Kopernik Observatory Science
Center (NY). The activities will be shared with families through live-streamed
web sessions that introduce the activity, give tips to adults for facilitation,
share a bit on related STEM careers and engage the audience in dialog about the
activity and their current experiences. Versions of the sessions that are
recorded will be edited and include closed-captioning and subtitles in multiple
languages before being posted on platforms such as YouTube.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a design-based research approach to
investigate strategies for enabling families to actively engage with STEM while
home and away from their traditional institutions during a period of crisis. The
research components focus on: 1) Engagement: How do families engage in the
activity tasks, in terms of processes, practices, and use of resources? Who
participated, why did they choose to participate and how did they engage
(including modification of activities)? What barriers prevented interested
families from completing activities? 2) Impact: How did the activities change
participants’ feelings of: a) efficacy around STEM and b) connectedness/
isolation, during extended school closures? and 3) the Activities: Which
activities had the greatest uptake? How many activity ideas were submitted by
those outside of the team? What was the age/content focus of each of these
activities? The researchers will analyze social media data (including data on
resource downloads and use of tracked links, YouTube and Facebook views, comment
threads during livestreams and Likes/Shares/Follows across social media sites)
to refine and improve the activities and programming as well as learn about the
ways families are engaging in the activities. The researchers will solicit
survey responses from website visitors to gather more information on
participants, why they participated, how they engaged and how the activities
impacted participants’ efficacy around STEM and their feelings of connectedness
or isolation. The researchers will also ask participants to submit images,
videos and text that describes what they are making and their process along the
way. Analysis of this data would lead to insights on how children and families
use STEM language and practices; how children and families ask questions and use
COVID-19-related and other information as part of their design work; and how
ideas are formed, shaped and refined as families engage in design and making.
While the project focuses on a unique opportunity to collect data on family STEM
engagement as families respond to disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, this
project and its findings will provide a knowledge base that can be utilized to
inform future responses to national emergencies, other work aimed at promoting
family learning at home, and approaches to supporting children in open-ended
problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.