* 2027025
* NSF 2026: What Works in Workshops – Evolving Short-format Training to Serve Life Sciences STEM Professionals in the 21st Century
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Rochelle Tractenberg, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 02/28/2023
* USD 99,774.00

With support from the NSF 2026 Fund Program in the Office of Integrated
Activities, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory DNA Learning Center in New York and
Georgetown University Medical Center are holding a conference on improving the
availability and quality of training for life science researchers, educators,
and other STEM professionals (STEM workforce). Life science research is highly
interdisciplinary and relies on rapid advances happening across its sub-
disciplines as well in computing, statistics, engineering, and mathematics.
However, university degrees often fail to keep up with the pace of change and as
a result the life science STEM workforce is unprepared to use and teach cutting
edge methods and technologies. To address these challenges, this workforce often
relies on short-format training such as bootcamps and workshops to acquire or
reinforce newly required skills. Short-format training has advantages, like
topical focus and ease of access, but studies show it often does not result in
long-term change or successful use of new methods. Disparities among the STEM
workforce can increase when high-quality training is not accessible or
inclusive. The 2.5-day conference is an initial step in implementing the NSF
2026 Idea Machine “Reinventing Scientific Talent” Idea and brings together
national and international experts on training, education, and life science
research to develop a blueprint and build community for the transformation of
short-format training. Improving short-format training in the life sciences will
promote a better-prepared, and more inclusive, STEM workforce for the 21st
Century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference explores challenges in applying
established principles from education research and professional development,
identifies research opportunities, and defines strengths and weaknesses in
short-format training. The conference organizers (representing the largest life
science short-format training programs world-wide) developed an outline of
discussion topics, and a process for identifying participants and incorporating
broad community input beyond the initial set of attendees. The output of the
meeting includes relevant research questions, sets of lessons learned, and
recommendations for supporting career-long learning that will be applicable in
the life sciences and other STEM fields. Ultimately, these outputs form a
blueprint for improvement that supports communities, organizations, and programs
developing and delivering short-format training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.