* 2027708
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: High-Frequency Data Collection for Human Mobility Prediction during COVID-19
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Jing Du, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2021
* USD 66,515.00

COVID-19 has and is continuing to dramatically alter the lives of millions of
Americans as businesses, schools, and many public places have closed around the
country. Recommendations of public officials along with individual concerns and
fears have fundamentally changed the pattern of daily routines as Americans have
adopted the practices of social distancing, sheltering in place, and even self-
quarantine. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will improve our
ability to assess and predict changes in mobility patterns under sudden
disruptions caused by large-scale public health crises such as COVID-19. The
specific focus will be to understand changes in mobility patterns and the
complex and dynamic decision-making process shaping these changes during the
unfolding events associated with this major public health crisis. The project
will advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare by greatly improving
the preparedness and responses of public agencies facing COVID-19 and future
similar public health crises. It will also help understand and predict
reduction, change, and recovery of human mobility patterns promoting the
progress of science in human mobility and urban resilience, in alignment with
the mission of NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this RAPID project
are to: (1) capture and ultimately predict spatiotemporal changes in the
patterns of human mobility in response to the COVID-19 pandemic using social
media data mining techniques; (2) perform high-frequency individual-level
surveys via a smartphone app to understand motivational, decisional, and
sentimental factors shaping changes in mobility patterns; and (3) explore
conversion and convergence functions for high fidelity and high accuracy human
mobility prediction. The intellectual merits of this research include: the
discovery of unique mobility patterns emerging from this public health crises
related to social distancing, sheltering, and self-quarantine practices; the
unprecedented gathering of longitudinal evidence about the motivational,
decisional and sentimental factors shaping mobility decisions; and the
development of innovative algorithms of using a small representative sample for
high-fidelity mobility prediction. The data and knowledge gained from the
project will enhance future studies on urban mobility, travel demand and
resource allocation modeling, and help policymakers assess the response and
recovery of major urban metropolitan area facing a devastating disaster such as
COVID-19. Project outcomes will be disseminated through the Boston Area Research
Initiative (BARI), an inter-university partnership between Northeastern
University and Harvard University, and through the MetroLab
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.