* 2027985
* SBIR Phase I:  Large Scale Production of Antiviral Interferons for the Treatment of COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Ryan Shepherd, PhylloTech Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to advance the development of production
for COVID-19 treatments. The COVID-19 pandemic is placing great strain on the
supply chain for protein and antibody therapeutics and research products.
Interferons represent a specific class of protein released in response to viral
infections; they are currently being tested as important therapies to combat
COVID-19 infections and to regulate the immune system. This project will develop
a new system to produce and purify interferons using a new platform based on a
plant system. No plant system has been utilized commercially to produce human
interferons, due to product loss during purification from plant tissue. This
system overcomes this challenge by secreting the proteins to leaf surfaces where
they will easily be recovered. The rapid scalability of this plant-based system
can allow fast production of COVID-19 therapeutics at high levels and lower cost
than current protein expression systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
Phase I project will develop a photosynthetic platform for the production of
COVID-19 therapeutics, as current production strategies are expensive to scale
and limited in production capacity. Plants will be generated that produce and
secrete interferons for the purposes of large-scale production. Further research
efforts will be performed to determine if newly-identified trichome-specific
promoters, intron-mediated expression elements, and unique protein secretion
signals that are cleaved during protein maturation can optimize and enhance the
system for interferon production. Plant-made interferons will be tested for
activity and compared against interferons generated in other biomanufacturing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.