* 2027892
* RAPID: Information Retrieval and Graph Mining Techniques to Enable Self-Assessment and Clinical Monitoring of Emergent Infectious Diseases
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Bjorn Sandstede, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project will develop a system for enabling patients in Rhode Island to
enter and monitor possible symptoms associated with COVID-19. The system will
also enable patients to compare their symptoms to others in the state. The
system will eventually provide automated guidance on whether and individual
should (1) seek immediate clinical assessment; (2) manage symptoms at home; or
(3) continue monitoring symptoms. The system will be part of a web portal that
makes clinical data available to patients from medical providers across the
Rhode Island healthcare system. Data from the system will be used to develop
computer models that can be used to better predict potential subsequent COVID-19
outbreaks. The resulting system and computer models will be designed to better
predict other potential infectious disease outbreaks in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will focus on the development and
advancement of data science and informatics approaches to establish a much-
needed infrastructure for supporting population-level syndromic monitoring, with
an initial emphasis on supporting patient inquiry and managing patient loads on
the healthcare system. Specifically, the goal of this project is to develop a
real-time monitoring system based on patient-reported and electronic health
record (EHR) data to facilitate public health responses to emerging epidemics
like COVID-19. Specifically, the team will: (1) Create a patient-centered system
that better informs appropriate seeking of healthcare services; and (2) Develop
a platform for population-level clinical decision support and monitoring that
uses data from healthcare providers across Rhode Island using an EHR system. The
system will provide an alignment to health conditions that can be linked to
resources to guide follow up recommendations. Focus groups will be used to
explore acceptability and feasibility of the patient-facing system. A
probabilistic symptom-condition model will then be generated from a combination
of data from admissions, discharges and transfers, as well as clinical and
laboratory data, which will be used to guide targeted alerts to individuals at
highest risk of infection. This model will also include temporal information to
enable modeling of the rate of progression and time to admitting diagnosis. The
validity of the model will be assessed by a team of clinicians. The model will
be used to identify patterns of disease progression, as well as identify targets
for public health intervention such as geographical hotspots or other at-risk
communities. The success of this project has the potential to have immediate
impact in Rhode Island in its response to COVID-19, and potentially inform
disease monitoring processes through the use of EHRs
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.