* 2027470
* RAPID: Broadening Access to Science-Based Information and Practices to Protect Families and Curb the Spread of COVID-19 Among Low Income Families—With a Focus on Latino Families
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Alicia Torres, Child Trends Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter related to
the COVID-19 pandemic. This award is made by the AISL program in the Division of
Research on Learning, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act. COVID-19 presents a national threat to the health of
children and families, presenting serious implications for the mental and
physical health of children. Child development scientists have already warned of
increasing stress levels among the U.S. child population, especially those in
low-income families of color. In addition, Latino children are
disproportionately impoverished, and benefit from culturally relevant
information. Parents and caregivers need to be armed with effective science-
based strategies to improve child prospects during this global crisis.
Harnessing well-established partnerships—including with local TV news partners
and parent-serving organizations—strengthens the potential for broad impacts on
the health and well-being of children and families during the COVID-19 pandemic.
As the pandemic persists, widely disseminating accurate research-based
strategies to support parents and families, with a focus on low-income Latino
parents, is crucial to meeting the needs of the nation’s most vulnerable during
this global crisis. The award addresses this urgent need by producing research-
based news videos on child development for distribution on broadcast television
stations that reach low income Latino parents. The videos will communicate
research-based recommendations regarding COVID-19 in ways that are relatable to
Latino parents and lead to positive parenting during this pandemic. A "how to"
video will also be produced showing parents how to implement some of the
practices. Project partners include Abriendo Puertas, the largest U.S. parenting
program serving low-income Latinos, and Ivanhoe Broadcasting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions include: 1) What information do parents
need (and potentially what misinformation they are being exposed to)? 2) What
are they sharing? 3) How does this vary geographically? 4) Can researchers
detect differences in public engagement in geographic areas where TV stations
air news videos as compared to areas that don’t? This project will use data and
communication science research strategies (e.g. natural language processing from
online sites where parents are asking questions and sharing information) to
inform the content of the videos and lead to the adoption of featured behaviors.
Data from web searches, public Facebook pages, and Twitter posts will be used to
gain a window into parents’ main questions and concerns including information
regarding hygiene, how to talk about the pandemic without frightening their
children, or determining veracity of what they hear and see related to the
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This organic approach can detect concerns that
parents may be unlikely to ask doctors or discuss in focus groups.
Methodologically, the researchers will accomplish this by natural language
analysis of the topics that parents raise; the words and phrases they use to
talk about specific content; and any references to external sources of
information. Where possible, the researchers will segment this analysis by
geography to see if there are geographical differences in information needs and
discourse. A research brief will share new knowledge gained with the field on
how to respond to national emergencies, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, using
local TV news and reinforcement of messages across contexts. The findings from
this award will provide a knowledge base that can be utilized to better inform
responses to national emergencies in the future. By broadly disseminating these
findings through a research brief, the project’s innovative research will
advance the field of communication science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.