* 2027855
* ATD: Anomaly Detection with Confidence and Precision
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Minge Xie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 372,247.00

Detection of threats is critical to national and global security. With
tremendous amounts of surveillance and other types of data currently available,
a systematic and formal quantitative approach to threat detection is needed.
Threats are often preceded by abnormal behavior; early threat detection thus
becomes detection of abnormal behavior. Statistically, detection of abnormal
behavior is essentially detection of outliers from a "usual" distribution or a
"usual" relationship. While missing a threat may have devastating impacts to
society, a false detection also has negative impacts. This project aims to
develop a new outlier detection framework under which the confidence level of
detection is formulated in terms of the level of false positives and is
precisely determined to aid decision makers for more informed resource planning.
The development provides novel statistical approaches for threat detection
utilizing a wide range of data sources. This outlier detection method and the
confidence level determination tool are general statistical methods that form a
useful framework for many threat detection and risk assessment problems. They
will enrich the theory and methodology of statistics, produce a new statistical
analytical toolkit, and contribute to general data science, since outlier
identification is a crucial stage of data cleaning for valid downstream
analysis. The investigators will actively engage in activities related to
education and research training of graduate and undergraduate students,
especially attracting minority and women students into the fields of statistics
and statistical applications, and introducing them to areas that are important
to global and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although outlier detection
algorithms have been extensively studied, most existing methods do not provide
an uncertainty assessment and rely on an ad hoc rule to make judgment calls. The
“Conformity Outlier Detection” (COD) framework under development in this project
can overcome the shortcoming and provide detection with a theoretically
guaranteed confidence level. This development is based on a state-of-art non-
parametric predictive inference tool in machine learning and statistics, known
as conformal prediction. It can provide accurate assessment of risk and
uncertainty with little assumption on the data and can be applied broadly. Under
this new COD framework, the project explores two outlier detection procedures.
The first is distribution-free and is suitable for any data set that provides
pairwise similarity measures between subjects. It can be used for outlier
detection of a broad class of unconventional data sets often encountered in
counter-terrorism surveillance (e.g. text data with word-use frequency
similarity measure, communication pattern changes, voice similarities, network
changes, and many others). The second is a model-based procedure to detect an
abnormal deviation from a "usual" relationship or behavior. The detection method
is robust against model misspecification under certain settings. In addition,
since heterogeneity is commonly seen in large data sets, the project includes
extension of the COD procedures to precision contextual outlier detection under
the general individualized learning framework. Lastly, the project aims to
demonstrate the approaches in a specific setting with sparely observed spatial
and temporal count processes that are commonly encountered in surveillance of
remote areas. This project will support one graduate student per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.