* 2027278
* RAPID: The Social and Behavioral Impact of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Beth Red Bird, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2021
* USD 199,474.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is quickly making broad changes to American society. This
project surveys the public opinions, attitudes, and behaviors of thousands of
Americans in order to map and track the social disruptions caused by the
outbreak, economic shutdowns, and responding public policies. The project will
enhance understanding of (1) effectiveness of public policy in changing
individual behavior to conform with public health recommendations; (2) the ways
in which different forms of public communication create understanding about the
pandemic and distribute public health recommendations; and (3) social and
psychological stress caused by social distance and quarantine. The rise of SARS,
MERS, H1N1, and COVID-19 underline the need to understand these phenomena – not
just the epidemiology of pandemics, but the effective social policies and
practices that create positive behaviors and mitigate harms. This will not be
the last event of its kind, but with a thorough understanding of its effects, we
can be better prepared for the next one. As such, the findings will inform
governmental policies at several levels. It will also inform civic leaders and
residents, thus helping all to mount efforts to mitigate pandemics’
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has quickly disrupted
American life. Surveys of opinions and attitudes and behaviors can track both
these social disruptions and responses to them. The project utilizes an internet
panel of 500 respondents, recruited daily throughout the period of contagion
increase, for a total of 7,000 respondents. The sample is nationally
representative, with an oversample of individuals over age 55. Once the peak
number of cases has passed, daily sample size will be reduced to 250 respondents
per day, for another sample totaling 7,500. To ensure representation, the
project will utilize quota sampling with post-stratification weighting. Survey
responses will be matched with local health department data, including number of
tests, confirmed cases, and fatalities, as well as other policy data, including
school closures, gubernatorial announcements and orders, and state-level
legislative actions. By including geographic measures, the project will ensure
future researchers will be able to explore how community actions affected
respondents’ attitudes, well-being, and public health behaviors. Findings from
the project will inform sociological theories regarding scientific knowledge,
inequality, political institutions, community, stress and social
trust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.