* 2027848
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Using Phylodynamics and Line Lists for Adaptive COVID-19 Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Anil Kumar Vullikanti, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

It has been difficult to track and control the COVID-19 pandemic due to various
factors such as asymptomatic transmission, high incubation period, human
mobility, weather patterns and limited number of tests available. Especially as
the number of cases rise, it will become hard to monitor, and request quarantine
appropriately, as experience in other countries shows. Hence, this project aims
to improve COVID-19 monitoring by designing more targeted and adaptive testing
and intervention in a data-driven fashion. With both monitoring and intervention
applications, this project directly attacks the problem through development of
processes and actions to address this pandemic and also model and understand its
spread. Apart from the immediate applications to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
tools developed should be more broadly useful for other infectious disease
settings (e.g. influenza). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of Data Science,
Network Science, Public Health and Phylogenetic analysis experts main approach
for this question is to integrate several novel datasets via inference
algorithms. The project focuses on two tasks: Task 1: Aligning phylodynamics
data (PD) with line lists; and Task 2: Inferring transmission chains to new
infections using aligned data. The teams prior works on interventions and
monitoring have been highly successful in this regard. These inferred
transmission chains naturally give guidance on whom to adaptively monitor and
quarantine among the new infections. The project will release its methods as
research code, which should be usable by both practitioners and modelers for
faster monitoring under resource constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.