* 2027796
* Increasing Undergraduate STEM Success through Scholarships and Support Services
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2025
* Kathryn Bell, Salt Lake Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 11/30/2025
* USD 999,658.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly capable scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Salt Lake Community College
(SLCC). SLCC is Utah's largest, most diverse college serving more than 60,000
students at multiple campuses and in online classes. This project focuses on
supporting academically talented, economically challenged students seeking STEM
degrees, transfer to university programs, or entry into the STEM workforce. Over
its five-year duration, this project will provide one- or two-year scholarships
to 91 students in Life Science, Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering,
Geoscience, Math, and Physics degree programs. It will also provide one-year
scholarships to enable students to complete their STEM degrees. The project will
have immediate positive benefits on Scholars by providing financial and other
support and services. It will also have longer-term benefits, by enabling
graduates to earn higher wages associated with STEM degree completion. In
addition, companies that hire these graduates will be able to grow their
businesses and increase their local economic impact. The project builds on known
best practices for student degree completion by providing social, academic, and
financial services. By increasing the number of STEM graduates who are ready for
both employment and transfer opportunities, the project is directly aligned with
Utah’s economic growth and transformation goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates in Salt Lake County. SLCC will draw on its extensive
network of relationships with high schools and college partners to recruit
students into STEM programs. A multi-disciplinary selection team will review
applications and select participants. The scholarship program will work closely
with the existing TRIO STEM Student Support Services program to provide Scholars
with services, including faculty mentoring, focused advising, opportunities for
undergraduate research and other scholarly work, transfer assistance to
baccalaureate programs, career placement services, and a supportive social
network. Over five years, SLCC will provide 56 incoming students with two-year
scholarships to enroll in a STEM degree program. In addition, the project will
provide one-year scholarships to approximately 35 “Near Completers” who are
close to completion but need support to finish a STEM degree. The expected
outcome of the project is to retain over 90% of participants though graduation,
transfer to university programs, or entry into the STEM workforce. This project
emphasizes involving SLCC students in high-quality undergraduate research
projects that are typically absent from the experience of community college
students. Such research experience is clearly demonstrated to be a high impact
practice for motivating students to continue and complete STEM degrees. The
project will use a novel intensive writing experience to investigate conditions
under which improved participation in research projects occurs. The results of
this approach will advance understanding about what works for promoting
successful STEM completion. Project activities and outcomes will be of
significant interest to all colleges offering STEM degree programs. As a result,
the project will disseminate its work in peer-reviewed journals specializing in
undergraduate STEM education. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.