* 2027532
* Collaborative Research: Flying snakes: fluid mechanics of deforming articulated bodies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Pavlos Vlachos, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,000.00

There are numerous forms of flight ranging from the natural flapping of insect
wings to engineered multi-rotor helicopters. Among the diversity of systems for
producing flight forces, the flying snake embodies a highly unexpected and non-
intuitive solution for aerial locomotion. With a cylindrical body, the snake has
no extendable surfaces to create or control flight forces. Despite these
limitations, the Asian arboreal species known as ‘flying’ snakes possess a
surprisingly sophisticated ability to glide. These snakes jump from trees,
flatten their body, and undulate in the air in a complex three-dimensional
pattern to produce aerial locomotion. Most surprisingly, the snakes can actively
maneuver in the air, capable of turning in mid-air under their own volition.
Understanding how flying snakes achieve such feats is the first step toward
duplicating this behavior in engineered devices, which could significantly
advance design of robots in complex environments, with important applications to
surveillance, search-and-rescue, and disaster monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The aerial interaction physics of flying snakes - the strong coupling
between the translational and rotational degrees of freedom of the snake as an
articulated body - is largely unknown. This project will test the hypothesis
that translational-rotational coupling is achieved through feedback between
self-deformations (driven by undulation) and unsteady fluid mechanics. The
research will use a combination of animal observations, experimental fluid
mechanics, and computational fluid dynamics to reveal the fluid mechanics of
deforming articulated bodies, of which the flying snake (genus Chrysopelea) is
the prime example. The application of adaptive mesh refinement-based immersed
boundary method to study fluid flows produced by gliding snakes will enable more
efficient investigations on other complex fluids problems with dynamically
moving objects across a wide range of Reynolds numbers. The proposed
experimental and computational framework can potentially re-define the form and
function of locomotion in fluid media for aerial and underwater robotic systems
with enhanced mobility. The project involves a broad participation plan that
will benefit a diverse range of groups. The principal investigators will engage
under-represented students through programmatic connections to regional HBCUs,
for summer undergraduate research as well as recruiting of graduate research
assistants, at the three collaborating universities. Flying snakes excite the
imagination of both students and the public, and the results of the experiments
and computations will be disseminated both professionally and publicly, to media
outlets and also directly to the public through social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.