* 2027077
* Collaborative Research: Towards improved imaging of the outermost core through determination of the effects of lowermost mantle heterogeneity and anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Edward Garnero, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 206,806.00

Earth’s outer core is molten iron, plus roughly 10% of a lighter alloying
material. With a radius that is slightly larger than the planet Mars, the core
sits roughly ~2900 km below Earth’s surface. The fluid outer core holds high
importance for a number of reasons, including the generation of Earth’s magnetic
field, and being an important mechanism to transfer heat to the mantle, which
helps to drive the convective engine responsible for plate tectonics. In the
past few decades, geophysicists have detected a thin shell at the top of the
outer core where seismic waves appear to slow down, suggesting some form of
stratification in the fluid. However, the seismic models for this shell do not
all agree, which motivates further study. A principle challenge in seismically
imaging the outer core is that seismic waves from earthquakes that are used to
study the core have to travel through the entire mantle of the Earth twice (down
and then back), and the mantle is very heterogeneous, with seismic velocities
that vary with position. Thus, how can seismologists determine if patterns in
measured signals are due to anomalous outermost core structure versus
heterogeneities in Earth’s mantle? The purpose of this project is to document
the degree to which the heterogeneous mantle affects the data which are used to
map the core. The team of four seismologists will collect seismic data from
earthquakes and seismic sensors from all over the world, predict the
observations using state of the art seismic wavefield computations, and conduct
refined measurements on the signals that are sensitive to deep mantle and outer
core parts of the planet. The expected outcome is a better understanding of the
degree to which Earth’s heterogeneous mantle affects measurements of data to
study the core, and to produce an improved model of the outermost core by using
the best data which are demonstrated to be minimally affected by the mantle.
Better seismic mapping of Earth’s outermost core will inform research that aims
to understand the enigmatic nature of the magnetic field, heat flow from the
core to the mantle, as well as possible chemical exchange between the mantle and
core which is important for understanding the chemical evolution of the planet.
All four seismologists on the team will share results with the public in a
variety of venues (including the classroom, public presentations, and science
fairs) to promote awareness of the importance of Earth and planetary interiors
in shaping phenomena experienced at the surface. The project will train several
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismically imaged P
wave velocity (Vp) reductions in the outermost 50-400 km of the core imply the
presence of a stably stratified layer overlying the deeper, separately
convecting interior. The precise thickness and nature of the reduced velocity
(and density) layer holds critical significance for geodynamo models that
address making Earth’s magnetic field, as well as the ability to understand core
composition and mineralogy. However, in over ~30 years of seismic studies, no
consensus has emerged among seismologists on either the thickness of the layer
or the velocity structure within it. This is likely due to the effects of mantle
heterogeneity and anisotropy on the seismic data used to probe the uppermost
outer core. This project will investigate travel time, wave path, waveform, and
shear wave splitting anomalies of seismic waves that travel in the outermost
core, including multiple reflections from the underside of the core-mantle
boundary (“SmKS” waves), which are more sensitive to outer core structure than
any other seismic wave, in order to identify and mitigate the effects of mantle
structure on outer core models. To accomplish this, a method that sums
seismograms at geographically localized seismic sub-arrays will be used to
improve the clarity of weak signals relative to noise, which can improve upon
identification of contamination from mantle heterogeneity and anisotropy. 3D
wavefield synthetics will be used to benchmark how 1D outer core imaging tools
are affected by mantle heterogeneity. New outermost core seismic models will
subsequently be determined in forward and inverse experiments based on highest-
quality data that have been corrected for the effects of mantle heterogeneity
and anisotropy. Thus, this project will thus directly test the longstanding (but
likely imperfect) assumption that differential SmKS travel times can be used to
reliably retrieve outer core structure without explicitly considering the
effects of mantle heterogeneity and anisotropy. In addition to producing new
models of outer core structure based on high-quality, corrected data, this
project will produce complementary data products that contain new insights into
lower mantle velocity heterogeneity and anisotropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.