* 2027757
* RAPID: Social un-distancing: Understanding self-privacy violations in online communities during the Coronavirus pandemic
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Anna Squicciarini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The Covid-19 global crisis is unprecedented in a number of ways, one being the
scale and scope of human interaction through social media, as people across the
world have resorted to online mediums to connect with others. Early evidence
indicates that this expanded breadth and depth of online activity may magnify
privacy risks for individual users, offering increased opportunity for privacy
violations. However, aside from some notable exceptions such as contact tracing
apps, online connectedness has not been studied through the lens of privacy
risk. This project will investigate how increased disclosure of personal
information during the Coronavirus crisis poses unique risks to users’
wellbeing, leaving them vulnerable to privacy violations and subsequent harms
that can further worsen the current global health crisis. Investigators will
develop and distribute anonymized, annotated COVID-19 related datasets collected
from online social platforms in the USA and Italy for the purposes of
understanding unique risks to individual privacy posed by COVID-19 crisis.
Framing self-disclosure as a strategic and inherently social behavior,
investigators will study observed individual and collective rewards for sharing
and explore how individual cost/benefit calculations are mediated during the
Coronavirus crisis. Outcomes of this project will provide insights into the
unique evolution of privacy attitudes during crisis, specifically, how
oversharing of personal information is expedited or even encouraged, leaving
users vulnerable to privacy breaches and exploits. Project outcomes will provide
novel computational methods to identify utterances of self-privacy violations
and, critically, to contextualize this risky behavior. These insights will be
critical for effectively managing the health and well-being of individuals and
communities during COVID-19 and future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop convolutional neural networks for labeling of emotional and
informational textual utterances of self-disclosure on conversational datasets
related to Covid-19 crisis. Semantic labeling approaches, to better capture the
language of personal information sharing will also be included in the analysis,
for a better modeling effort. These methods will be used to furnish fine-grained
labels of instances of self-disclosure in user-centric conversations collected
from online social platform. In parallel, the investigators will develop game-
theoretic models of self-disclosure in social context. These strategic models
will support formal understanding of privacy risk vs. social reward at the
individual and collective scales. Data collection, algorithm development and
model refinement will move forward in tandem, enabling the most rapid possible
response during the Coronavirus crisis. Parallel to a focus on domestic users
and English-language text, the investigators will collect and analyze data from
Italian social and mainstream media in order to explore the cultural and
infrastructural “signatures” of these phenomena, as well as to understand self-
disclosure at differing points in the epidemic lifecycle. The dataset with
annotations as well as open source code related to the models will be shared
with the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.