* 2027305
* RAPID: Coordinating Remote Work for Social Distancing to Stem the Spread of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Charlotte Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,878.00

In response to the dangerous spread of COVID-19, organizations, including
institutions of higher learning, are requiring social distancing, in lieu of in-
person gatherings, for an extended period. As one tool in response to pandemics,
the CDC has recommended remote work for social distancing. Previous research has
shown that it is not enough to insert technology into a situation. People and
organizations need technologies designed to fit or be adapted to actual work
practices. Resilient organizations must dynamically adapt. This research project
will develop evidence about how organizations and diverse people are transformed
by transitioning to remote work. It will develop vital guidance for large
organizations—which employ and/or serve tens of thousands of stakeholders—about
how to prepare for, enact, adjust to, and coordinate remote work. The guidance
will be used to quickly inform and educate diverse organizations, stakeholder
groups, and citizens about best practices for working together to meet the
practical, social, and emotional needs of work communities during a transition
to remote working in response to an unfolding crisis. The research team will
promote broad public engagement with this guidance through university, social
media, and news communications channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
centered on a 1-year qualitative research study at the University of Washington
(UW), in Seattle. Seattle was the first US COVID-19 epicenter. UW was the first
university to switch to remote learning and work. Data collection will include
interviews, observations, targeted archival research, and surveys. The study
will involve individuals, groups, networks, and departments, in order to get
multi-level and multi-scale perspectives on a full range of activities that
effectively support resilient organizations and work communities. Qualitative
data analysis, including iterative coding and memoing, will be used to discover
and then elaborate on recurring themes. Underlying the investigation is an
understanding that conceptions of organizational resilience are implicitly about
cooperative work. The analysis will apply computer-supported cooperative work
(CSCW) conceptual tools—such as the types of articulation work and how they can
amplify organizational resilience—in a novel way. This is expected to yield
empirical contributions about the coordination of remote work at different
scales, under intense time pressure. It is also expected to create theoretical
knowledge on how complex organizations coordinate and support remote work in
relation to the social and practical realities of an evolving
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.