* 2027665
* RAPID: Instructional Shifts in Response to the COVID-19 and Their Impacts on Classroom-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* David Hanauer, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,952.00

Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) greatly expand
opportunities for students to participate in authentic research early in their
academic career. Research participation is linked to increased student
persistence in STEM, especially for students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM. Thus, by increasing the number and diversity of
students who have a research experience, CURES also broaden participation in
STEM careers. CURES typically engage student teams in hands-on work in
laboratories or field sites. With the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus, the
national CURE education landscape quickly and dramatically changed to a fully
“online” mode, with limited opportunity for advance planning. Thus, this
situation presents a unique and urgent opportunity to explore how CUREs evolve
in a new online environment, as well as whether they continue to achieve core
CURE educational goals. It also allows for assessment of whether these rapid
course changes have equitable outcomes for all students, including first-
generation students, students on financial aid, and from different socioeconomic
backgrounds. If CUREs are a solution for engaging large numbers of early-stage
undergraduates in authentic STEM research, then the feasibility to translate
CUREs online must be known. It is important to understand the structure of these
newly online CUREs, in what situation they are effective, and who they benefit.
The results of this project have the potential to expand understanding of CURE
instructional approaches and outcomes, for both practitioners and researchers.
Additionally, this unexpected shift to online coursework is an opportunity to
engage broader higher education audiences in new thinking about course
configuration, online effectiveness, and supports and barriers for online
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is twofold: 1)
capture and analyze how CURE course activities are rapidly translated into
online formats; and 2) assess effects of course changes on students with
different demographic profiles. It will provide early evidence to answer if,
how, and why CURE benefits are realized through the different modality of online
teaching. Importantly, this project will not make conclusions about the quality
of online CUREs or online teaching overall; instead, it will explore which CURE
activities can be readily delivered online, how they get delivered, how students
respond, and how this new way of teaching changes/expands how instructors think
about CUREs. The present project will use a mixed-methods design to track online
implementation of CURE courses in two samples. The first sample will include a
diverse set of local CUREs that span multiple STEM departments and have an array
of course objectives/structures. This collection of CUREs will afford an in-
depth, qualitative case study investigation that will capture and analyze
instructors’ thinking, plans, and products, before, during, and after the shift
from hands-on, laboratory-based CUREs to ones that are now abruptly online. The
second sample will include CURE courses from a national network, which will
allow us to explore more broadly and in a more quantitative way, how a large
number of instructors transitioned to online. The project will also examine the
resulting emotions, motivations, and experiences of students during this
transition and how this semester’s student outcomes compare to those from prior
years, through analysis of a historical student outcomes database. This approach
will provide broad reach and comparison among a relatively homogenous set of
CUREs, since all CURE instructors in this network are trained in the same
research approach, have similar course objectives, and use similar materials.
This RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program
in the Division of Undergraduate Education (Education and Human Resources
Directorate), using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.