* 2027655
* SemiSynBio-II: Engineering Write, Access, Read, and Protect (WARP) Drives for DNA-based Data Storage Systems.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Digital data are being generated at increasingly overwhelming rates both
economically and for the environment, with data storage material and energy
usages close to reaching the physical limits of what current technologies can
provide. For over two decades DNA has been considered with only limited
enthusiasm as a potential next generation medium for data storage, despite
holding pronounced advantages of high density, stability, and low energy
requirements. This is because executing the core operations of a data storage
system including write, access, read, and protect using DNA currently requires
multiple complex steps carried out in succession. Furthermore, they often
require specialized processing and purification in between each operational
step. This leads to practical barriers in speed, cost, scalability, and
reusability. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that an
interdisciplinary collaboration can completely reimagine and reengineer these
core operations to be continuous, highly practical, and economically viable
through creative integration of knowledge and technologies from disparate
disciplines. Specifically, molecular biology techniques from the Biological
Sciences will be informed and designed by models and simulations derived from
the discipline of Computer Science and Engineering, while these biological
components will be physically controlled and interfaced with nanomaterials
developed with expertise in Materials Science and Nanoscience. This hybrid
information storage system engineered from DNA directly interfaced with novel
nanofibrillar substrates, will leverage dynamic processing by biomolecular
manipulations, and will unlock direct and rapid readout of information with
semiconductor-based nanopore technology. Biomolecular-based computational
modeling will inform all aspects of both the design of the system and its
operation, from molecular to systems level scales. The interdisciplinary nature
of this project will also provide strong opportunities to advance education and
diversity in the Science-Technology-Engineering-Math (STEM) workforce through
several avenues. This interdisciplinary research provides opportunities for
undergraduate researchers to experience directly working with peers and PhD
students from very different disciplines on common problems. Undergraduate
course modules will be created that bridge synthetic biology, nanoscience,
materials science, computer science and engineering that present applied
interdisciplinary examples including DNA storage as case studies. Hands-on kits
will also be developed to facilitate in-person and virtual activities
administered through partnerships with organizations that reach and support
underrepresented grade-school students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to transform DNA storage systems from batch to continuous
architectures. Each Aim addresses a unit process (WRITE, ACCESS, READ, PROTECT).
WRITE: Rapid, scalable, and cheap DNA synthesis will be engineered by a
combination of tree algorithms and enzyme-driven DNA assembly. ACCESS:
Continuous and reusable access of information and files will be achieved by
immobilization of a DNA database on dendritic colloidal particles with easily
accessible high surface areas. This novel scaffold allows a transcription-based
file access system previously developed by the team to rapidly extract
information in the form of transcribed RNA through simple laminar flow through
the DNA database. READ: RNA generated by the ACCESS technology will be directly
read by nanopore sequencing, and fundamental experimental and machine learning
studies will be engaged to inform the encoding algorithms of DNA databases and
to optimize real-time base-calling. PROTECT: The unique physical and
thermodynamic attributes of DNA and of these first three hybrid unit processes
will be exploited to encrypt and obfuscate information. While fundamental
thermodynamic findings, computational models, and physical technologies
generated in each aim have strong and specific benefits in mutually informing
the other aims, these unit processes will further be integrated together by two
ongoing explicit Umbrella Tasks. End-to-end microfluidic devices storing
protected data will be engineered by integrating all unit processes, informed by
systems-level modeling to identify unit processes that are the bottlenecks for
speed, cost, robustness, and longevity. This work will also generate important
fundamental knowledge and models that will be generalizable to other types of
biomolecular-based information storage systems as well as applicable to problems
in each distinct discipline regarding DNA assembly and interaction specificity,
nanoparticle engineering, and nucleic acid sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.