* 2027465
* I-Corps: Fiber-Coupled Nanoscale Chemical Imaging Spectroscopy Probe
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Zhenrong Zhang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a novel, near-field, chemical imaging microscope probe based on a
plasmonic fiber-tip assembly. This Fiber Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscope
(F-TERS) probe is designed to provide the chemical composition of a sample
surface while taking a nanoscale surface morphology image. F-TERS enables
automation of nanoscale chemical imaging, which could move the technology from
strictly research labs to industrial production settings. F-TERS can operate in
virtually any gaseous and liquid environment, enabling new avenues in data
collection for sample analysis in most real-world environments. The probe
microscope market accounts for approximately $200 million and has been limited
by measurement complexity and lack of chemical sensitivity. An optimized F-TERS
probe could remove these limitations, creating an opportunity for growth within
the microscopy market space. Development and commercialization of F-TERS would
make nanoscale chemical imaging commercially viable for use in various markets
such as the semiconductor, catalysis, and pharmaceutical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of fiber-coupled, nanoscale, chemical imaging spectroscopy probe.
The probe uniquely integrates the plasmonic optical fiber and the most advanced
Raman spectroscopy techniques for an imaging and spectroscopy instrument that
can be used in a variety of commercial applications. The probe can be added to
any existing nanoscale scanning probe-based microscope system (SPMs). Through
F-TERS, an added dimension of chemical detection can be acquired by existing
probe microscopes, substantially increasing their application and inherent
value. Current methods of nanoscale chemical sensing require specific technical
expertise, lengthy microscopy operational time, and subsequently, high cost.
F-TERS will not require highly technical expertise but be usable by technicians
who normally operate scientific instruments, greatly reducing the time and cost.
The new probe assembly eliminates the need for laser alignment, improves the
signal to noise ratio, lowers the required operating skill, and broadens the
material compatibility. The self-contained design of F-TERS also allows it to
function in most aqueous and gaseous environments with little or no sample
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.