* 2027750
* RAPID: ENSURING INTEGRITY OF COVID-19 DATA AND NEWS ACROSS REGIONS
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Sudipto Ghosh, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,748.00

Large amounts of epidemiological data are being generated and collected from a
variety of sources to understand the impact and propagation of COVID-19.
Similarly, huge amounts of news articles are generated and disseminated about
the pandemic to keep the population informed. The appropriateness of the actions
taken by individuals, corporations, and governments are often based on the
quality of data and news. Thus, ensuring the quality of data and news is
important. However, malicious actors can alter the attributes of data records,
insert spurious records, or suppress records causing any analysis to be
inadequate and misinformation to be propagated. This project addresses the
critical problem of defining and identifying spurious data and news concerning
COVID-19, and tracking the source of misinformation. The project novelty lies in
the development of an approach and associated toolset that adapts and combines
Machine Learning technologies to detect spurious data and misinformation and
presents the results in a manner that is easy for end users to understand and
interpret. The approach detects discrepancies in COVID-19 data and traces the
flagged discrepancies back to the data sources. The results obtained from the
news sources and those obtained from the medical data analysis are compared to
determine correlations between the quality of news and the degree and type of
data manipulation performed at any region. The project’s impacts are on
significantly enhancing the ability to perform accurate scientific analysis, and
detecting and explaining news manipulation with respect to COVID-19. The
scientific principles developed in the project are expected to be useful outside
the medical domain. The PI and the students identified for this project are
minorities. The project will be carried out in the Computer Science Department
at Colorado State University which is a BRAID
affiliate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 data discrepancies are related to (1)
single records, where some field is modified, (2) sequence of records over time
forming a temporal dimension, where spurious records have been inserted or
records have been suppressed, and (3) sequences of records across regions
forming a spatial dimension, where there is a pattern of manipulation or
information disclosure across regions. The approach determines the appropriate
combination of autoencoders, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Temporal Convolution
Network (TCNs), and Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) that can work with data
obtained from medical sources and news containing both spatial and temporal
dimensions. The tools help the investigators’ collaborators at the University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Center and Center for Disease Control and Prevention
to perform data integrity checking of medical records and to provide
explanations of integrity violations. The tools also handle different types of
data and news alterations pertaining to COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.