* 2027890
* NSF RAPID: Modeling Corona Spread Using Big Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Borko Furht, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 95,751.00

The novel coronavirus COVID-19 is a virus with serious clinical manifestations,
including death. Although the ultimate course and impact of COVID-19 are
uncertain, public health efforts depend heavily on accurately predicting how
COVID-19 spreads across the globe. During new outbreaks, when reliable data are
still scarce, researchers turn to mathematical models that can predict where
people who could be infected are going and how likely they are to bring the
disease with them. This process sometimes involves making assumptions about
unknown factors, such as travel patterns. By plugging in different possible
versions of each input, however, researchers can update the models as new
information becomes available and compare their results to observed patterns for
the illness. In this project we propose developing of a model of COVID-19 spread
by using innovative big data analytics techniques and tools. We will leverage
experience from research in modeling Ebola spread to successfully model Corona
spread. We expect to obtain new results, which will help in reducing the number
of infected a patients and related deaths. Because of our partner's large
database (through our collaboration with LexisNexis), we are proposing
"automatic" process, so we can quickly identify the virus' trajectory in a
community to significantly reduce the infection rate and the number of deaths.
The proposed research activities have a great potential to advance knowledge
within the field of big data analytics as well as across different fields
including medical, healthcare, and public applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
propose to develop a model of COVID spread by using innovative big data
analytics techniques and tools to understand Corona spread patterns will be fed
into a Decision Support System (DSS) for public health systems. Based on spread
patterns, the DSS will then calculate probabilities for a social group or area
will get infected with Corona. The data will be presented in the form of reports
to responsible state and government agencies, who will then immediately take
action of testing and containing virus hotspots. &lt;br/&gt;We will closely
collaborate with LexisNexis Corporation, which is a leading US data analytics
company and a member of our NSF I/UCRC for Advanced Knowledge Enablement.
LexisNexis is committed to provide a large amount of data for our study of
computational models to predict the spread of this disease utilizing both,
forward simulation and the propagation of the infection into the community and
backward simulation, tracing a number of verified infections. Mathematical
compartmental models have been successfully applied to predict the behavior of
disease outbreaks in many studies. These models aim to understand the dynamics
of a disease propagation process and focus on partitioning the population into
several health states. Common assumptions can include: number of individuals,
infection probability, incubation period, infected recovery time, etc. These
phenomenological assumptions limit the scope of the model while preserving the
most realistic aspects of it, but some model dimension assumptions are necessary
because actual data does not exist. Therefore, in our research we plan to use of
the proposed emerging technologies could accelerate the accumulation of
knowledge around disease propagation in the United States. In our research we
plan to calculate various scores related to Corona spread including: Population
density rank, Household mortality risk, Street level mortality risk, and County
mortality risk. The project will help build a coalition between Florida Atlantic
University and LexisNexis to jointly address public health problems of national
and global significance using the state of the art in computer science, big data
analytics, data visualization techniques, and decision support
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.