* 2027795
* TRTech-PGR: Establishment of a community resource for analysis of gene phenotype in a tractable rice variety
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Pamela Ronald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,100,000.00

This project will result in a community resource for analysis of gene function
in rice, a staple food crop. The fully sequence-indexed mutant collection will
provide researchers an 80% probability of identifying a obtaining a rice line
with a mutation in their gene of interest. The mutant and associated data will
be made publicly accessible via KitBase and public repositories. Public
availability and distribution of these tools will enable researchers to advance
characterization of genes controlling diverse biological processes rapidly. The
proposed genetic resource is expected to facilitate research significantly in
rice as well as in other cereal crops and will set the stage for functional
genomics analysis of diverse traits in other staple food crops. Graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, visiting scholars, and faculty will receive
online tutorials in sequence data analysis, rice growth and genetic techniques,
and assays to identify the mutation corresponding to the gene of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sequence-indexed plant mutant collections have
significantly facilitated plant and animal biology research, especially in model
organisms, e.g., Arabidopsis thaliana. Such a collection is particularly
important for rice, which is a globally important staple food crop, and which
also serves as a model for other monocotyledonous species. The Ronald laboratory
and collaborators created a publicly available, fully sequenced mutant
collection in the model, genetically tractable, Japonica rice variety KitaakeX.
KitaakeX has a short life cycle (9-10 weeks), approaching that of Arabidopsis.
This proposal takes advantage of an established, fast-neutron-mutagenized mutant
population generated KitaakeX. Compared to insertional mutagenesis that requires
thousands of transformations, fast-neutron irradiation-induced mutagenesis does
not require transformation and regeneration, saving labor and time. The aim of
the proposed project is to further characterize and distribute the KitaakeX
mutant population, providing researchers rice lines with mutations in their
genes of interest. In collaboration with the Joint Genome Institute (JGI), the
Ronald laboratory has sequenced 3200 mutant lines. In-depth characterization of
the first set of 1504 mutant lines reveals a total of 91,513 mutations affecting
32,307 genes, i.e., 58% of all rice genes, with mutations evenly distributed
across the genome. The proposed project will characterize the genetic mutations
in 3200 mutant lines and make key data via an optimized database, KitBase. The
seeds will be made available upon request.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.