* 2027620
* RAPID: THE PSYCHOLOGICAL UNDERPINNINGS OF PANIC BUYING DURING THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK AND HOW TO MITIGATE THEM
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Mehdi Hossain, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 135,825.00

The coronavirus pandemic has influenced people’s marketplace behaviors. Panic
buying has been evident among consumers all over the world, incurring
substantial costs to the buyer, the society, and the marketplace. Hoarding and
stockpiling creates shortage of supplies for necessities, depriving others who
might be needing them the most in the situation (e.g., health care providers,
older individuals), and artificially hikes price levels. For the panic buyer,
this behavior creates inventory management problems. This research focuses on
the consumer psychology of panic buying and how the media, policy makers,
government officials and retailers can frame their communication with the
general public at times of such unprecedented events, aiming to mitigate the
psychological triggers of this behavior. The current research illuminates the
psychological remedies of panic buying, and prescribes actions that may protect
the supply chain, ensure equal distribution of necessities among the population,
control price hikes of necessities, and extend consumers’ financial well-being
in pandemic like situations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is two
interrelated studies aimed at tackling the problem of panic buying owing to the
COVID-19 pandemic. The first study explores the underlying psychological
processes of panic buying during the ongoing crisis. Through an online survey, a
U.S. national pool of 2750 respondents provides measures of relevant
psychological factors and proneness to panic buying. The second study uses
findings from the first study to develop communication frames and materials. The
researcher then randomly assigns respondents to different conditions and
evaluates the efficacy of the different conditions to reducing panic buying and
hoarding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by DRMS and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.