* 2027652
* RAPID: Examining public spatial behavior during the COVID-19 outbreak
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Paul Torrens, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,985.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has altered the moment-to-moment activities of our daily
public lives. Some communities have initiated restrictions on the movement,
activities, physical interaction, and socialization of large sections of the
population. These actions have been borne of necessity, in a bid to reduce human
contact as part of widespread efforts to mitigate the potential spread of the
virus. Social distancing measures have taken on a sense of urgency in
population-dense metropolitan areas, which host a large portion of the COVID-19
cases. This project will launch a rapid effort to acquire high-resolution data
regarding life on streetscapes during the pandemic, with the goal of producing
quick-response insight as changes in public spatial behavior unfold. This will
be done by capturing and coding immersive, first-person, geolocated video-
diaries of metropolitan residents going about their daily streetscape activity,
as life shifts to adapt to new social distancing and curfew orders. The data
will be disseminated broadly through local community partnerships. Additionally,
the project will fund four graduate students in diverse STEM related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research captures how new forms of spatial
behavior emerge, while testing how existing theories of spatial behavior hold
under extraordinary circumstances. The central innovation is to focus on
individual embodiment in day-to-day streetscape scenes, as revealed in latent
and overt spatial behavior through body language in public places. This will be
accomplished through first-person video footage of everyday streetscape scenes
from a group of recruited volunteers as they go about daily activities during a
pandemic. The data will be hand and machine coded to explore patterns of spatial
behavior that can indicate relationships between individuals, the built
environment, and socio-behavioral phenomena. Emergent relationships will be
fine-tuned, using a series of studio-based experiments after the fact, deploying
motion capture to methodically and empirically trace-out pathways between non-
verbal communication such as gestures and mannerisms, and high-resolution space-
time details of spatial behavior, in a controlled setting that utilizes the
collected video data as ground truth. To promote broader use of the data and to
foster additional research, data will be collated—from both the field and from
the studio experiments—using high-resolution space-time Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and virtual geographical environments. These resources will be
made publicly available and shared with local partners, with implications for
safeguarding public health and wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.