* 2027668
* RAPID: Scalable Manufacturing of a Microneedle Coronavirus Vaccine Delivery System
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Nicole Steinmetz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant supports research that contributes to
the scalable manufacturing and nanotechnology of a novel coronavirus vaccine
delivery system with funding from the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation Division in the Directorate for Engineering and from the Biomaterials
Program in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. There are no
known effective therapeutics to combat the coronavirus (COVID19) disease and the
vaccines in development face manufacturing challenges for scale and stability.
This research brings an advanced nanomanufacturing approach to vaccine
development by coupling expertise in polymer fabrication with biomedical
engineering. The plant virus offers a unique biomaterial for vaccine discovery
because it can be easily engineered to mimic coronavirus without being
infectious and it is highly stable under various environmental conditions. The
innovation in this technology is that these vaccine candidates can be
manufactured using established polymer-processing technologies, such as
injection molding, into self-administered vaccine patches for durable protective
response. These scalable processing technologies can impact vaccine distribution
on a massive scale, since they can be used to fabricate vaccine/polymer patches
rapidly at low cost. The research is multi-disciplinary and involves polymer
science, bioengineering, and plant molecular farming. Students conducting this
research are trained in an interdisciplinary environment, putting them at the
forefront of innovation to help position the nation as a technological leader.
The PIs are committed to education and outreach through engaging
underrepresented high school student in research and through dissemination of
results via public lectures and demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cowpea
mosaic virus (CPMV) is used as a nanotechnology scaffold to present epitopes
(antigenic peptides) of the novel coronavirus to generate vaccine candidates.
The nanoscale virus-like particle is highly visible to the immune system and
serves as an epitope presentation technology and adjuvant (to boost the immune
response). This research develops vaccine cocktails to provide the most
protective shield against the virus. CPMV is especially suited for advanced
manufacturing technologies. CPMV is produced through molecular farming in
plants. The plant virus-based vaccine candidates are stable under the polymer
processing temperature conditions required for delivery device manufacturing.
The plug-and-play technology can be quickly changed as public health needs
evolve. For example, if mutants or novel strains emerge the platform is
adaptable in that the epitopes can be easily replaced. The CPMV vaccine
candidates are blended into slowly degradable polymers and injection molded into
microneedle patches. Injection molding is a scalable method to manufacture
polymeric devices at low cost. The polymers are chosen for slow release of the
vaccine candidate over the course of months, providing protection over the
course of the pandemic. The slow release of the vaccine provides boosts to the
immune system, which is effective after a single administration. Once realized,
these patches can be shipped outside of the cold-chain and show efficacy when
self-applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.