* 2027571
* RAPID: A Novel Detector for Mitigating the Covid-19 Pandemic based on Phase Interrogated Ultra-sensitive Microwave Resonance
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Yang Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

This project will conduct research to develop a rapid and powerful electronic
probe that can detect biochemical attributes of COVID-19 from exhaled breath in
real-time and on-demand. Our approach is an alternative and complementary
solution to rRT-PCR for large-scale COVID-19 testing. The proposed sensor is a
novel biohazard aerosol analyzer probe, which is based on phase interrogated
ultra-sensitive microwave resonance. The probe can detect physicochemical
attributes of human lung capacities and compositions of breath aerosols. We
hypothesize that the compositions of the breath aerosols (water, virus,
bacterial) will correlate to permittivity signatures of specific pulmonary
diseases, which can be extracted using machine learning algorithms. The probe
will separate sick from healthy individuals through a rapid and definitive test
of an individual's breath. The proposal focuses on defining the theoretical and
experimental sensitivity and selectivity of the probe and addresses the
following: Is it possible to detect signatures from COVID-19 and other diseases
from exhaled breath in real-time? Computer simulations will be employed to
investigate the fundamental electromagnetic parameters of a prototype probe to
determine the theoretical limit of detection. Probes will be fabricated and used
to identify size distributions and chemical compositions of innocuous aerosols
and those containing materials simulating viruses and respiratory tract
secretions to detect COVID-19. Machine learning will be employed to analyze
aerosol data and identify diseased
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This work will advance the
state-of-the-art of non-invasive point-of-care probes in the health care arena.
The integration of machine learning data analysis with real-time and on-demand
medical diagnostics is a novel contribution which will permit real-time
evaluation of large-scale probe data and the concomitant detection of vectors of
disease propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will
inspire engineers to quickly advance the proposed strategy for identifying
COVID-19 and other pulmonary disease signatures from human breath in real-time
so that testing of human breath will soon become standard medical practice
worldwide. The work is multidisciplinary, involving optics, electronics,
chemistry, physics, virology, and machine learning. Testing has been identified
as a scarce and essential resource. This research will permanently and
dramatically enhance the containment of pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.