* 2027790
* RAPID: Collaborative: REACT: Real-time Contact Tracing and Risk Monitoring via Privacy-enhanced Mobile Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Amy Franklin, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 13,279.00

Contact tracing is critical for controlling epidemic disease outbreaks such as
the fast-growing COVID-19 pandemic. Real-time location traces of individuals can
be used to significantly speed up and scale up contact tracing. However, such
use also heightens concerns on individual privacy and data abuse. Urgency of the
COVID-19 pandemic requires a careful balance of privacy protection with public
health benefits. This project aims to develop techniques and a mobile
application, REACT, for REAal-time Contact Tracing and risk monitoring via
privacy-enhanced tracking of users' locations and symptoms. To enhance privacy,
users can control and refine the frequency and granularity with which their
information will be collected and used. REACT will enable: 1) contact tracing of
individuals and locations that a confirmed case has contact with for quarantine
and decontamination to control further spread, 2) individual risk monitoring
based on the locations they visit and their contact with others so they can be
informed and alerted; and 3) community risk monitoring and detection of early
signals of community spread to prepare for larger-scale infections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and study: 1) efficient and
scalable data structures and algorithms for contact tracing queries given a
large number of users and multi-resolution location traces; 2) a learning-based
approach for modeling users’ risks in real time; 3) a social network sensors
approach for monitoring the community risk, and 4) a multi-stage privacy
approach where users can upload generalized locations to receive alerts and more
precise locations when they are notified as possible contacts with confirmed
cases for refinement and confirmation. More rigorous privacy enhancements will
be studied including location perturbation based on geo-indistinguishability and
its variants and searchable encryption for contact tracing on encrypted
locations. In addition, the project includes a set of dissemination and
education activities: 1) releasing a mobile app with open-source system
components; 2) investigating privacy-preserving mechanisms to share the
collected data for research studies; and 3) integrating the research in classes
and organizing seminar series and tutorials to promote the interdisciplinary
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.