* 2027718
* RAPID: Real-time updating of an agent-based model to inform COVID-19 mitigation strategies.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Alex Perkins, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,883.00

The SARS-CoV-2 virus is responsible for the most significant pandemic in a
century. With a vaccine not yet available, non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs) offer the only way to control the virus at this time. Those
interventions, which include social distancing, school closures, and sheltering
in place, may be effective if timed appropriately and adopted widely. At the
same time, NPIs cause serious social and economic disruption, meaning that they
must be used as sparingly as possible. To inform decisions about when to adopt
NPIs, and when to relax them, it is important to understand what the
consequences of those actions might be. This research will advance the
capability of mathematical models to provide insight into those consequences.
Looking to past data, the researchers will use statistical approaches to
estimate key unknowns, such as numbers of people previously or actively
infected. Looking into the future, the researchers will use simulation modeling
of communities across the United States to evaluate the consequences of
alternative actions. Merging these approaches will capitalize on the strengths
of each, resulting in improved projections of the consequences of alternative
strategies for mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will feature a geographically
realistic, agent-based model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the United States.
Advantages of this model include its detailed portrayal of the density,
demography, and movement patterns of people in specific counties across the
United States, and its ability to directly implement NPIs through behavior
modification of agents. These features enable locally tailored projections of
SARS-CoV-2 transmission and impacts of NPIs thereon. At the same time, the
computational demands of agent-based models pose a challenge to using them in
the fast-paced context of a pandemic. To overcome that challenge, the
researchers will use less computationally demanding statistical approaches to
estimate inputs for use in the agent-based model up to a given point in the
pandemic. The agent-based model will then simulate forward from that time under
alternative scenarios about use of NPIs. To further safeguard against
computational demands being a limiting factor for producing timely results, the
researchers will make use of high-performance computing resources to perform
batches of simulations of the agent-based model that account for stochasticity
and parameter uncertainty. Results will be publicly disseminated on a regular
basis over the course of the project, and the researchers will coordinate with
stakeholders to ensure that mitigation scenarios under consideration remain
relevant as the pandemic progresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.