* 2028213
* EAGER: An Experimental Exploration for Spin-Based Neuromorphic Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Abhronil Sengupta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 102,514.00

Recent experiments in spintronics have revealed the opportunity of mimicking
brain-like functionalities in a single device structure that can be operated at
very low terminal voltages. These non-volatile memory technologies can be
arranged in crossbar array fashion to realize In-Memory Computing in
neuromorphic systems by application of Kirchoff's law. Spintronics enabled
neuromorphic computing has the potential of enabling a significant increase in
efficiency of machine learning hardware. However, experimental investigations
are still in the infancy stage. The goal of this project is to experimentally
demonstrate the emulation of the computational primitives by mimicking
biological brain in the underlying hardware substrate exploiting the functional
properties of Spin-Orbit Coupling. The EAGER program is focused to prove the
feasibility of experimentally demonstrating spin-based neuromorphic devices that
has the potential to enable significant improvements in performance and energy
consumption as compared to Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor technologies.
If successful, the research can lead to the development of computing paradigms
that inherently exploits nanomagnetic devices as a mechanism to build brain-like
hardware. Graduate students and undergraduates from Penn State's Schreyer Honors
College will be engaged in the research activities of this project. The PI plans
to integrate the results from this project into the Electrical Engineering
departmental K-12 summer camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior experimental efforts
have mainly focused on single device characterizations without addressing the
issues of scalability and system-level demonstrations. This proposal aims to
bridge that gap through the following research thrusts: (i) Fabrication and
characterization of heavy-metal based Hall-bar structures at room temperatures
to experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of various neural and synaptic
functionalities including leaky-spiking neuron, stochastic-spiking neuron,
spike-timing dependent plasticity, and short-term plasticity. The device
structure will consist of a ferromagnet (CoFe/CoFeB) â€“ heavy metal (Ta/Pt) Hall-
bar where current flowing through the device will be used to switch the magnet
and the final state will be detected using anomalous Hall effect. (ii) The
device will be characterized for performance and non-idealities like
magnetization pinning, stochastic programming, thermal noise induced switching,
and programming resolution. (iii) Arrays of such devices will be fabricated to
investigate the impact of device-to-device and cycle-to-cycle variations and
demonstrate a prototype computing system. Efforts will also be placed to develop
realistic device models by incorporating device constraints and non-idealities
that can be used to predict performance of large-scale systems. Successful
completion offers the basis for transformative improvements in the efficiency of
machine learning platforms having the capability of performing real-time
decision-making in autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.