* 2028736
* EAGER: SARE: Dynamic Phase Center Antennas for Secure Sensing and Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Nanzer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 224,952.00

The rapid increase in the use of wireless devices in commercial products for
sensing and communications has led to significant societal improvements.
However, every wireless connection, whether for sensing or communications,
represents a potential access point for security threats, whether malicious or
accidental. Vulnerabilities that are well-known to the military sensing
community, such as jamming, interference, and spoofing, are increasingly
becoming potential vulnerabilities for commercial sensors, from automotive
networks and radar, to in-home sensors, to body-worn gesture recognition radars.
Beyond this, hacking threats have been evolving, with researchers demonstrating
the ability to control vehicles remotely through the wireless communications
channels on modern vehicles. To address these emerging challenges of wireless
security, this project will investigate a novel approach to mitigate
vulnerabilities at the physical layer by using dynamic antennas. By dynamically
moving the phase centers of antennas in space and time, the information
transmitted and received by the antenna can be filtered at the physical layer,
significantly reducing the impact of malicious signals before they enter the
wireless system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
investigate new methods of physical layer security of sensing and communication
systems through dynamic modulation of antenna phase centers. Prior work by the
principal investigator has demonstrated the ability of dynamic antenna arrays to
support directional modulation; this research will explore the concept at the
antenna level and develop novel antenna structures with phase center dynamics.
The effort has the following objectives: 1) explore the theoretical foundations
of phase center dynamics in antennas; 2) design and develop new dynamic antennas
jointly with signal processing in wireless systems; 3) demonstrate additional
security in sensing and wireless communications provided by dynamic antennas.
This research will develop new theoretical foundations for dynamic antennas,
potentially leading to new design concepts and new areas of study in the field
of applied electromagnetics. Through an inherently interdisciplinary approach,
the work will focus on wireless system security design from a holistic
viewpoint, including the electromagnetic aperture, the transceiver system, and
signal processing, leading to potentially new ways of designing and
characterizing wireless systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.