* 2028881
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Performance Scalability, Trust, and Reproducibility: A Community Roadmap to Robust Science in High-throughput Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Victoria Stodden, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 30,000.00

This project is focused on a critical issue in computational science. As
scientists in all fields increasingly rely on high-throughput applications
(which combine multiple components into increasingly complex multi-modal
workflows on heterogeneous systems), the increasing complexities of those
applications hinder the scientists’ ability to generate robust results. The
project recruits a cross-disciplinary community working together to define,
design, implement, and use a set of solutions for robust science. In so doing,
the community defines a roadmap that enables high-throughput applications to
withstand and overcome adverse conditions such as heterogeneous, unreliable
architectures at all scales including extreme scale, rigorous testing under
uncertainties, unexplainable algorithms (e.g., in machine learning), and black-
box methods. The project’s novelties are its comprehensive, cross-disciplinary
study of high-throughput applications for robust scientific discovery from
hardware and systems all the way to policies and
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through three virtual mini-workshops called
virtual world cafes, this project engages a community of scientists at campuses
(through the Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions [CAHSI], the
Coalition for Academic Scientific Computing [CASC], and the Southern California
Earthquake Center [SCEC]), at national laboratories, and in industry. The
scientists participate in defining scalability, trust, and reproductivity in an
initial set of high-throughput applications; identifying a set of experimental
practices that support the in-concert successful progress of these applications’
workflows; advancing towards a vision of general hardware and software solutions
for robust science by evaluating the generality and transferability of
experimental practices and by identifying any missing parts; and defining a
research agenda for the next-generation workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.