* 2028212
* Collaborative Research: Using multi-proxy paleo data to constrain natural and anthropogenic hydrographic variability in the Gulf of Maine System over the last 250 years
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Michele LaVigne, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 203,631.00

The Gulf of Maine is located in the Northwestern Atlantic Ocean. Its waters
serve as home to the economically important Atlantic Cod and shellfish industry.
But recent changes to this environment pose a threat to the ecosystem and the
commercial fishing industry. However, only a few long-term records of the
environment exist in this area making it difficult to tell exactly when these
changes started and how much is related to human activities. In this project, a
team of researchers from three universities will construct a 250-year history of
the regional environment by measuring yearly growth bands in local clams and
algae. Chemical fingerprints in these growth bands will be used to determine the
water temperature, salinity, biological productivity and pH conditions. This
allow scientists to study how natural changes have affected the environment and
compare these to changes caused by greenhouse global warming. This information
will inform policy decisions of the newly-formed Maine Climate Council on how to
better manage this area. The proposed work will also support training for early
career scientists, broaden participation in science programs, and support
undergraduate research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
team will use a multi-pronged approach using geochemical proxies in two types of
high-resolution marine climate archives (clams and crustose coralline algae) to
reconstruct past changes in oceanographic conditions, including near surface
seawater temperatures, salinity, and pH in the Gulf of Maine through the last
250 years. Geochemical fingerprints (or proxies) preserved in the annual growth
bands of clam shells and skeletons of long-lived marine calcifiers have been
used extensively as archives of past ocean conditions. Discrete calcium
carbonate layers can be sampled from the growth bands of clams and crustose
coralline algae for geochemical analysis, generating proxy archive records.
These reconstructions of past environmental conditions fill data gaps prior to
instrumental records. Hence, the proposed research will potentially yield
several multi-centennial, annually-resolved, absolutely-dated datasets of
oceanographic variability in the Northwestern Atlantic, including the Gulf of
Maine, prior to the Industrial Revolution, which will be used to evaluate the
role of Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, and other climate forcings,
on observed changes. By combining new data derived from traditional and novel
proxies with existing hydrographic records, the relative contributions of source
waters into the Gulf of Maine through time will be characterized to better
understand the drivers of variability within the Gulf of Maine. Understanding
past oceanographic variability in the Gulf of Maine is therefore critical for
predicting the likely extent and magnitude of future change, and for planning to
safeguard ecosystems and fisheries. Results will be widely disseminated to
science and non-science audiences through publications, conference
presentations, mentoring programs, coursework, and outreach activities at area
schools, museums, and science centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.