* 2028688
* Collaborative research: A mechanistic approach to assess the impacts of hurricanes on tropical forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Maria Uriarte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 263,080.00

The intensity and frequency of hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean have been
increasing. Hurricanes change forest structure and can increase carbon emissions
to the atmosphere. Severe hurricanes favor light-loving tree species that are
particularly vulnerable to wind damage, making forests more vulnerable to
subsequent hurricanes. More severe hurricanes may also lead to the development
of shorter forests dominated by wind-resistant species. In the short term, tree
damage from severe hurricanes will reduce forest carbon storage and through
accelerated decomposition, much of the carbon in dead biomass will return to the
atmosphere as carbon dioxide. However, the long-term effects of more severe
hurricanes on carbon dynamics are not well understood and depend on the severity
of the hurricane and post-disturbance tree establishment, growth, and death. The
research will use data collected after Hurricane María in Puerto Rico to improve
understanding of these long-term effects. Society will benefit from the
development of modeling schemes that can be used to predict forest resilience to
climate change. Results will be shared with scientists and managers working in
the U.S Forest Service and 28 young scientists will gain valuable experience in
ecological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research studies the
unique situation caused by the passage of Hurricane María over Puerto Rico in
2017 to gain important, new knowledge about the effects of extreme wind on
forests and to develop a realistic approach to representing forest responses to
wind damage in earth system models. María was the strongest hurricane to make
direct landfall in Puerto Rico since 1928 and may reflect changes in North
Atlantic hurricanes. This project completes the seventh 5-year census of the 16
hectare Luquillo Forest Dynamics Plot to characterize post-disturbance tree
recruitment, growth, and delayed mortality. The project combines data on tree
damage and forest recovery after Hurricane María and two weaker storms,
hurricanes Hugo (1989) and Georges (1998), with aerial laser-derived
representation of tree biomechanical properties. This information will be used
to characterize the relationship between canopy structure of tree species and
their response to a range of hurricane severities. The data will then be used in
the Ecosystem Demography model, allowing assessment of the impacts of various
climate change scenarios on forest and carbon
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.