* 2028274
* RAPID: CCF: Optimizing Resource Allocation to Combat Pandemics
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Sanjiv Kapoor, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Network mobility models are important in the analysis of the COVID-19 pandemic,
and are especially useful for optimizing allocation of resources to combat the
spread of infections. The recent pandemic highlights this, as well as the need
for methods to determine timely decisions for strategic interventions that
reduce the impact of the pandemic on populations. Use of network traffic models
account for flow of the disease via carriers from the initial source of the
pandemic and between centers of infections, and addresses the long-distance
spread of the disease. Non-medical solutions that immediately attempt to reduce
the spread of pandemic include intra-city restrictions and inter-city strategies
that involve suppression of population transfer. Critical actions include
decisions on the level of suppression, the routes over which suppression has to
be applied, and the time at which it has to be applied. Reducing the mitigation
or suppression must critically account for the re-occurrence of the disease. The
level of  suppression has economic consequences with immediate and potential
long term impacts on employment and economic growth, and can run counter to
maintaining essential services such as food distribution, medical facilities,
and first responders. This project will develop novel techniques to analyze
pandemic models and design new optimization algorithms that provide decision
strategies, accounting for costs, including the economic costs of suppression.
This research has time urgency as there is a need for strategic analysis in the
current pandemic and the project will utilize timely insights from the data
available. Additionally, the insights will assist in determining decision
strategies for future occurrences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will
identify and refine network models of pandemic spread using a hierarchical model
that incorporates the traffic network between major cities and countries at the
first level. The subsequent levels will utilize local traffic networks and
mobility patterns in centers of large populations. The models will include (i)
subdivision of  populations into classes that represent the current state of the
pandemic, examples being population sets that are susceptible, infected,
suppressed and recovered, all parameterized by time, (ii) multiple source and
destination network flow models of infection flow, and (iii) geographic models
of infection spread in local population clusters. This project will apply
optimization techniques and network analysis to analyze the models and design
algorithms for determining decision strategies. Evolution of the population
sets, as modeled by differential equations solved using numerical  methods and
discrete analogs, will be investigated. Methods to determine parameters that
regulate the transfer rates between populations will be designed. The model will
be used to define mathematical programs in order to optimize decision parameters
that include the level of suppression and the time at which to relax
suppression. Network flow techniques will be used to minimize the flow of
infection with multiple key objectives, especially to minimize the peak levels
of the spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.