* 2028617
* Bridging the gap in multiphase flow simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Marcus Herrmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 338,844.00

Understanding and predicting the dynamics of multiphase flows is important as
these flows are found in everyday life and in many engineering applications. In
nature, flows that involve two phases or more include clouds, dust storms and
sediment transport in rivers. Fuel sprays, pharmaceutical sprays to treat
pulmonary infections and diseases, pneumatic transport, powder processing and
bubble column reactors are among the many applications relying on multiphase
flows. Unlike single-phase flows which have established methods, simulations of
two-phase flows are far more challenging due to the added complexity and cost
required to deal with discontinuities, mass and momentum exchange at the
interface separating the two phases. Despite decades of growing computational
power, deployment of state-of-the art multiphase flow solvers remains exclusive
to well curated and simplified academic flows, while many applications remain
out of reach. The goal of this project is to develop numerical strategies that
retains high-fidelity yet reduces the computational cost using computationally
efficient methods. This research will benefit a wide range of industries where
multiphase flow simulations are routinely conducted to inform the design of
engineering systems. The reduced computational cost will enable simulations of
real-life flows in regimes previously inaccessible. The project also aims at
inspiring young kids to pursue careers related to fluid mechanics through an
experiential learning module delivered during an outreach event in a digitally-
enhanced performance arts stage at Arizona State University. Graduate and
undergraduate students will receive stronger professional preparation and
training through involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
computational approach will be investigated, which enables a consistent and
continuous transition from fully resolved to fully modeled interfacial dynamics
within the same simulation. The method builds on the volume-filtering theory as
its mathematical support. The approach is similar in spirit to the Large Eddy
Simulation method where interface scales larger than the filter width are fully
resolved, and scales smaller than the filter width are fully modeled. Three
variants of the method will be implemented and characterized, Volume-Filtered
Immersed Boundary, Volume-Filtered Volume of Fluid and Volume-Filtered Eulerian-
Lagrangian. The investigation will reveal the precise conditions allowing
consistent and conservative transition from resolved to modeled interface using
the Eulerian-Lagrangian approach where the characteristic interface length scale
drops below the filter size. The approach will be demonstrated in simulations of
atomizing jets and particle-laden channel flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.