* 2028536
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: The Internet under Widespread Shelter-in-Place: Resilience, Response, and Lessons for the Future
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 04/30/2021
* USD 74,975.00

The spread of COVID-19 has led to unprecedented and ongoing changes to daily
life, including shelter-in-place orders, widespread closing of businesses and
schools, and work-from-home and school-from-home at previously unknown levels.
These changes in behavior are placing extraordinary demands on the Internet.
This project will measure the Internet’s ability to meet these demands,
including comparing its performance before, during, and after the peak of
COVID-19; whether the amount of change varies between areas heavily impacted by
COVID-19 and those less impacted; and whether and how large networks
adapt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide this rich understanding, this project
will combine multiple Internet-scale datasets that provide complementary views
to investigate how responses to COVID-19 have impacted the Internet and how
networks have reacted. Specifically, the project will measure how workloads have
changed and their impact on networks in response to COVID-19 by measuring
traffic patterns worldwide and the impact of congestion on performance globally.
In addition, the project will measure how networks react to these changes in
workloads by monitoring path changes that indicate rerouting of traffic during
surges induced by measures in response to COVID-19, identifying whether traffic
management is deployed for (de)prioritizing certain network flows, and measuring
whether networks add interconnections and upgrade capacity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring the network impact of COVID-19 will illuminate
the Internet’s strengths and weak points and is a crucial step towards improving
the Internet’s future resilience in the face of pandemics, natural disasters,
large scale conflict, and terrorist attacks. The Internet is designed for
resiliency, but large cloud and content providers have been avoiding public
Internet exchange points and the public Internet in favor of private
interconnection and private wide-area networks. This project will understand the
impact of these decisions. The relative performance of these strategies under
stress should play a critical role in informing future research, funding, and
design of critical Internet infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the
data, measurement tools, and analysis code used for this study will be published
to the greatest extent permitted by our affiliated organizations and prevailing
data privacy regulations, with links to these artifacts posted
at&lt;br/&gt;https://covid19-internet-resilience.github.io/. The goal is to keep
these artifacts publicly available in perpetuity via free storage and cloud
repositories, though the duration is subject to the availability of such
resources. The tools and code will be maintained for as long as they remain
useful for measuring Internet resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.