* 2028554
* Collaborative Research: Geodetic imaging of the interplay between creep, locking, earthquakes and land subsidence along the Chaman plate boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 282,820.00

For the past 50 million years, processes deep within the Earth have forced the
Indian subcontinent to collide with the Asian continent. In the north the high
mountains and earthquakes of the Himalaya are evidence of this continued
collision. Less well studied, the 700-mile-long western edge of the subcontinent
between Karachi and Kabul is marked by several large faults similarly plagued by
damaging earthquakes. Although none have occurred recently, several key areas
where future earthquakes are anticipated. Thanks to satellite imagery and the
dry terrain, the researchers can quantify the evolution of stresses in the
region responsible for these future earthquakes in remarkable detail. They will
use satellite radar observations to develop a detailed model of where the plate
boundary fault is currently locked and where it is slowly creeping, suggesting
reduced earthquake hazard. However, complicating these studies, a tenfold
increase in local populations in the past two decades has increased the demand
for water. This demand has been met by pumping water from a half dozen
subsurface aquifers, but with catastrophic consequences. Lowered underground
pressures have caused surface subsidence and open fissures in cities, leading in
some cases to the demolition of schools and hospitals. These changes in
subsurface pressure also have the potential to alter stresses on faults where
earthquakes are anticipated. This project quantifies both the changing tectonic
forces responsible for earthquakes, and the modification of these forces by
unprecedented groundwater withdrawal in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, satellite geodesy techniques, including satellite radar
interferometry and Global Navigation Satellite System data, and creepmeters will
be used to study the spatial and temporal distributions of ground deformation
along the entire Chaman fault system during the time period from 2014 to 2023.
The focus is on the following scientific targets: 1) quantify the surface
deformation rates along the Chaman fault arising from interseismic coupling,
fault creep, earthquakes, and ground subsidence due to groundwater extraction;
2) invert for the fault slip rates and locking depths of major faults in the
Chaman fault system and identify the associated spatial distribution and
temporal variation of interseismic strain accumulation and fault creep along
both the Chaman and Ghazaband faults; 3) investigate the fundamental
relationships between tectonic loading, time-variable fault creep rates, and
earthquakes; 4) assess the hazards of regional earthquakes and hydrological
changes based on estimates of fault slip rates and stressing influences from
hydrological storage changes due to rapid depletion of regional aquifers. The
researchers’ deformation quantification and modeling will provide new
constraints on the potential for future earthquakes based on past earthquake
occurrences and current hydrologic unloading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.