* 2028343
* Understanding the Impact Graduate Fellowships on Broadening Participation in GEO
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Erick Jones, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2024
* USD 66,488.00

The workshop seeks to develop national strategies and key recommendations to
engage groups currently under-served in the geosciences, including students from
key geographic areas and at institutions that serve economically and
demographically diverse populations. The workshop effort seeks to support
students to pursue graduate degrees in the geosciences by learning about methods
that could increase the likelihood of successful applications for Federal
graduate fellowships. The project aims to create an initial model for the
geosciences that can be tested with and applied to other STEM disciplines. The
project will also elucidate the data needed to provide evidence-based
understanding of the impacts of different funding mechanisms, especially federal
graduate fellowships, on graduate student recruitment, retention and workforce
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will address two overarching goals:
To understand the impact of different funding mechanisms, especially federal
graduate fellowships, on both graduate student recruitment and workforce
outcomes, and to learn how to leverage graduate funding mechanisms and targeted
outreach to broaden participation of under-represented people in STEM,
particularly in the geosciences. The workshop will bring together thought
leaders in graduate education, broadening participation, the geosciences, and
relevant federal agencies, with the aim of recommending evidence-based
strategies, achieving greater data transparency, and enabling targeted
application support for fellowship applicants. The main outcome of this workshop
will be to provide professional development level guidance for UR students on
how to leverage graduate funding mechanisms for career advancement in STEM
disciplines with an emphasis on the geosciences. The proposed workshop has the
potential to develop a path forward for filling in a necessary professional
development gap for underrepresented students to gain understanding in the value
of fellowship support for career mobility and preparation. The workshop should
yield an increased understanding of how graduate student support mechanisms can
lead to greater diversity in the geosciences and related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.