* 2028823
* EAGER: SARE: Directional Modulation Non-Contiguous OFDM Retrodirective Communication for Secure IoT
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

In the upcoming era of the Internet-of-Things (IoT), billions of physical
devices will be networked together and enable emerging concepts, such as smart
homes and smart cities, leading to new paradigms for connected human societies.
As such, devices such as intelligent sensors and controllers—often operating on
small-capacity batteries and running applications on ultra-low-power
processors—will need to be able to communicate with each other, while being
connected to the internet cloud. In this scenario, IoT gateways serve as an
essential component in bridging IoT devices and the internet. As the IoT
gateways will need to deal with critical tasks at the edge IoT devices, it is
essential to ensure secure communication links between the gateway and the
devices against any spoofing attacks by adversarial entities. Since end-to-end
encrypted sessions between the edge devices and the gateway cannot be relied
upon for secure communications due to the high computational resource demand and
battery burden of such cryptographic strategies, there is an urgent need to
develop physical-layer (PHY) secure communication schemes. To this end, this
project develops a directional modulation non-contiguous orthogonal frequency
division multiplexing (NC-OFDM) retrodirective communication scheme that will
have a profound impact in securing IoT applications. The outcome of this project
will enable a highly secure PHY communication scheme among the IoT devices and
gateways against malicious spoofing attacks. Furthermore, the unique combination
of NC-OFDM and directional modulation retrodirective array will make such
attacks very unlikely to succeed even with sophisticated machine learning (ML)
techniques. In addition, the educational plan of the project aims to broaden
participation of graduate, undergraduate and high school students, including
underrepresented minority groups, in relevant research on microwave and antenna
technologies, signal processing and ML, and wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of technical details, the research
project addresses a critical security issue in IoT applications that are
susceptible to malicious spoofing attacks via an innovative PHY solution
combining NC-OFDM transmission and a directional modulation retrodirective
array. As compared with traditional OFDM transmissions, NC-OFDM transmissions
take place over a subset of active subcarriers to either avoid incumbent
transmissions or for strategic considerations. As such, NC-OFDM transmissions
have low probability of exploitation characteristics against classic attacks
based on cyclostationary analysis. On the other hand, retrodirective antenna
arrays are well known to be able to respond to an interrogator by sending
signals back to the interrogator location without a priori knowledge, which is
particularly useful in a multipath-rich environment. By incorporating the
directional modulation technique, the antenna array will corrupt the information
by distorting the digital modulation’s constellation diagrams in all unwanted
transmitting directions. One way to realize the directional modulation
functionality is to use time-modulated antenna arrays, in which the aliasing
effects resulting from the time-modulation frequency are used to distort the
signals in the undesired directions. Furthermore, the unique integration of NC-
OFDM and directional modulation enabled by a time-modulated retrodirective
antenna array whose modulation frequency is the NC-OFDM subcarrier can
potentially lead to an unprecedented level of PHY hardware security against
spoofing attacks by an adversary, even when the adversary is equipped with
sophisticated ML-based attack techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.