* 2028680
* RAPID: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Child Development in the ABCD Cohort
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Susan Tapert, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The coronavirus pandemic has affected children and families worldwide. In the
US, schools and closed, yet there is variability across states and cities
regarding pandemic recommendation on social distancing. The situation likely
affects different children in different ways, due to varying levels of familial
financial impact, self or family COVID-19 illness, mental health effects of
social distancing and stress, online activity, scholastic activity, adult
supervision, and indirect health influences of altered physical activity, sleep,
and access to nutrition. The Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development project
(ABCD) is a longitudinal study of 11,878 diverse youth enrolled at ages 9-10 in
2016-2018 (birth years 2006-2009) at 21 research sites around the United States.
This RAPID project will design and implement a new survey, to assess personal
impact of COVID-19 on ABCD participants and families. With this new information,
we can leverage existing ABCD data to examine perturbations in developmental
trajectories of brain functioning, neurocognition, mental health, substance use,
academic achievement, and social functioning. By immediately collecting a unique
set of measures that characterize the pandemic’s effects, we can make use of the
existing ABCD protocol and design in this large, diverse, national sample.
Results from this study will provide substantially improved guidelines for
future epidemics and pandemics, and indicate potential targets for interventions
when other traumas affect children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ABCD cohort is
being followed until at least age 20, with: biennial state-of-the-art
neuroimaging, epigenetics/genetics, and physical activity tracking; annual
cognitive testing and assessments with youth and parents on mental and physical
health and development, life events and trauma exposure, culture and
environment, substance use, sleep, and screen time; and biannual brief
assessments of mental health and substance use. The proposed research would
immediately characterize the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on each child via
a youth and parent self-assessment that characterizes their personal level of
family disruption, social distancing and its impact, attitudes, adherence to
public health directives, and media exposure. This crisis provides a unique
opportunity to make use of ABCD’s elaborate infrastructure and rigorous
scientific processes to discern critical dimensions of behavior not previously
envisioned. The impending severity of this unanticipated pandemic may result in
significant influences on school-age youth for decades, and this RAPID will be
critical to characterizing factors that protect and exacerbate its effects. This
research will immediately examine COVID-19 related effects on youth, and how
their practices around virus transmission and prevention vary as a function of
family and social factors, external influences, and other
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.