* 2028092
* Travel Support for Students to Attend Advanced Materials for Additive Manufacturing Symposium at the Fall MRS Meeting; Boston, Massachusetts; November 29 to December 4, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2020,05/31/2021
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2021
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides travel support for students, post-docs and young faculty to
attend and participate in the Symposium on "Advanced Materials for Additive
Manufacturing" at the Fall Meeting of the Materials Research Society (MRS) to
take place in Boston, Massachusetts, from November 29 – December 4, 2020. The
symposium focuses on new research in the fields of materials and manufacturing.
The students and young faculty present through oral and poster sessions their
latest research results in advanced materials discovery and their shaping in 3D
objects via additive manufacturing. Priority is given to student participants
who are women and who come from underrepresented minority groups. This approach
promotes diverse participation at the conference, in the short term, and in STEM
fields, in the long term. This award benefits the nation through the education
of a skilled and diverse advanced materials and manufacturing workforce, which
is better prepared to provide transformative solutions to challenges in their
chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to
benefit the students' and young faculty’s professional, scientific and technical
development. Attendance at the conference gives the students a broader view of
the advanced materials, advanced manufacturing and engineering professions and
of state-of-the-art research in these fields via access to several technical and
professional development talks by leading domestic and international speakers.
Students enhance their communication skills through oral and poster
presentations, in-depth discussions of their work with peers in their fields.
This interactive experience significantly broadens student education, increases
their enthusiasm for their research topics, acquaints them with expectations for
scientific careers, and exposes them to new approaches for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.