* 2028674
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: The Diffusion of State Policy Responses to the 2019 Novel Coronavirus
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Jeffrey Harden, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 04/30/2021
* USD 8,730.00

When the 2019 novel coronavirus arrived in the United States in February and
March of 2020, state governments quickly began enacting policies intended to
contain and mitigate its spread. Understanding the timing and sequence of these
policy choices, and those policies’ eventual consequences, is critical for
assessing how governments can be most effective during pandemics. This project
collects data on state and local governments’ responses to COVID-19, including
policies related to closing schools, canceling travel, banning public
gatherings, closing restaurants and bars, delaying rent payments, and rules on
medical licenses. This data allows researchers to examine the factors that
influence states’ policy choices, whether those factors differ from the ways in
which states enact policies during normal times, which policies are effective in
slowing the spread and morbidity of the virus, and how states roll back policies
in a manner that allows economic activity to resume while maintaining
preparedness to avoid and mitigated waves of the virus.

This project collects data on state government responses to COVID-19 by scraping
government websites daily, focusing on sites dedicated to COVID-19 and those
associated with the executive branch, state legislatures, and state departments
of public health. It also collects data on the number of diagnosed cases,
fatalities, recoveries in the states, and mobility data that tracks geographic
movements from mobile phones. The policy recommendations or decisions recorded
from state government pages include decisions related to closing schools,
canceling travel, banning public gatherings (and their size), closing
restaurants and bars, travel quarantines, postponing elections, safe shelter
orders, limiting elective medical procedures, as well as when states modify
these policies; additional data is collected from official state Twitter
accounts. This data allows researchers to examine the factors that influence
states’ policy choices, whether those factors differ from the ways in which
states enact policies during normal times, which policies are effective in
slowing the spread and morbidity of the virus, and how states roll back policies
in a manner that allows economic activity to resume while maintaining
preparedness to avoid and mitigated waves of the virus.

This project is jointly funded by the Accountable Institutions and Behavior
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.