* 2028478
* Becoming Joey: Promoting Informal Learning through Embodiment in an Adelie Penguin Virtual Reality Experience
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Travis Tangen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will provide a new means for the broader public to better
understand an important polar research topic, the Adelie penguins of Antarctica,
through an immersive virtual reality (VR) experience. The foundation of this
proposal is built upon a collaborative effort between the Wisconsin Institute
for Discovery Virtual Environments Group, the Wisconsin IceCube Particle
Astrophysics Center (WIPAC), the Field Day Lab from the University of Wisconsin
- Madison campus, and an Antarctic research scientist and educator, Jean
Pennycook. The collaborative team will create a VR experience to tell the story
of Adelie Penguins and how they impact the lives of all citizens. The project
will enhance and improve the public’s understanding of the research on Adelie
penguins that is currently underway in Antarctica and that is outlined in the
book “Becoming Joey” by Jean Pennycook with a narrative that includes an
interdisciplinary scientific focus on fields such as atmospheric sciences,
ecology and biology. The final VR product will be showcased in a public
exhibition space, VR app stores, national and international science events, and
publicly accessible websites. The experience will provide closed captioning and
translations for Spanish and other relevant languages to enable a greater
accessibility for the created products. The project will also serve as a
training tool and resource for two local educators through a fellowship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will allow users to virtually
experience the science behind Adelie Penguins in an engaging way through
embodying the user as an Adelie Penguin to partake in a narrative-based VR
application that shares the story of the lives of these unique animals. VR
technology enables users to experience environments that are difficult or
impossible to physically inhabit, such as the Earth’s polar regions. The
embodied interaction will provide a wealth of information around a participant’s
actions and perspectives. Previous work from the project team has shown that
viewpoint analysis of a virtual experience can pinpoint salient features in a 3D
environment that can be used to provide a summary of events. Recent work has
shown that player actions inside of video games can be used to predict learning
outcomes and early quitting, but little work has studied these effects in VR.
Given the wealth of information about a user’s virtual actions, this proposal
aims to explore how a participant’s views, actions, and decisions correlate to
their learning outcomes and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.