* 2028119
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Steganography Based on Sensor Capture Models: Replacing Heuristics with Model-Based Designs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jessica Fridrich, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 768,964.00

Steganography is a secret communication method in which the actual message is
hidden in some other innocuous looking object. Digital media, such as images,
are ideal for this purpose because they can be slightly modified to encode a
secret without making these modifications visible to a human being or detectable
by a computer. Steganography thus offers privacy to citizens in countries that
censor communication channels or prohibit the usage of encryption. This project
studies the fundamental principles and limits of such stealth communication by
starting with a detailed mathematical understanding of how a digital image is
formed inside the camera. This provides mathematical guarantee that the hidden
data cannot be discovered by an adversary, protecting thus the users. The model
is also expected to find applications in a related field of digital forensics
that tries to identify which portion of a digital image has been altered, what
kind of camera took the image, and what type of enhancement it was subjected to.
This project is closely related to homeland security, intrusion detection and
its prevention, information assurance, and trusted information exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steganography in digital media has historically relied on
heuristic reasoning and empirical evidence of security due to the complexity
associated with the cover medium and the lack of tractable models. This makes it
difficult, if possible, to establish optimality, establish security formally,
and assess threats. The main thrust of this project is to move from heuristics
to approaches that are based on tight-fitting models to construct provably
secure embedding schemes and assess their security formally. The investigation
begins with a domain in which true randomness with a tractable mathematical
description exists, which is then propagated to the representation in which the
actual data hiding occurs. This will be achieved by adopting pixel-specific
models for the RAW sensor capture and deriving a model in the embedding domain
in a closed- form, if the complexity of the development (processing) allows, or
by deriving (estimating) a tightly-fitting model using Gaussian Markov random
fields, parametric multivariate models, Monte-Carlo sampling, and using data-
driven models. Multiple closely related tasks will be investigated that involve
reasoning based on statistical hypothesis testing and information theory to
provide the foundation for design, assessment, and analysis of steganographic
systems, and to establish capacity of covert channels at a given level of
statistical detectability. The project has the potential to improve theoretical
understanding of the complex interaction between the users of covert tools and
the adversaries in terms of payload scaling laws, bounds on secure covert
communication rates, and on statistical detectability of the covert
communication channel. Leveraging tightly fitting models of indeterministic
components within digital media will help remove heuristics and intuition so
often relied upon in digital-media steganography. Pixel-specific sensor capture
models will find applications in the related field of digital media forensics
for determining provenance, origin, and integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.