* 2028452
* RAPID: Using SenseMaker to Investigate Complex Dynamics in Social Systems to Inform Agile, Real-Time Policy-Responses in Times of Crisis
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Joachim Walther, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2022
* USD 108,113.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has had a sudden and significant impact on almost all
aspects of daily life in the United States. In higher education, college
teachers and students have had limited time to adapt to the new normal of online
learning, while observing increasingly stringent shelter in place ordinances and
coping with the stress and grief that comes with a worldwide health crisis. This
project will investigate how the pandemic has impacted faculty, staff, and
students in STEM education, with a particular focus on engineering. The
opportunity to collect this data right now, as the crisis unfolds, underscores
the need for RAPID funding. The research team will use an online data collection
platform, called SenseMaker, to collect short stories from faculty, staff, and
students that describe how they are experiencing the COVID-19 crisis and
transition to online learning. These stories will be used to help administrators
respond to challenges in real time. Data from the study will also be used as the
basis for future work, which will focus on what organizational and cultural
aspects of STEM higher education can help universities better prepare for future
disruptions. This RAPID project will be the first time that the SenseMaker
approach has been used to investigate how university programs cope in times of
crisis. SenseMaker has previously been used to investigate community experiences
in other crisis contexts, such as how different stakeholder groups adapted to
the damage caused by Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico (see NSF award: 1832678).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a novel research method, SenseMaker,
to capture systems-level dynamics in a College of Engineering as they emerge in
response to the COVID-19 crisis. Three research questions will be investigated:
i) How are students, faculty, and staff in a College of Engineering experiencing
the COVID-19 crisis and associated transition to online learning? ii) What
aspects of thriving (e.g., autonomy, flexibility, accountability etc.) are
particularly salient to engineering faculty, staff, and student experiences? And
iii) What actions can be taken to respond, in real-time, based on the SenseMaker
findings, to improve the teaching and learning experiences, and general well-
being of students, faculty, and staff in a college of engineering? This RAPID
project will continue until 1-month after the return to face-to-face classes.
Data will entail the continuous collection of micro-narratives of participantsâ€™
experiences (qualitative data) and responses to a series of survey questions
that will prompt participants to make sense of their experiences (quantitative
data). These data will be analyzed for patterns to inform immediate actions to
improve the experiences of faculty, staff, and students in a college of
engineering. These data will also inform future work that will focus on the
organizational structures and cultures that contribute to resilient educational
ecosystems. The outcomes of this project will include: a) a rich data set of
real-time micro-narratives that capture how faculty, staff, and students in a
college of engineering experienced the COVID-19 crisis and associated transition
to online learning; b) a theoretically-grounded, tested, and validated
methodological approach and instrument that can be deployed in times of crisis
in STEM programs across the nation to collect real-time data on faculty, staff,
and student experiences; and c) a preliminary understanding of what
organizational structures and cultures contribute to resilient educational
ecosystems and how these structures and cultures can be fostered outside of
times of crisis to better prepare STEM programs for future
disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.