* 2028803
* RAPID: Structural Refinement and Intramolecular Binding in SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Wai-Yim Ching, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2022
* USD 231,198.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current COVID-19 pandemic is a
severe threat to human health leading to unprecedented social and economic
disruption all over the world. All scientific organizations in different
disciplines are fully mobilized to combat this terrible pandemic in various
capacities. &lt;br/&gt;This award focuses on the fundamental understanding of
the nature of this virus and how it attacks the human cell, leading to means to
mitigate its detrimental effects. The research targets the structure and
properties of a crucial COVID-19 protein using large-scale computational
modeling. The objective is to obtain highly accurate and reliable structure data
and investigate both inter-molecular and intra-molecular binding mechanisms at
the atomic scale.&lt;br/&gt;The supported research is critically important in
understanding the modification of the human cell under virus attack, providing
insights for vaccine development and antivirus drug design at a much reduced
cost by supplementing experimental data with computation. The fundamental
understanding of the COVID-19 virus will have a profound socioeconomic impact
domestically and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the computational modeling and
structure refinement of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. The research is
challenging because of the structural complexity, the large number of atoms to
be dealt with, the accuracy required for meaningful interpretation and the
urgency associated with COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
includes the calculation of the electronic structure and interatomic bonding
using first-principles density functional theory based on methods uniquely
suited for this purpose. The spike (S) glycoprotein (S-protein) in SARS-COV-2 is
the key element in understanding the anatomy of the virus, since it makes the
first contact with the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE2) in the human cell.
The structure of the S-protein was determined by cryo-EM technique with a
resolution of 3.5 â„«. This resolution is not sufficiently fine for detailed
calculations aimed at drug design. This research addresses that deficiency
computationally. The S-protein consists of three chains (A, B, C), each
consisting of four structural domains: receptor binding domain (RBD), N-terminal
domain (NTD), and subdomains S1 and S2. This project will mostly focus on the
RBD, which has 144 amino acids with a total of 2100 atoms. The structure of the
entire Chain A in the spike protein has 959 amino acids and 14482 atoms.
Refinement of the structures of these domains and investigation of the
electronic structure and interatomic bonding, including hydrogen bonding, of the
spike protein in both the pre- and post-fusion conformations provides the
urgently needed information lacking in prior research. The structural data
obtained here are to be deposited in an appropriate data bank and made available
to the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;This award supports the research using
large-scale ab-initio computation, in conjunction with experimental
verification, to identify the salient features in novel complex virus systems.
Such a strategy is increasingly popular with the use of high accuracy cyro-EM
measurements. The tightly coupled feedback between computational modeling,
formal theory and experimental exploration is important for fundamental research
in biomaterials and physical virology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported
research has a wide range of broader impacts. First, novel insights generated
from the research paves the way for applications in vaccine development and drug
design. Second, the planned research aligns with educational goals by involving
a postdoctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate students, and external
collaborators. This awarded project emphasizes the inclusion of women and
minorities, where students work as a team in a boundary-free environment of
modern science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.