* 2028972
* SBIR Phase I:  An Artificial Intelligence-Inspired Computing Application for Detecting the Early Onset of Pneumonia (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Apostolos Kalatzis, IMMERSIVE REALITY GROUP LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,315.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a Human-Artificial Intelligence
(AI) computing application for detecting the early onset of pneumonia. It can be
particularly useful for complications of COVID-19; clinical studies have
identified a significant association between COVID-19 and pneumonia, with
studies observing up to 70.1% of older COVID-19 patients diagnosed with
pneumonia. This work aims to collect physiological data and symptomatic
determinants using remote health monitoring and stream it to our AI-based cloud
application to detect the pattern associated with pneumonia. Through accessible
monitoring outside the hospital setting, this proposed application affords
patient care management at the earliest signs of worsening and serving as a
complementary diagnostic tool, useful for general detection of this life-
threatening ailment - particularly for COVID-19 patients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes to address some of the public health challenge of the current COVID-19
pandemic by developing a predictive algorithm strategy for providing optimal
care for outpatient COVID-19 patients at risk of pneumonia. The proposed
application uses a multimodal dataset (physiological and user inputs) integrated
with collaborative cloud-based AI. The proposed application will include a
cloud-based predictive analytics unit that receives multimodal information from
Remote Health Monitoring, identifies the early onset of pneumonia, and alerts
healthcare providers. One of the proposed work’s key innovations is the dynamic
analytics unit’s dynamically adaptive approach that performs classifications on
low-dimensional data and expands the dimensionality model as needed by including
real-time patient symptoms. This approach affords a novel collaborative approach
to AI, where the COVID-19 patient is actively collaborating in the system
decision-making process. The system will automatically decide what should be
interactively requested from the patient to enhance prediction accuracy. The
approach will provide enhanced clinical information, allowing for clinician
oversight for rapid response when the algorithm detects a pattern associated
with the early onset of pneumonia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.