* 2028623
* RAPID: The role of fomites in community transmission of SARS-CoV-2
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Amy Pickering, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 96,023.00

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV2 is responsible for the global pandemic of
COVID-19. There is an urgent need for better tools to monitor the transmission
of SARS-CoV2. Surface sampling of community surfaces holds promise as a tool to
identify how transmission is occurring. While most studies are focused on SARS-
CoV2 in hospitals and other clinical settings, this project will focus on
monitoring SARS-CoV2 on surfaces in community settings. This will be achieved by
tracking SARS-CoV2 on crosswalk buttons, doors, grocery cart handles, gas pump
handles, ATM interfaces, and other surfaces that are most likely to be
contaminated. Results will be assessed to determine whether surface sampling can
be used to rapidly and cost-effectively gauge the effectiveness of outbreak
control measures. If successful, this research will allow the prioritization of
surfaces for disinfection during the SARS-CoV2 outbreak. Combining the results
with environmental modeling will help identify the risk of SARS-CoV2 infection
in public spaces during the epidemic and once intervention efforts are
relaxed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS-CoV2 transmission has been more difficult to
control than previous outbreaks of human coronaviruses. This is thought to
result from the high proportion of asymptomatic cases (up to 60%) actively
shedding the virus. Infected community members can shed SARS-CoV2 onto surfaces
up to a week before developing serious symptoms and can continue shedding the
virus during and after disease progression. Recent evidence suggests viable
SARS-CoV2 particles can survive on stainless steel and plastic surfaces for up
to three days. The goal of this project is to better understand environmental
transmission of SARS-CoV2 through contact with contaminated surfaces. This will
be achieved through the following specific objectives: 1) Characterize the
presence and concentration of SARS-CoV2 over time on high touch fomites in
public locations during an outbreak; 2) Determine whether the presence or
concentration of SARS-CoV2 on fomites over time is associated with public health
control measures and changes in community infection rate; 3) Use SARS-CoV2
concentration data generated in this study in conjunction with transmission
efficiency of viral particles to determine risk of infection from fomites. Given
that more than half of infections may be asymptomatic, any recurrence may not be
detected through typical hospital-based surveillance until transmission is
already widespread in the community. Results will be used to assess whether
changes in outbreak control strategies over the study period impact
environmental concentrations of SARS-CoV2. A major concern is that lifting
control measures too rapidly or ineffectively could cause a rapid increase in
new infections. Results will benefit society by informing decisions on how best
to control and monitor COVID-19 and future outbreaks of other enveloped
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.