* 2028944
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: A Cross-Layer Observable Approach to Extreme Scale Machine Learning and Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 204,484.00

The ability to analyze and learn from large volumes of data is becoming
important in many walks of human endeavor, including medicine, science, and
engineering. Analysis workflows for high-resolution images (e.g. medical
imaging, sky surveys), scientific simulations, as well as those for graph
analytics and machine learning are typically time consuming because of the
extreme scales of data involved. While the hardware elements of the modern data
center are undergoing a rapid transformation to embrace the storage, processing,
and analysis of needs of such applications - understanding of how the different
layers of the systems stack interact with one another and contribute to end-to-
end application performance is challenging. This planning project envisions the
ACROPOLIS framework to address these challenges. ACROPOLIS will enable a
comprehensive research agenda on systems software that will facilitate rapid and
flexible construction of analytics workflows and their scalable execution. By
facilitating the rapid prototyping of application drivers ACROPOLIS can also
enable important scientific discoveries to potentially improve human health and
better understand the world around us. The research enabled by ACROPOLIS will
also educate many students, including those from under-represented groups, who
will become part of a highly-trained workforce capable of addressing our
nation's needs long into the future. With respect to broader impacts, ACROPOLIS
will provide a unique research and training infrastructure that will catalyze
research in multiple disciplines as well as facilitate convergent research
across disciplines. Well-established initiatives at The Ohio State University,
such as the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) as well as
new programs in Data Analytics, will facilitate the recruitment of graduate and
undergraduate students for involvement in this research agenda. This project is
aligned with two of NSFâ€™s 10 Big Ideas: Harnessing the Data Revolution and
Growing Convergence Research, as well as the American AI
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses five key research
pillars: 1) Flexible abstractions for parallel computation and data
representation, 2) Modeling data movement complexity at extreme scales, 3)
Pattern-driven scalable communication and I/O systems, 4) Near-memory
architectures for machine learning and analytics, and 5) Cross-layer
observability and introspection. Specifically, the focus is on the design of an
end-to-end framework inculcating a high-performance, next-generation,
heterogeneous, reconfigurable hardware and software stack to facilitate real-
time interaction, analytics, and machine learning for a range of scientific
disciplines including Computational Pathology and Computational Fluid Dynamics
and Emergency Response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.