* 2028547
* RAPID: Acoustic Communications and Sensing for COVID-19 Data Collection
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has unfolded as a major
international crisis whose influence has extended to every aspect of daily life.
This has led to a devastating loss of human life as well as the nation's
economic well-being. As various US states begin to restart their economies,
contact tracing has become an invaluable tool in allowing the workforce to
return in a safe and controlled manner. The proposed project aims to build a
privacy-preserving crowdsensing system for effective COVID-19 tracking and
tracing by leveraging the ubiquity of mobile devices. This work overcomes key
challenges of infrastructure-based techniques such as video monitoring systems,
etc., that are difficult to scale and provide broad coverage. This approach uses
a unique inaudible acoustic based communication system to identify and monitor
persons with whom users have interacted with. It uses only acoustic signal
transmission with every day mobile phone sensors (i.e., inbuilt speakers and
microphones) to facilitate easy implementation. The research conducted during
this project will overcome key challenges in energy management and power control
to prolong battery life, dealing with an occluded environment where the phone
may be in a pocket or a purse, and detecting physical interactions between
users, thus making fundamental contributions to domain specific research areas
themselves.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The system will leverage the normal procedure
of human interactions in the context of social encounters and adapt a novel
acoustic signals dissemination service that selectively broadcasts information
within particular "turfs". The encounters' information will be uploaded to a
central server either automatically or with users' manual processing. The map at
the central server will be updated accordingly. The solution will preserve a
number of desirable qualities in the following dimensions: (i) The sensing range
of acoustic signals on mobile phones is small compared with competing systems
such as Bluetooth, but meets the requirements on virus detection. In fact, this
feature enables far less false positives than Bluetooth based approaches. The
short range also helps with privacy. (ii) Each user's unique ID such as WiFi and
Bluetooth MAC addresses would not be disclosed to their peer encounters.
Instead, only randomly generated IDs are disclosed. (iii) Users can choose what
information to report to the central server, e.g., their encounters with/without
GPS, their medical condition, age, real ID, etc. They could also choose not to
report certain encounters or encounters at certain
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.