* 2028839
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Integrated Scalable Platform for Privacy-aware Collaborative Learning and Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Jimeng Sun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

Building scalable distributed heterogeneous systems of the future with easy-to-
program software is broadly acknowledged to be a grand challenge. It is widely
recognized that a major disruption is currently under way in the design of
computer systems as processors strive to extend, and go beyond, the end-game of
Moore’s Law. This disruption is manifest in new forms of heterogeneous and
distributed processors and memories at all scales (on-chip, on-die, on-node, on-
rack, on-cluster, and on-data-center), rendering scalability as a fundamental
challenge at all levels. Healthcare analytics offers a unique opportunity to
explore scalable system design for the 21st century because there has been a
tectonic shift in the ability of medical institutions to capture and store
medical data, and to even stream data in real time. This shift has already
contributed to an ecosystem of Machine Learning (ML) models being trained for a
variety of clinical tasks. A new distributed heterogeneous architecture is
required to build systems that can develop and deploy ML models based on
distributed healthcare data that must necessarily be accessed with privacy-
preserving constraints. Further, the proposed architecture must be accompanied
by a software framework that can address the needs of domain-specific data
scientists to develop and augment ML models being deployed in their
hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant project is exploring the
foundational principles necessary in building integrated scalable distributed
systems of the future, so as to prepare for submitting a full proposal to the
PPoSS program. It uses the domain of healthcare analytics to motivate and
concretize the research agenda, but the principles developed in this research
should be applicable to other application domains as well. The exploration
focuses on demonstrating an integrated platform that spans multiple levels of
distribution and heterogeneity of computation and storage, while also obeying
important privacy constraints. While recent progress on the use of ML in
healthcare applications has been encouraging, current approaches do not a) scale
to the degrees of parallelism, heterogeneity, and distribution that will be
required in future systems, or b) support the soft real-time responsiveness to
streaming data that is needed in many clinical situations. The originality of
this project can be seen in the integration of distribution, heterogeneity, and
privacy considerations in a single unified software/hardware stack, which
includes adaptive resource management that spans privacy-preserving federated
continuous learning, automatic specialization of ML models at individual sites,
and automatic selection of ML models best suited for specific clinical tasks
that maximize accuracy subject to different latency and soft real-time
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s end-to-end approach to develop
foundational scalability principles will impact multiple areas of computer
science through publications, tutorials and courses, thereby benefiting other
researchers working on scalability challenges in future distributed
heterogeneous systems. The use of healthcare analytics as a driving application
has the potential to result in significant benefits to society, by demonstrating
how knowledge distilled from multiple sources of data can be embodied in
recommendation systems that can run onsite to provide time-critical decision
support to physicians. As a further impact, the project will contribute to the
training of Highly Qualified Personnel (HQP) at the intersection of Systems for
ML and ML for Healthcare — two emerging inter-disciplinary communities that are
currently growing independent of each other. Finally, this research will
leverage existing activities at the PIs’ institutions that contribute to
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.