* 2028424
* MODULUS:RoL: Uncovering Roles of Cell Fate Decisions in Migrating Neural Crest Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Qing Nie, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project addresses a key unresolved issue in biology, which is how cells on
the move such as migratory cells in embryos or metastatic cancer cells, make
decisions about where to go and what type of cell to become. The research
approaches this biological question through a novel combination of experiments
in zebrafish embryos and mathematical models. The major benefits of the project
to science include a better basic understanding of how cells make decisions
about their fates as well as having clinical implications for birth defects and
cancer. The broader societal impacts include student research training in both
zebrafish and cell migration. This training is imparted mainly by involving
graduate students in zebrafish development and genetics, and through summer
programs that expose high school and college students to developmental biology
concepts such as cell migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in
developmental biology is to understand complex systems of fate specification in
migratory cells exposed to dynamic environments. This application exploits novel
experimental tools such as single cell RNA sequencing in a transient population
of migrating embryonic cells called the neural crest, as well as new
computational methods for modeling spatial interactions between cells during
migration. The integrated systems biology approaches applied uncover new
mechanisms that control neural crest cell fate specification, including their
transient interactions and transitional cell states. The results are directly
relevant to basic developmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences, the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Neural Systems cluster in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.