* 2028672
* Experimental Investigation of Open-Ended Pipe Piles Subjected to Axial and Lateral Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Monica Prezzi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 11/30/2023
* USD 450,452.00

Open-ended pipe piles (OEPPs) are often used to support a range of onshore and
offshore civil infrastructure systems such as buildings and other structures
that are vital to the economy of the United States. However, fundamental
understanding of soil-pile interactions during the installation and operation of
OEPPs remains limited. This limited understanding has led, in some cases, to
disastrous consequences, such as foundation and structural failures and very
significant economic losses. In this research, the response of OEPPs will be
experimentally characterized and investigated during installation and under
complex loading conditions. A series of installation and loading tests will be
performed at Purdue University as well as at Universit√© Grenoble Alpes by
leveraging international collaborations. The broader impacts of this project are
diverse and include developing educational tools on the solution of mathematical
problems related to foundation engineering for undergraduate and graduate
teaching, developing reliable design methods for OEPPs that can be used by the
industry, increasing opportunities for partnerships between academia and
industry, and paving the way for a strong and enduring international
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the research are: (1) to
develop a fundamental understanding of pile plugging processes during
installation of OEPPs; (2) to develop effective methods to predict pile plugging
during installation; and (3) to develop methods to account for the soil plugging
history on the load response of OEPPs. These goals will be achieved through a
comprehensive model pile testing program, using unique instrumentation schemes
and advanced image analysis methods: Digital Image Correlation (DIC) and X-Ray
Computed Tomography (CT). The experimental program consists of a series of tests
involving varying sequences and combinations of installation processes (jacking
and driving) and loading processes (axial and lateral, monotonic and cyclic
loading) on model pipe piles. The parameters considered in the test plan are the
pipe pile diameter, pile surface roughness, sand type, sand relative density and
soil layering. The fundamental knowledge that will result from the project
research will serve as the basis for the development of reliable methods to
predict plug formation and pile installation resistance, as well as design
methods for calculation of the resistances of OEPPs accounting for the pile
plugging effect. The work is expected to significantly improve the safety and
performance of onshore and offshore structures founded on
OEPPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.