* 2028225
* I-Corps: Scintillating Nanoparticles for Low Energy Radioisotope Analytical Workflows
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Craig Aspinwall, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new nanomaterial technology used to measure molecules that are
labeled with radioisotopes at very low concentrations. This new technology will
enable real-time measurement of new biochemical reactions directly in water-
based solutions. In addition, this new nanomaterial technology will be broadly
applicable for environmental and energy-related studies involving radioactive
materials. The proposed technology addresses several limitations of existing
commercial methods by reducing waste generation and disposal, enabling time-
dependent measurements, enabling measurements inside of living cells, and
providing simultaneous detection of multiple chemical types. This project will
enable academic and industrial users to perform new biochemical and biological
studies and expand the ability to measure diverse classes of important
molecules, driving further innovation in multiple market
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a series of nanomaterial technologies that generate light (scintillate) in the
presence of radioisotopes and radioisotope-labeled compounds. The nanomaterial
scintillator technology enables high-sensitivity detection of important
molecules that cannot be measured using other techniques. Fine-tuning the
chemical and physical properties of these nanomaterials enables them to be
functional directly in aqueous environments, thereby allowing dynamic
measurements of important biochemical systems. The unique nanomaterial
architectures are functional in common commercial instrumentation, lowering the
barrier to adoption and substantially reducing waste generation, as well as
lowering back-end costs. The proposed project will explore translation of these
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.