* 2028998
* EFRI E3P: Plastics Recycling Processes by Integrating Mechanocatalytic Depolymerization, Monomer Purification, and Consumer Behavior
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Christopher Jones, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,026,418.00

This multidisciplinary team will tackle the problem of accumulating plastics
waste in landfills and the environment â€“ a rapidly emerging national and global
issue - by developing new approaches to convert plastics into valuable chemicals
and related consumer strategies. This project will investigate and develop a
process that breaks down polymers by application of mechanical forces (e.g., in
a ball mill) in the solid phase with zero/minimal solvent use. Energy-efficient
recovery and purification of the chemical products will be achieved using
nanoporous materials that separate molecules based upon size, shape, or specific
interactions. Process systems modeling will identify the key requirements for
integrating these technological units into viable industrial processes. At the
same time, consumer behavior studies will reveal means of motivating consumers
to provide suitable plastics streams and increase public acceptance of the
proposed products. Thus, technological innovations and behavioral/logistical
insights will be integrated into process and supply chain-level models that
guide long-term economic decision-making. This framework has great potential to
be a transformative paradigm change in how plastics recycling systems are
envisaged and designed. The project features a number of educational and
outreach activities, including the infusion of circular economy concepts into
the Georgia Tech curriculum through collaborative teaching module development as
well as wider dissemination of these concepts through an online Lecture Archive
for Sustainable Chemical Processes accessible to worldwide
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EFRI project will create an integrated process
strategy for converting plastic waste into its monomers or other valuable
molecular products, through a combination of mechanocatalytic depolymerization
and energy-efficient separations guided by process systems modeling and analysis
of supply chains and consumer behavior. This framework is central to the concept
of future refineries that will convert waste feedstocks mechanocatalytically
(e.g., in ball mills), to generate tunable crude product streams containing
monomers for production of fresh plastics and/or oligomeric intermediates for
upcycling to more valuable products. Mechanocatalytic reactions use mechanical
impact energy (rather than heat) to drive chemical reactions and provide
intimate contact between solid catalysts and feedstocks allowing for solvent-
free reactions. Depolymerization products will be solubilized, fractionated, and
purified with new, energy-efficient membranes and adsorbers, which are key for
achieving large reductions in overall process costs. Consumer behavior studies
will reveal means of motivating consumers to provide suitable plastics streams
and increase public acceptance of the proposed products. We will integrate our
technological innovations and behavioral/logistical insights together into
process and supply chain-level models that guide long-term economic decision-
making. The team will integrate these efforts by targeting key dimensions of the
plastics recycling puzzle, and convergently integrate our new knowledge to forge
an economically viable and sustainable process and to educate a new generation
of professionals with a multidisciplinary background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.