* 2028160
* RAPID: Coupled Contagion, Behavior-Change, and the Dynamics of Pro- and Anti-Social Behavior During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Michelle Kline, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 233,283.00

The current COVID-19 pandemic involves both tremendous risk and tremendous
uncertainty about that risk, at unprecedented scales and across demographic and
cultural contexts. How individuals interpret, understand, and respond to that
risk have important implications for the transmission of the COVID-19 virus,
SARS-CoV-2. This research leverages the ubiquity of SARS-CoV-2 amid varying
community, regional, and national responses to test theories about the
transmission of behavioral norms, linking individual characteristics
(identities, homophily, transmission biases such as conformity or prestige risk
management, and demographics), sources of information about the virus, and
effects on transmission. Coupled contagion modeling has tended to be limited to
demonstration of concept. The incorporation of real time behavioral response
data in the modeling of couple contagion improves prospects for improved
epidemic control through the promotion of pro-social behavior. This project will
train students from under-represented minorities and a post-doctoral scholar in
epidemiology. Results will be made immediately available to the public and will
inform development of educational material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study the coupled contagion dynamics of COVID-19 and related behavioral
responses, including (but not limited to) increased hygiene (e.g., hand-
washing), social distancing, social gathering (purposeful resistance to
distancing), hoarding of supplies, and signaling of either alarm or defiance in
response to official reports of threat. Investigators will collect data
longitudinally in three waves starting from severe non-pharmaceutical
interventions such as "lockdowns" through the expected course of the epidemic.
Surveys will assess risk-reduction behaviors, compliance with public-health
mandates, and hypothesized predictors of response including trust in various
institutions, social capital, and sources of news and information. To complement
the empirical data collection, the investigators will develop and analyze
mathematical and simulation-based models that jointly track the dynamics of
virus transmission and behavior change. The models will be parameterized with
data collected in the survey. Particular focus will be given to the consequences
of behaviors driven by conflicting messages about seriousness and the
appropriateness of different types of interventions for disease transmission. An
important goal of this modeling is to develop insights for improving public-
health interventions, motivating compliance, and ensuring that effective and
accessible information about the virus is available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.