* 2028949
* PPoSS: Planning: Prescriptive Memory: Razing the Semantic Wall Between Applications and Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Jessica Hodgins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

There is a large semantic gap between the high-level understanding of an
application's goals and the sequence of processor instructions and memory
accesses observed by computer hardware. This is due to the long-standing narrow
interface between software and the computing platform it is running on, which
acts as a semantic wall that prevents the platform from meeting application
needs. The cost of this wall is growing with the rapid increase in specialized
hardware accelerators and new classes of memory and storage. This project razes
the semantic wall by developing a fundamentally more expressive interface,
called prescriptive memory, which enables more semantic information to be
conveyed from applications to system software to hardware. Prescriptive memory
will enable applications to take advantage of new hardware accelerators and new
memory technologies, spurring market acceptance, which in turn spurs industry
investment both in more advanced accelerators and memories and in application
software that uses them. This virtuous cycle boosts the entire high tech
ecosystem, which in turn boosts all aspects of society that benefit from
improved computer performance. Prescriptive memory will also improve the energy-
efficiency of computations in data centers, reducing their carbon footprint. As
a general and powerful abstraction, prescriptive memory will provide significant
--often game changing--benefits to a wide range of applications. The project
will demonstrate such benefits for important applications in robotics and
machine learning, with a showcase application being training robots to perform
complicated tasks with and among humans in cluttered environments, safely and
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will define a prescriptive memory
abstraction that enables higher-level properties to be associated with dynamic
regions of a program's memory. It is through these properties that semantic
intent, application goals, application preferences, etc. are expressed and
conveyed throughout the software stack down to the hardware. The project will
design and implement an open source software stack that supports and benefits
from the new abstraction. A unifying hardware mechanism will be developed that
enables hardware to leverage these properties to reduce overheads and better
meet application needs. A super-controller will be designed and implemented
that, based on these properties and dynamic system state information, makes
(near-)optimal decisions on data placement and accelerator use at every point in
time. The project will explore how prescriptive memory benefits a range of
applications bottlenecked by the semantic wall, with a specific focus on
providing orders of magnitude improvements in the speed and scale (fidelity) of
robotic worlds simulations, a key to enabling safe and effective "AI in the
wild."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.