* 2028082
* RAPID: Using remote diary methods to understand how families navigate COVID-19-driven schooling at home
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Brigid Barron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 199,745.00

It is estimated that over 95% of all school children across the country are out
of the classroom due to social distancing mandates in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Almost overnight, families have had to develop and support new
practices for learning at home as districts scramble to meet the academic,
social and emotional needs of their communities. It is essential to collect data
now to develop a deeper understanding of how schools and families are adapting
to these changes and will continue to do so in coming weeks/months - the
troubles they encounter, and the solutions they generate. Retrospective accounts
may mask critical features of what was experienced, minimizing the country’s
capacity to conceptualize and build more robust, equitable and transformative
learning ecologies for the future. Emphasizing an equity approach to solution
development, this research will document how families engage in creative
practices to generate powerful learning based on local needs, values, contexts,
and histories in this present crisis. It will address the following questions:
(1) What resources are schools providing and how are parents navigating and
extending these resources to sustain their child’s learning? (2) How are
families exploring science and math concepts related to the pandemic? (3) How
are parents and families learning to adapt (e.g. communication with teachers;
broader social networks) and what challenges do they face (e.g. subscription
costs; reliable Internet)? (4) How are digital resources for STEM, curated by
the research team, utilized for learning? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergency school
closures are exposing significant gaps in access to the Internet and
communication devices, and the capacity of parents/caregivers and communities to
capitalize on technology to sustain health-relevant learning in a time of
crisis. This project will use a novel, remote-diary tool based on a smartphone-
enabled data collection platform, to reach families across the country. Mobile-
phone-enabled remote diary tools make it possible to reach families who are
under-connected, not just those with robust technical infrastructure. The data
collected will lay the groundwork for creating new socio-technical support
systems informed by diverse families’ experiences, as the crisis unfolds.
Approximately 200 parents with school age children (early and upper elementary
grades) living at home will be recruited. This study and a subsequent virtual
workshop with other researchers who are also using remote methods to study
learning will help establish a broader research agenda to specify the conditions
under which socio-technical systems productively augment a family’s capacity to
innovate and learn when traditional co-located school settings disappear. It
will advance our understanding of how human learning adapts to unexpectedly
changed learning environments. This study draws on advances in remote data
collection and new analytical tools for innovation in research
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.