* 2028032
* SWQU: Forecasting Small-Scale Plasma Structures in Earth's Ionosphere-Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Fuller-Rowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,398,603.00

Space weather caused by structures and irregularities in Earthâ€™s ionosphere can
disrupt transmission of Global Navigation Satellite System signals critical for
precise positioning, navigation and timing, and can influence propagation of
trans-ionospheric radio waves used in land-satellite communication. Despite
decades of work, forecasting this space weather phenomenon remains a challenge.
This project advances fundamental research underpinning such forecasts by
establishing integrated models of ionosphere-thermosphere conditions that lead
to ionospheric plasma irregularities. Novel data-assimilation techniques and
uncertainty quantification methods are applied to estimate uncertainties in
model predictions. Spatial and temporal variations of simulated ionosphere-
thermosphere parameters are validated with ground- and satellite-based
observations. The project team includes both senior and early-career scientists
with expertise in space physics as well as software engineers and a graduate
student. Collaborations with the UK, Japan, and Taiwan expand the availability
and dissemination of the models and code. The improved models will be adopted
into the operational version at NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center. This
project directly addresses objectives in the National Space Weather Strategy and
Action Plan and the National Strategic Computing Initiative
Update.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project improves the coupled whole atmosphere
model and ionosphere-plasmasphere electrodynamics model (WAM-IPE) with high
resolution capability (10s of km) using the Cornell ionospheric dynamics model.
The data assimilation scheme address uncertainty in external forcing especially
solar EUV irradiance and high-latitude heating associated with geomagnetic
activity, and constrain the large-scale ionosphere-thermosphere dynamics while
preserving small-scale perturbations generated by WAM-IPE without requiring
unrealistic local adjustments. Highly scalable uncertainty quantification
strategies based on low rank approximations are adopted and extended to estimate
the model prediction uncertainties in the presence of high-dimensional input
uncertainty. Key science questions investigated here include: can the high-
resolution global model generate the range of scales driving plasma
irregularities at low- and mid-latitudes; which parts of the spectrum of waves
and background ionosphere-thermosphere conditions lead to the formation of
plasma irregularities; and what are the key drivers controlling model parameters
and their uncertainty? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made as a part of the
joint NSF-NASA pilot program on Next Generation Software for Data-driven Models
of Space Weather with Quantified Uncertainties (SWQU). All software developed as
a result of this award will be made available by the awardee free of charge for
non-commercial use; the software license will permit modification and
redistribution of the software free of charge for non-commercial
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.