* 2028151
* The Impact of Ambient Deep-Tropospheric Vertical Wind Shear on Tornadoes and Their Attendant Supercells within Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Nusrat Yussouf, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,590.00

Hurricane and tropical cyclone landfalls produce numerous hazards, from wind
damage to flooding to storm surge. This project will address a lesser-studied
aspect of tropical cyclone landfalls, tornadoes, and specifically the role of
wind shear on their development. Tropical cyclone induced tornadoes are
generally weaker than supercell tornadoes, but they are a public safety hazard.
There is not a direct correlation between the strength of a tropical cyclone and
the resulting number of tornadoes and forecast guidance is often generic. This
award will provide a research-based understanding of tropical cyclone tornadoes
which should allow operational weather forecasters to better alert the public of
these hazards. The project will also involve multiple students as training for
the next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans
an analysis and modeling study of the role of vertical wind shear on the
occurrence of tornadoes in landfalling tropical cyclones. Tornadoes frequently
occur during hurricane landfall, but the number can vary by an order of
magnitude among tropical cyclones that are otherwise of similar strength. These
tornadoes are also much less predictable than the more common Great Plains
tornadoes. This study will use observational analysis of the deep-tropospheric
vertical wind shear and tropical cyclone-relative helicity from reanalysis data,
other observations such as radar data and atmospheric soundings, and modeling
with the WRF-based Warn on Forecast System (WOFS) to: 1) Test the variability of
the relationship between tornadoes and deep convection in tropical cyclones and
vertical wind shear with other relevant factors (e.g. diurnal cycle), 2) Assess
the sensitivity of tornadic supercell predictability to vertical wind shear in
hindcasts, and 3) Identify how vertical wind shear creates favorable
environments for tropical cyclone tornadic supercells using observations and
Lagrangian vertical vorticity budgets computed from
hindcasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.