* 2028338
* Origins of Damping in Biomimetic Scale Exoskeletal Metamaterials and their Influence on Limit Cycles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ranajay Ghosh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 266,855.00

The grant will support research towards the discovery and quantification of new
kind of damping in biomimetic scale structures. These structures are synthetic
soft substrates with stiff plate like exoskeletal protrusion resembling scales
on fishes and reptiles. Damping can critically affect the performance of a range
of dynamic systems such as soft autonomous systems and robots, wearable
technologies, aerostructures and microsystems. Typically, damping is either
undesirable or poorly controlled. However, exoskeletal structures leverage
geometry, deformation and sliding to provide unprecedented control over damping
response. This can change damping from a nuisance to a design element that
tailors operational efficiency and dynamics. This will directly contribute to
the development of next generation of aerospace structures, collaborative robots
(COBOTS) and smart skins with superior performance. These outcomes will improve
operational efficiency, accelerate automation and deepen human-machine
integration. This research will broadly benefit US economy, increase
technological competitiveness, strengthen national defense, and positively
affect society. The comprehensive but fundamental approach in this research will
lead to new science, greater cross-pollination of ideas across engineering,
broaden participation of underrepresented groups and improve engineering
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origins of structural damping for the
systems considered in this study are from the friction between sliding
exoskeletal structures, and are dramatically reshaped in metamaterials due to
the intricate interplay of dynamics, deformation and topology. The dynamics of
biomimetic scale exoskeletal metamaterials, resembling the form of scales found
in nature on fishes and reptiles, is dictated by the complex mutual sliding
kinematics of the stiff plate-like scales. However, the emergence of damping due
to sliding friction is poorly understood as friction has a dual nature â€“ enhance
both dissipation and stiffness. As a direct consequence of sliding complexity,
this project hypothesizes the emergence of viscous, directional and nonlinear
damping behavior even when simple Coulomb friction exists between scales. Due to
the dual effect of friction on both stiffness and damping, its central role in
limit cycle creation-annihilation is postulated. The research will reveal the
architecture-dissipation-dynamics relationships using a combination of
analytical modeling, computational simulations including finite elements and
testing and imaging based experimental studies. The interplay of scale sliding
kinematics with substrate deformation and boundary conditions give rise to these
emergent properties even in small strains with complex oscillations tailorable
from the exoskeletal distribution and shape (architecture). By revealing the
coupling of these operating factors, a new body of transformative knowledge on
the dynamics of exoskeletal structures will be
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.