* 2028331
* RAPID: Pandemic School Closures and Teacher-Student Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Allison Pugh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,763.00

This project assesses how new efforts and strategies for action, developed due
to the COVID-19 pandemic, challenge or compound pre-existing differences among
students. Existing scholarship predicts that during crises, people and
organizations develop new strategies for action. As a consequence of the
COVID-19 pandemic, more than half of America’s schools have closed down and
transitioned to online learning. This constitutes a unique natural experiment in
how a crisis and uncertainty can affect teacher-student relationships (TSRs) and
how these in turn can affect differences. The current crisis may strengthen TSRs
as teachers and schools reach out to students in novel ways and normally non-
academic matters such as student’s health and access to the internet at home
become priorities. This study will help policymakers and school officials
understand the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting school closures on
different groups of students, informing efforts to redress the effects of this
crisis and plan for future disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands
upon six months of ethnographic observations in two Virginia high schools
(conducted prior to school closures) with online observations, interviews and
weekly student time diaries and photojournals during the spring and summer of
2020, as well as resumed in-person data collection during fall 2020. Broadly,
this project advances knowledge by showing 1) how school and teacher strategies
to reach students during this crisis are received; 2) how TSRs change during
moments of crisis and 3) how these changes inform differences in student
experiences and outcomes. Specific research questions include: (1) How do TSRs
shape the impact of the crisis on student engagement and outcomes? (2) How does
the ongoing impact of TSRs vary by student background? (3) How does school
response to the crisis affect teachers’ connections with students? and (4) How
does the impact of this response vary based on student background? To address
these questions, this study’s data collection includes eight months of
observations (both virtual and in-person when schools re-open), collection of
weekly student time diaries and photojournals (N=80), and in-depth semi-
structured interviews with administrators (N=20), students (N=120) and teachers
(N=60).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.