* 2028310
* RAPID: COVIDGeoGraph â€“ A Geographically Integrated Cross-Domain Knowledge Graph for Studying Regional Disruptions
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2020
* Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 10/31/2020
* USD 90,658.00

This COVID-19 RAPID research program will develop a geographically integrated
knowledge graph to support data scientists and decision-makers in industry and
the government in taking region-specific steps towards reopening the country.
Towards this goal, the project will combine data from themes as diverse as
transportation, social distancing measures, demographic and environmental
factors, as well as economic impacts. Knowledge graphs are contextualization
technologies. They enable their users to gain a more holistic understanding of
complex social and scientific questions by providing actionable insights from
neighboring disciplines. For instance, making decisions about local economies
and food systems require an understanding of the frequently changing social
distancing measures, traffic control and restrictions including neighboring
regions, demographic factors, and the percentage of recovered citizens. The
project will work together with industry partners to understand how graphed
knowledge can be utilized in their forecasting models. Finally, the project will
reach out to other knowledge graphs to jointly form an open knowledge network
related to COVID-19.

More technically, we will utilize a stack of open source technologies and
international standards to develop a highly integrated Linked Data-based
knowledge graph that combines cross-domain data across different geographic
scales and types of places. We will utilize machine learning technologies to
learn graph embeddings for predicting links within our graph as well as
alignments to other graphs by using places such as cities or counties as points
of integration. We will also provide the functionality to collaborate with the
broader schema.org effort. We are particularly interested in studying how to
represent and align COVID-19 data that is currently being reported at different
geographic scales and aggregates, thereby fostering interoperability and
breaking up data silos. We will work directly with our industry partners on
engineering (spatially-explicit) features from our and external graphs. These
features will be integrated into industry downstream forecasting models with a
particular focus on food systems. Finally, We will utilize the expertise of our
partners in creating visual data dashboards to better communicate our findings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.