* 2028824
* EAGER SARE: Physical-Layer Security of THz Communication Using Orbital Angular Momentum and Rapid Frequency Hopping
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ruonan Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With the ever-growing number of wireless devices handling personal health,
finance, and other private data, the security associated with the over-the-air
data transmission becomes a major concern. At present, the protection of data
transmission almost entirely relies on digital encryption, which has various
drawbacks and vulnerabilities. For high-volume data transmission, energy-
efficient and fast symmetric encryption (e.g., advanced encryption standard,
AES) is commonly used, but its cipher secret key, which needs to be wirelessly
shared between the transmitter and receiver, is susceptible to eavesdropping.
Asymmetric encryption with a public-key infrastructure (e.g., RSA cryptography)
can be used to secure key distribution, but it requires energy-consuming
computation and complex two-way communication protocols. As a result, additional
non-digital security approaches using the physical properties of wireless
hardware and electromagnetic waves become attractive. Transmission using narrow
beams at millimeter-wave and terahertz (THz) frequencies is expected to reduce
the chance of eavesdropping. However, due to the inherently non-ideal beam shape
generated by actual antenna arrays, leakage of information still occurs. To
address the above issues, this project will investigate the design, analysis,
and experiments of a new approach for secured wireless transmission of secret
keys. It is expected to significantly increase the capabilities of wireless
backhaul infrastructures, especially the future “beyond-5G” networks, against
eavesdropping and attacking. It will also advance the interdisciplinary research
and education across the fields of THz technologies, microelectronics, and
wireless security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a scheme that
encodes the data onto various spatial-distribution patterns (i.e., orbital-
angular momentum, OAM) of the wave-front phases in a THz beam. The decoding of
such a scheme requires the receiver to be precisely located along the axis of
the OAM wave, making eavesdropping very hard and prone to be detected. The
project will study approaches that utilize superposition of multiple OAM modes,
which further enhances security with the additional information ambiguity
induced to illegitimate receivers. To avoid any possible selective jamming, a
bit-level rapid frequency hopping scheme will also be applied. The researchers
will not only investigate the theoretical security performance limits of the
“laser-like” transmission scheme against various sophisticated hacking
scenarios, but also provide experimental demonstrations using custom-designed
microelectronic chips. Operations such as the generation, detection, coding,
frequency-hopping, and beam-steering of THz OAM waves will be performed. The
one-way, high-security transmission of secret key to be enabled by this project
will complement the existing digital encryption schemes and further the
understanding of the THz technologies and applications in wireless security
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.