* 2028279
* RAPID: Measuring the Internet during Novel Coronavirus to Evaluate Quarantine (RAPID-MINSEQ)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,000.00

The world is employing social distancing, work-from-home, and study-from-home to
limit COVID-19's spread until the availability of early detection and a vaccine
for COVID-19. Implementation of these policies varies across the U.S. and
globally due to local circumstances. A common consequence is a huge shift in
Internet use, with university dormitories and high schools emptying and home use
increasing. The goal of this project is to observe this shift, globally, through
changes in Internet address usage, allowing observation of early reactions to
COVID and, one hopes, a future shift back.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
plans to develop two complementary methods of assessing Internet use by
measuring address activity and how it changes relative to historical trends. The
project will directly measure Internet address use globally based on continuous,
ongoing measurements of more than 4 million IPv4 networks. The project will also
directly measure Internet address use in network traffic at a regional Internet
exchange point where multiple Internet providers interconnect. The first
approach provides a global picture, while the second provides a more detailed
but regional picture; together they will help evaluate measurement
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project allows to capture an improved global
picture of how different parts of the world react to COVID-19, as seen through
their use of the Internet. In particular, the results from this research will
help understand changing behavior of networks compared to historical data, and
provide a new method based on address usage to characterize how people are
staying home, and to look for the effectiveness and onset of work-from-home and
shelter-in-place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website will be at
https://ant.isi.edu/minceq. The project will make all new data generated by this
project available at no cost to researchers at https://ant.isi.edu/datasets. The
project website and data will persist indefinitely; as of 2020 the website
already provides five years of archival data that serves as a
baseline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.