* 2028748
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Scalable Cyber Attack Investigation using Declarative Queriesand Interrogative Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yinghui Wu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,979.00

Recent cyber-attacks that exploit multiple vulnerabilities plague even the most
protected companies. This has led to the solutions that ubiquitously monitor
system activities as a series of system events, and apply causality analysis to
reveal the attack steps through reconstructing the events and their dependencies
on the attack as dependency graphs. Nevertheless, existing techniques mainly
exploit event time to identify dependencies. This will include many less-
important dependencies brought by irrelevant system activities. Moreover, these
techniques cannot easily incorporate expert knowledge from security analysts due
to limited extensibility, and provide little support to engage security analysts
to actively explore the dependencies. The project is expected to make a major
positive impact on system security by enhancing attack investigation using
system audit logs, and provide contextual information to help intrusion
detection systems better prioritize alerts. The project actively involves
students from minority and underrepresented groups for research and training
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to develop a
general query framework to express and extract contextual attack information, by
constructing small graphs of attack-relevant events from system audit logs. The
project is focused on the following research tasks: (1) build a general
infrastructure that computes discriminative weights for dependencies based on
various properties of system events to identify attack-relevant events and entry
points for attacks; (2) develop a declarative graph query language that provides
specialized language constructs to express various formats of causality
analysis; (3) devise a scalable interrogative analysis framework that can
automatically clarify causality analysis by tracking expressive causal
structures for both verified and hypothetical scenarios, enabled by new ``Why''
and ``What-if'' semantics. This project will advance the state of the art in
revealing attack provenance from complex systems, on engaging security analysts
to interactive and explainable security analytical pipelines, and to gain better
understanding of the fundamental and practical challenges for building an
effective attack investigation system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.