* 2028433
* Travel Funds for The Fourteenth International Congress on Artificial Materials for Novel Wave Phenomena – Metamaterials 2020; New York, New York; September 28 to October 3, 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Andrea Alu, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

This grant supports the next generation of researchers in dynamic systems,
mechanics of materials and metamaterials by providing funding for graduate
students, post-doctoral fellows and junior faculty to travel to the Fourteenth
International Congress on Artificial Materials for Novel Wave Phenomena –
Metamaterials 2020, which will comprise a 4-day conference (28 September-3
October), and a 2-day Doctoral School (4-5 October). It is the first time that
this highly visible international conference is held in the United States. This
event will represent a unique opportunity for students and young researchers to
gain exposure to the latest advancements in the field of metamaterials and to
meet the leading experts in this rapidly developing field. The Doctoral School
course will be focused on the optical properties of engineered low-dimensional
artificial materials. The recent interest in this topic is motivated by growing
interest in 2D materials, metasurfaces, valleytronics and twistronics. This
grant will be used to broaden participation from groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in major metamaterials conferences, particularly from women,
underrepresented minorities, and researchers from universities that do not
typically have the funding to travel to these events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fourteenth International Congress on Artificial Materials for Novel Wave
Phenomena will provide a unique forum to share the latest results on
metamaterials research and to bring together the engineering, physics, and
material science communities working in the field of artificial electromagnetic
materials and their applications at microwaves, millimeter waves, terahertz, and
optical frequencies, as well as in acoustics, mechanics, hydrodynamics and
thermodynamics. The conference program will include four plenary talks given by
eminent researchers in the field of metamaterials. In addition, leading experts
will present invited talks, which will review the state-of-the art and address
the latest advancements in their respective areas. The Congress holds Special
Symposia, comprised of invited and contributed papers, on areas deemed to be
topical and of special interest to conference attendees. The technical oral
talks and interactive poster sessions will encompass a broad range of topics,
from fundamental electromagnetic theory of metamaterials and complex
electromagnetic media to innovative microwave and optical devices, giving the
opportunity to the early career scientists and engineers supported by this grant
to get access to the latest advances in the area of
metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.