* 2028714
* PPoSS: Planning: Dynamic Big Graph Store for High-Throughput and Secure Distributed Query Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 249,999.00

Since graphs can readily express entities and relationships among them, they are
widely used to represent large volumes of data from domains ranging from online
shopping platforms to social networks. These graphs continue to evolve in size
and structure as they integrate new data that emerges, often in real time, thus
creating a need for online analytics to answer user queries based upon the
latest available information. The goal of this research is to address
fundamental challenges across the software-hardware spectrum to develop a
scalable and secure distributed platform for online graph analytics. This
research will discover novel techniques for delivering meaningful answers to
queries over changing data, with a high degree of efficiency, while addressing
security concerns that can arise in cloud settings. The key components of this
platform, named DyGr, include: a graph store with a consistency model that
tailors the scope of consistency to efficiently compute meaningful answers to
queries; an event-driven incremental computation model that is supported across
software and hardware layers to rapidly compute query results; and hardware
supported protocols for secure distributed evaluation of queries over private
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By building of a powerful online analytics system
this research will contribute to acceleration of new discoveries in fields that
employ graph analytics. Advances in online analytics will enable new
applications that are relevant to businesses and thus will contribute to
economic growth. The students participating in this project will gain
comprehensive training in all aspects of system building as well as receive
training in applications that require online analytics. Therefore, the broader
impact in form of contributions to workforce development in an area of national
need will be tremendous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.