* 2028683
* RAPID:  Evaluating the Impact of COVID-19 on Labor Market, Social, and Mental Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Wandi Bruine de Bruin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This research project will advance understanding of the economic, social, and
mental health toll of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic is quickly eroding the
social and economic platform the world is built upon. Quality data must be
gathered quickly in order to understand the impact of the pandemic on human
life. This project will collect robust data on people's experiences in the U.S.
during the pandemic, including data collected quickly via social media
platforms. The project also will develop methodology to facilitate the effective
use of different data sources. Because experiences both within the U.S. and
across countries vary widely, the investigators will collaborate with
researchers in five countries outside the U.S. By implementing the same measures
of experienced outcomes in similar surveys across the globe, a unique comparison
is possible about the effectiveness of the policies that have been implemented
across countries. The project results will provide insights for academics,
practitioners, and policy makers who are seeking to understand and inform
policies to curb the pandemic and its consequences. Data collected by this
project, links to other data, and project findings will be made available
through dashboards for policy makers, researchers, and the interested public.
The investigators will record podcasts and webinars to broadly disseminate the
results. Graduate students will be trained in the conduct of collaborative
multi-site research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage data
collected as part of an ongoing tracking study of American households in the
Understanding America Study. Survey data also will be collected via Facebook and
Instagram. Research questions to be addressed by the data include: Which
policies have helped to reduce anxiety and depression during this pandemic?
Which individuals are at greatest risk for economic losses during the pandemic
and what measures have helped them the most? How do these economic losses
influence willingness to engage in social distancing, and which policies have
helped people to stay at home in the face of economic losses? The project also
will develop new survey weighting approaches to make use of the simultaneous
collection of data with different sampling frames, sampling schemes, and modes.
The availability of multiple data sources will allow for the assessment of
measurement properties of mental health scales items in need of adaptations to
rapidly changing environments. Methods will be developed for causal inference
from data combined from different sources to assess the effects of different
policy interventions by local areas, states, and
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.