* 2028880
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Quarantined Networks and the Spread of COVID-19
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Nicole Eikmeier, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Pawel Hitczenko
* 04/30/2022
* USD 22,554.00

As the global community weighs the necessary extent of quarantine and social
distancing to fight the spread of COVID-19, the critical question is how disease
transmission is mitigated by these measures. Recent predictions suggest that
without serious interventions, a large portion of the world population will
become infected, resulting in millions of deaths. To mitigate this worst-case
scenario, key policy decisions are being guided by mathematical models. However,
several prominent models make unrealistic assumptions about human contacts i.e.,
that an individual is equally likely to infect a close family member as a
complete stranger on the other side of the country. Such assumptions are useful
for calculations, but fail to take into account the full geographic complexity
of the outbreak. Furthermore, many models do not consider the consequences of
the quarantine of healthy individuals. This project will use rigorous analysis
and simulation to address these shortcomings by describing a more realistic
structure of quarantined networks and how disease spreads in them. The proposed
research will use real-world data about contact networks to make predictions and
recommendations for controlling the COVID-19 outbreak, improving our
understanding of how best to contain the current as well as future pandemics.
The project will involve the training of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will describe the effect of
quarantine on connectivity and disease transmission on more realistic networks
than have previously been considered. Of particular importance will be locating
critical thresholds which, when exceeded, allow large epidemics to occur. There
is recent study of these thresholds, but for networks that model digital
infrastructure and social networks. The first objective of the research will be
to determine the effect of biased site percolation on graph structure,
especially how different percolation rules influence the size of the largest
component of a given graph. The second part will then focus on how the critical
threshold and size of the epidemic for an SIR model change after percolation.
This will be explored rigorously on graphs generated from the configuration
model as well as random spatial networks such as Gilbert graphs. Additionally,
these questions will be investigated on real world face-to-face networks using
data specific to the current COVID-19 pandemic. Answering them will help test
robustness of previous models, while also exploring the effectiveness of
stronger preemptive distancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded
using funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.