* 2028280
* RAPID: A novel platform for data integration and deep learning on COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Keith Crandall, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, has fundamentally changed
the world, and yet its ultimate impact is unknown. While China has experienced a
slowdown in new cases, infections in the US continue to rise and are threatening
to exceed our health care system’s capacity. Tests capacities are limited
compared to the need, hospital services are becoming overwhelmed, and critical
supplies are in shortage. There is a diversity of efforts currently ongoing to
develop both new treatments as well as vaccine strategies to combat COVID-19.
Yet, we know from experience, the virus will evolve solutions to both host
immune systems and intervention strategies. In order to diminish both the short-
term and long-term impacts of COVID-19, it is essential to develop robust,
repeatable, and accessible tools to integrate and analyze the diversity of data
becoming available in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. The development of a
platform to characterize the dynamic nature of mutations in the virus and
testing for associations with clinical variables and biomarkers is an essential
broader impact and will help in making informed predictions of health outcomes
such as the stage of the severity of the disease and efficacy of treatment.
Additionally, this project provides professional development opportunities for
early career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in omics technologies
provide a broad and deep range of genotypic and phenotypic data to integrate
with clinical phenotypes. Machine learning techniques such as clustering using
phylogenetic distance and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are suitable techniques to
link these DNA level changes to clinical metadata for human disease prediction,
diagnosis, and therapeutics. This project develops tools within an open-source
platform for documented, repeatable analyses that can be conducted in real-time
allowing integration of data from patients with new treatments/vaccines
strategies. This deep learning bioinformatics platform will allow the
prioritization of genes associated with outcome predictors, including health,
therapeutic, and vaccine outcomes, as well as inform improved DNA tests for
predicting disease status and severity. The computational tools developed in
this study will provide the research community and health professionals with
comprehensive and generic approaches for characterizing the dynamics of
genotype/phenotype associations in viruses. Such tools allow healthcare
professionals and researchers to address specific properties of viruses such as
frequency and location of mutations across the viral genome. When added to other
clinical and epidemiological data, such information could help pave the way to
better treatments or a vaccine. The developed platform will provide a venue for
robust, open, repeatable analyses of COVID-19 as more and more data become
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.