* 2028742
* Collaborative Research: The GEO REU Network: Supporting Effective and Inclusive Research Experiences for Undergraduates in the Geosciences
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rebecca Batchelor, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 54,652.00

Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs) are an important part of the NSF
career and broadening participation portfolio for the geosciences. This project
focuses on supporting the people running NSF GEO REUs so that the programs are
effective, evidence-based and inclusive. It is intended to support both new and
established Principal Investigators (PIs) and managers of the REU programs
funded in the Geosciences directorate (GEO) by fostering the sharing of
strategies and resources and facilitating discussions amongst PIs. The GEO REU
Network has been built around the GEO REU email listserv and website, events at
conferences, and hosting of the biannual workshop for PIs. This award continues
and expands support to the network for an additional two years. The project PIs
will run workshops for new PIs and a bi-annual PI meeting. They will provide
resources on timely topics such as ethics, implicit bias, sexual harassment
prevention, and inclusive strategies, keeping the community current in its
approaches and thinking. The effort will also include new support structures
such as a GEO REU Leadership Council. In addition, a new partnership between the
GEO and BIO REU community will invigorate discussions with fresh perspectives
from a larger, well-established network of REU PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
effort to support GEO REU PIs in providing high quality research internship
experiences involves the development of a Community of Practice and a body of
knowledge of successful practices of mentoring, pedagogy, and diversity and
inclusion. The programmatic elements included and measures taken in running an
REU are advanced over time through the sharing of strategies, concerns, and
successes. Improving the quality of research internships results in better
trained students and more rigorous science projects. The GEO REU Network
provides a mechanism for REU PIs or managers to develop higher quality REU sites
using provided resources and support, and to be more successful in engaging
students from a broader range of backgrounds. The project leaders will
synthesize resources and strategies, facilitate discussion around challenges,
and organize events for the REU PIs at conferences. The goal of this project is
to support the creation of more effective and inclusive GEO REU programs.
Support for this project is provided by the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences, the Division of Earth Sciences and the Division of Ocean
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.