* 2028719
* EAGER: A Research-Driven Messaging Campaign to Transform Perceptions of URMs in STEM Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Almesha Campbell, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

This EAGER project engages in research that has the potential to transform the
field of innovation of entrepreneurship as it relates to broadening
participation of women of color in educational and academic related innovation
environments. The goal of this project is to use storytelling to explore which
factors influence the access, pursuit, and success of underrepresented
populations in innovative STEM spaces and create a research-driven messaging
campaign for the National Science Foundation’s (NSF’s) I-Corps program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation and entrepreneurship are major economic drivers
in the United States and are essential to ensure the Nation’s standing as a
global leader in science and technology. Because of the significant lack of
inclusion of under-represented groups in STEM, there is also an absence of
innovators with diverse experiences, ideas, perspectives, and stories. Including
these groups in the National Innovation Network can add potentially
transformative ways of thinking about innovation and entrepreneurship. Results
from this study will be used to uncover what factors (stories, ideas,
experiences, perceptions) influence/play a role in NSF’s under-represented
populations access to, pursuit of, and success in innovative STEM spaces (both
academic and professional). It will also inform the planning and implementation
of a pilot messaging campaign aimed at broadening participation of under-
represented groups in NSF’s I-Corps program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
efforts to address innovation for under-represented women in STEM have not been
effective in producing substantive impact that led to measurable increases in
this area. By focusing on stories told by under-represented communities in STEM,
this project seeks to uncover specific reasons these groups do not have access
to STEM sectors or think they do not fit in these spaces. The outcomes are
expected to advance the understanding of the barriers members of under-
represented communities face in STEM fields, and have the potential to
significantly impact the inclusion of underrepresented groups in STEM and
innovation within workplaces, schools, universities, and community
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.