* 2028498
* Recycling and separation of critical elements using porous materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gina Noh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 358,893.00

Critical metallic elements, such as lithium, rare-earth elements (REEs), cobalt,
and aluminum, are non-renewable resources that are vital to modern technologies.
For example, lithium is used in batteries for electronic devices and electric
vehicles, and REEs are used in jet engines and anti-corrosion coatings for
metals. Some critical elements, such as lithium and REEs, are not naturally
abundant within the United States, and their supply and cost can be affected by
shifting geopolitical factors. Understanding how critical elements can be
separated and purified will advance the Nation's economy and security through
advancements in mining and recycling of domestic critical elements. However, it
is challenging to achieve the separation of critical metal elements with high
purities by existing methods. Microporous titanosilicate materials contain
unique structural features that are suitable for separating critical metal
elements with high purities. Therefore, this research project will use a set of
experimental and computational methods to design microporous titanosilicate
materials for the highly selective separation of critical elements. The project
also involves training students of various educational levels as well as
outreach activities that disseminate the research findings to a broader audience
from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project
is to elucidate how the spatial arrangements of ion-adsorption sites in
microporous titanosilicates facilitate high-resolution separation of metal ions
with very similar properties by continuous ion exchange/continuous ion
chromatography (CIX/CIC). Titanosilicates have long-range order ion-adsorption
sites inside their micropores, where the micropores are channels with sizes
similar to hydrated metal ions. Through material design, these ordered ion-
adsorption sites could offer tunability toward metal ion selectivity. The
investigators will use a set of experimental and computational methods for
different length scales (ion adsorption site, unit cell, and particle scales) to
design materials for the separation of REEs and other metal ions. The project
will first focus on relating the fine structural features inside titanosilicate
pores, such as charged site density and distribution, to REE ion adsorption and
separation performance. Structures with different charged site densities will be
synthesized and simulated. Ion adsorption equilibrium constants will be measured
experimentally as well as computed using density functional theory calculations.
Computational methods describing the hydration and dehydration of metal ions
inside micropores will be developed. These efforts will lead to recommendations
for structural features for separating REE cations. The project will then focus
on evaluating the effects of material structure (chemical composition, pore
size, and pore topology) on metal ion migration rates and activation energies.
This outcome will be achieved by studying ion adsorption and migration on
microporous materials of various structures (titanosilicates, clays, and
zeolites) using experimental and computational methods. Finally, the project
will focus on determining the effect of particle size and morphology on REE
adsorption capacity, strength, and kinetics, which will be an important step in
preparing these materials for practical applications. This project will provide
guidelines for designing microporous materials for separating chemically similar
metal ions (such as separating REEs from each other or separating lithium and
sodium), which can also be customized based on the feedstock composition and
impurities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.