* 2028258
* I-Corps: TOPOLOGY OPTIMIZATION APPLIED TO ADDITIVE MANUFACTURED HEAT EXCHANGERS
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Xiaoping Qian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of topologically-optimized heat exchangers that may be additively
manufactured. By extending topology optimization onto three-dimensional
conjugate heat transfer systems and by accounting for additive manufacturing
constraints, this project will demonstrate the relevance and utility of both
technologies. Because of the focus on heat exchanger technology as the
demonstration platform, the work also may improve energy efficiency for a host
of convection related applications, ranging from automotive to aerospace, power
conversion, refrigeration, etc.

This I-Corps project will apply topology optimization to design novel heat
exchangers and consider additive manufacturing constraints during the
optimization process. The key innovation in the proposed research allows
density-based topology optimization to control design-dependent physical
boundary conditions. The resulting heat exchanger may be additively manufactured
and tested both for performance as well as durability in order to show that the
topology optimization process is acceptable for this type of application, which
is highly constrained along multiple competing aspects (i.e., thermal
performance, pressure drop, thermal stress, burst pressure, creep, etc.). This
developed technology may lead to new heat exchangers that dissipate more heat
than conventional ones by exploring a large design space opened by additive
manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.