* 2028177
* AISES 2nd Convening on Computer Science Research Infrastructure for Native-Serving Institutions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Kathy DeerInWater, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 97,823.00

Given the underrepresentation of Native students, professionals, and faculty in
the field of computer science, AISES believes now is a critical time to focus on
strengthening CS research infrastructure of Native-serving institutions to move
the needle on this broadening participation challenge. To this end, AISES
proposes to build on the outcomes if the first Convening on Computer Science
Research Infrastructure for Native-Serving Institutions, by further supporting
the development of research ideas and proposals among faculty at Native-serving
institutions with the goal of increasing the number of funding opportunities
awarded to Native-serving institutions and Native researchers in CS. AISES will
recruit participants from the pool of researchers who attended the first
convening as well as conduct further, targeted outreach and recruit for new
participants from Native-serving institutions, including tribal colleges when
possible. The primary objectives of the proposed 2nd convening are to: recruit
faculty from Native-serving institutions and Native faculty interested in
developing CS research proposals; convene participants to develop project ideas
leading to concept papers; and provide technical support for grant writing and
communication between participants and collaborators and NSF program
officers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed convening is to build
upon research ideas discussed at the first convening and support the development
of research proposals among Native faculty and faculty at Native-serving
institutions. The outcomes of the proposed convening will provide examples of
best practices for capacity building and developing partnerships aimed a
capitalizing on the unique strengths of Native-serving institutions.
Furthermore, the convening will provide critical insights into how best to
develop collaborative proposals addressing the issues facing faculty and
students at different types of Native-serving institutions across the country,
including non-tribal American Indian and Alaska Native-serving institutions and
Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs). Additionally, the convening will gather
faculty from a diverse set of colleges and universities, providing a unique
opportunity to learn from representatives of Native-serving institutions as they
develop projects to increase the prevalence of CS research among Native-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.