* 2028461
* RAPID: Mobilizing Close Relationships to Combat the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Sandra Murray, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 117,890.00

To stop the spread of COVID-19, people need to practice the protective behaviors
that public health and government officials recommend. To follow such
recommendations, people in turn need to trust that government and public health
officials are providing good advice. They also need to trust that their fellow
citizens will practice the protective behaviors too. Unfortunately, the spread
of COVID-19 makes it difficult to trust others because other people are the
source of illness. This project aims to understand how people can use their
closest personal relationships as a resource in helping them to trust more in
other people and in government and public health officials. Understanding how
close relationships can be used as a resource in coping with COVID-19 can help
identify simple techniques to bolster trust in others and ultimately motivate
people to engage in recommended self-protective behaviors.

This project centers on the idea that motivating people to trust more in their
closest interpersonal partners can also make them more trusting of their fellow
citizens and government and public health officials. Trusting in a close partner
should have this effect because such trust should make it seem safer and less
risky to depend on other people as well. Past research in this area has focused
on how partners and family members influence one another. This project seeks to
expand this knowledge by considering that relationships might succeed or fail as
a consequence of the ways in which people’s lives are intertwined with the
actions of those in the collective relational world. The project therefore
offers an opportunity to fundamentally transform basic understanding of close
relationship dynamics by studying relationships as part of an interconnected
system of relationships within the national and global community. A 3-week
intervention study examines the effects of a trust-bolstering intervention.
Daily experiences are collected each day, focusing on participant’s concerns
about COVID-19, trust in others, and self-protective behavior. This project
offers a formal test of how trusting a partner can make the world itself seem
more trustworthy and motivate people to engage in the kinds of behaviors needed
to stop the spread of illness. Understanding the role that close personal
relationships play in shaping people’s responses to the world around them can
help promote the kind of trust and cooperation needed for people to rise to
global challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.