* 2028400
* RAPID: A Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience on the Interaction between the Nasal Microbiome and SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus Infection
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Michael LaMontagne, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,268.00

Asymptomatic carriers of the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus can unknowingly spread
COVID-19. Undergraduate students, who routinely congregate on campuses for
classes and other activities, have an elevated risk of exposure to respiratory
infections. However, as a generally younger adult population, they also have a
relatively low risk of progressing to COVID-19. As a result, it is possible that
students could be carriers of this virus, posing increased risk of spreading it
to others. This RAPID project will expand the scope of an existing Classroom-
based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) in microbiology at the University
of Houston – Clear Lake. Students currently enrolled in the CURE participate in
authentic research in a course-based setting to study the nasal microbiome.
Support provided by this award will enable students to add information about
their SARS-CoV-2 status to the research. The CURE will allow them to learn both
how research is conducted and to potentially generate new knowledge about how
the SARS-CoV-2 virus works. Students will also develop and use a virtual reality
tool to learn how to use MALDI-TOF to sequence DNA fragments, providing them
with skills that are valuable in clinical and research laboratories.

The students enrolled in the CURE have already collected their own nasal swab
specimens earlier in the Spring 2020 semester. These specimens were cultured to
select for bacteria in the Staphylococus genus. Working at home, students will
participate in remote data collection from high-throughput MALDI-TOF analysis of
PCR amplicons generated from the 16S rRNA gene with bacterial-domain specific
primers. These data will identify which bacterial isolates are Stapthlococcus
epidermis. In addition, volunteers from this group of students will be invited
to return campus to provide nasal swab samples to be tested for the presence of
SARS-Cov-2. A drive-through testing facility that requires students to remain in
their vehicles at all times will be used for this purpose. At the facility,
registered nurses will survey the students about possible CoVID-19 symptoms.
Following FDA guidelines, students will then self-swab, place the swab into a
tube containing reagents that inactivate viruses, then place the tube into a
secondary container. Thus, only the individual student handles their sample. Co-
PI Alexander will collect all of the secondary containers, place them into a
third container, and deliver it to a commercial lab to be tested for SARS-CoV-2,
using research-only test kits that cannot be used clinically. Students will
receive their SARS-CoV-2 status via a blinded protocol that ensures that only
the individual student will know their status. The deidentified data from the
class will be pooled to examine the relationship between the nasal microbiome
and the presence of SARS-CoV-2. Exploring the potential of S. epidermis to
protect against SARS-CoV-2 infection might provide greater understanding of the
virulence of SARS-CoV-2. Thus, there is a urgent need for immediate data
collection. In parallel with data collection and analysis, the project intends
to develop virtual modules for teaching MALDI-TOF, providing students with
training opportunities that would be otherwise unavailable due to campus
closure. This RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
program in the Division of Undergraduate Education (Education and Human
Resources Directorate), using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.