* 2028763
* RAPID: Polyelectrolyte Coatings as an Approach to Extend N95 Respirator Usage Lifespan
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Edmund Palermo, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This project will address the critical shortage of N95 respirator masks
currently facing medical professionals at the front lines of the evolving novel
coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The research will leverage the expertise
of the investigators to develop a simple and effective approach for extending
the usable life of N95 respirator masks and similar personal protective
equipment (PPE). The investigators will explore the application of commercially
available polyelectrolytes (a polymer with a repeating charged unit) as thin
film coatings on the masks. These coatings can potentially deactivate enveloped
viruses such as SARS-COV-2, increase the barrier to penetration by viral
particles, and maintain performance integrity after solvent-based sterilization
protocols. An independent laboratory will evaluate the performance of the
modified masks relative to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) N95 standards. Clinical professionals at Mt. Sinai School of
Medicine in New York City, a region currently battling the highest infection
rate, will test prototype masks and work with the investigators to perfect the
coating procedure. The outcome of the project will be a coating protocol that
uses non-toxic components and can be applied by end users in a hospital setting
on procured masks. Findings will be made immediately accessible to the public
through pre-print servers, public repositories such as the Open Science
Framework, and social media platforms. Accordingly, society can work together to
mitigate the impact of the PPE shortage and minimize further infections through
clinician-patient contacts.

The overall goal of the project is to develop a simple and effective post-
processing step to coat manufactured nonwoven polypropylene materials, e.g., N95
mask filters, in polyelectrolyte solutions. This is expected to impart a thin,
uniform conformal coating exhibiting a semi-permanent charge. The
polyelectrolyte coating will extend the usable life of existing medical PPE
supplies by enabling use of common sterilization procedures. The polyelectrolyte
coating may also augment the protective capabilities of PPE by enhancing
material filtering efficiency and/or providing novel antiviral activity. The
investigators will evaluate and optimize a coating procedure that healthcare
personnel can directly apply to acquired PPE using commodity polymers.
Incorporation of alkyl halides in the coating and polymer cross-linking will be
explored to yield highly functional and resilient coatings. Scanning electron
microscopy will be used to characterize coating uniformity, changes to material
fiber structure, and resulting pore size distribution. Breathability after
polymer coating will be assessed by measuring air permeation through the mask,
and viral deactivation capabilities will be investigated through cytopathic and
plaque formation assays with a model Biosafety Level II enveloped virus. An
independent commercial laboratory will conduct NIOSH pre-certification testing
to assess particle filtration relative to N-series respirator standards.
Partners at the Mt. Sinai Icahn School of Medicine will test and implement
prototypical processes in real time to resolve the PPE shortage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.