* 2028055
* RAPID: Working and Teaching from Home in New York State amidst the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Amy Lutz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 97,058.00

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, schools in New York State have been closed
since mid-March and many workers are also working from home. This creates unique
stressors for parents who are struggling to oversee their children’s education
while doing their normal jobs from home or working as an essential worker. Most
of these parents have no previous experience with this form of homeschooling and
many are working with their children to complete online schooling content. Also,
many parents have limited experience working from home. This project will
interview parents about their experiences with work and this form of
homeschooling in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Key research questions
include: Who is overseeing children’s at-home work? Are there gendered patterns
to overseeing children’s schoolwork and how do they present themselves? Do
parents and children have adequate technology at home to both work and do
schoolwork at home in the context of online educational plans? How do parents
balance their work and school arrangements? How do parents organize their day
around children’s schoolwork and work? What stressors do parents face in this
new arrangement? Do parents have adequate support from schools and teachers to
provide for implementing their children’s at-home learning? Findings from the
project will inform both educational and business leaders regarding the
challenges that are involved in teleworking and this form of homeschooling
simultaneously, thus enabling better response to the current pandemic as well as
better preparedness for future events that may require this combination
activities at home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has changed both
working and educational arrangements for many families in the United States.
This project will conduct qualitative phone interviews of parents in and around
Syracuse, New York, who are teaching their K-12 children at home while also
working. Fifty or more parents will be identified through snowball sampling and
the use of a parenting Facebook page that has wide use throughout the Syracuse
area. Using the Facebook site will help to obtain a more diverse sample than
snowball sampling alone could produce. Interviews will be conducted using open-
ended questions including follow-up questions as necessary. Interviews will be
recorded and transcribed. The project will use the online qualitative software
Dedoose and flexible coding techniques to code the interviews, followed by
analytic coding. The project will also identify the central stories in the data.
Findings from the project will inform sociological theories regarding work and
family arrangements, especially within the context of household combinations of
teleworking and homeschooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.