* 2028110
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Maintain Mobility and Reduce Infection Through a Resilient Transit and Micromobility System
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2020,12/31/2021
* John MacArthur, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,979.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented disruptions to health, the
economy, and transportation systems in cities. The key strategy to combat growth
in the infection rate is through "social distancing," maintaining physical
separation from others. This strategy is incompatible with transit systems and
ridership in nearly every transit market has plunged, causing agencies to reduce
service levels to protect riders and employees. Still, mobility is required in
many cities and the ability of cities to rapidly recover from widespread
economic shutdown will require improving mobility systems in urban areas. In the
past decade, more diverse shared mobility systems have proliferated, potentially
improving the resilience and redundancy of the urban transportation system. Most
recently, micromobility systems (i.e., bike share and scooter share) have
entered cities and supplemented transportation systems in those areas. As a
shared personal mobility vehicle, micromobility vehicles have been highly
utilized in some markets in the early weeks of the pandemic even as transit
ridership has declined. This is an important opportunity to understand how
shared micromobility systems complement transit and can support social
distancing to limit spread of disease while also facilitating urban
transportation recovery. To that end, this study has two main aims. First, the
research team will conduct a series of panel surveys for the duration of the
pandemic of transit and micromobility users in two medium-sized transportation
markets (Nashville and Portland) that have robust micromobility markets. These
surveys will query and model mode choice behavior in relation to social
distancing requirements, transit captivity, job status, income, activity
restrictions, and others. The research team seeks to understand if riders self-
regulate transit use and exposure and balance their behavior with perceived
risks. The team will use detailed agency and micromobility operator data to
track changes in ridership during recovery. The second aim is to project those
findings on more aggregate ridership data of transit and micromobility across
cities of different sizes and with different COVID-19 infection rates. This will
provide detailed understanding of how riders react to pandemic in regard to two
main shared modes; transit and micromobility systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
date there has been little work on the response of transit to disease outbreaks.
The 2002/2003 SARS outbreak provides some aggregate evidence of long-duration
drops in transit ridership. This work will provide important insight into
disaggregate rider behavior, disease transmission, and personal- and community-
risk tolerance. Moreover, this work will explore how emergent modes, like shared
micromobility provide opportunities to maintain mobility while reducing close
personal contact. Models developed can help predict how city transit systems
will recover after a public health crisis. Public health emergencies will
continue into the future and preparation on how to react to such emergencies
will be important. For example, micromobility systems may provide much needed
transportation services to supplement limited transit service. Understanding the
dual roles of micromobility and transit will assist in limiting disease
transmission and recovering the transportation system. Policy responses could be
based on evidence generated in this study for the current and future infectious
disease pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.