* 2028401
* RAPID: Networked Data-Driven Modelling of the COVID-19 Outbreak with a Performativity-Aware Calibration Learning Algorithm
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Faryad Darabi Sahneh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2023
* USD 156,424.00

This project will develop and deploy a data-driven mathematical modeling
framework for predicting the spread of COVID-19 at regional levels and for
informing potential mitigation efforts. The models will also provide a means to
test the impact of social distancing and mobility reduction on the future course
of the pandemic. The proposed modeling framework relies on a two-component
structure that does not require prior knowledge of the epidemiological
characteristics of the disease. This approach is especially useful during the
initial stages of an emerging outbreak, where little is known and validated
about the contagion. Moreover, this project will bring a novel perspective on
the mathematical modeling of disease spread, which will complement other ongoing
efforts and provide access to diverse models critical to decision-making under
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon a data-driven
mathematical modeling approach leveraging a surprisingly simple behavior
examined in epidemiological data sets and models that allows forecasts for case
counts with no parameter estimations. The first thrust is to integrate data-
driven modeling into explicit network interactions in order to investigate
spatial aspects of COVID-19 outbreak propagation. The second thrust of the
project is to implement a calibration layer that takes into account mitigation
efforts. The rationale for this approach is that, in a constantly evolving
environment, epidemiological predictions are difficult to make due to the
performativity effect, whereby model predictions affect social behavior and
mitigation efforts, which in turn alters the spread of the outbreak predicted by
the mathematical models. From a conceptual point of view, this project will
address performativity in the context of epidemiological modeling. At the
practical level, it will develop a general calibration module that will learn
how to incorporate reactions to predictions into epidemiological forecasts. By
design, this “performativity-aware” calibration module will be independent of
any specific epidemic model; hence, once developed, it will be possible to be
integrated into other existing predictive models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is being funded by the CARES supplemental funds allocated to
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.