* 2028629
* RAPID: Real-time modeling of the source-sink dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 in rural regions for equitable public health
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Eckehard Doerry, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,857.00

SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, has become a global epidemic,
spreading rapidly through communities across our country and around the globe.
Accurate forecasting of disease spread is a critical tool for effectively
planning outbreak responses, allowing us to predict how many people will be
infected, how many patients will be in hospitals at any given time, and the
resource needs (e.g. ventilators) at each hospital. Most modeling studies of
SARS-CoV-2 have so far focused on predicting how the virus will spread in
densely populated cities like New York City, but the virus is also rapidly
spreading in more sparsely populated, rural regions. To accurately model
outbreak dynamics in more rural areas, more realistic mathematical models are
needed that can represent mid-sized population centers separated by large areas
of low population density. This project will develop and refine these more
advanced mathematical models to understand how population density and
interconnectedness influence the trajectory of epidemic outbreaks. Importantly,
the project will deploy model projections in near-real-time to aid in local
public health interventions, via a secure web portal accessible to local and
regional response planners. Model output will also be linked to the resources
available at specific local and regional hospitals in a broad rural area, so
that these hospitals can better manage the impacts of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic.
The modeling system and web application will serve as a framework for rapidly
responding to future outbreaks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most epidemiological
models that have been developed to forecast the spread of SARS-CoV-2 make
assumptions that are likely only realistic in dense urban centers, such as
frequency-dependent transmission dynamics, a lack of stochastic processes, and a
lack of density-dependent effects. In this project, models will be developed
that are more appropriate for sparse metapopulations, accounting for multiple
sources of stochasticity, population movement across a landscape, density-
dependent transmission, and spatial heterogeneity in transmission rates. The
project will use advanced statistical computing algorithms to fit the models to
data from a large rural region. This fitting routine will identify the most
appropriate transmission functions that describe longitudinal patterns of case-
counts and will allow the project to release data-informed predictions of SARS-
CoV-2 spread in near-real-time. These model forecasts will be developed in
collaboration with public health experts and healthcare practitioners to respond
to the needs of under-served, rural communities. The secure web application will
provide predictions of hospitalization rates at fine spatial grains so that
already strained, rural hospital systems can adapt and plan under different
intervention scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.