* 2028154
* SWQU: Improving Space Weather Predictions with Data-Driven Models of the Solar Atmosphere and Inner Heliosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Charles Arge, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2024
* USD 799,611.00

Solar wind, a stream of charged particles emitted from the Sun, is a key driver
of space weather at Earth and throughout the solar system. Extreme space weather
events occur when disturbances in the Sun’s atmosphere, called coronal mass
ejections (CMEs), reach the Earth’s magnetosphere. Space weather phenomena can
create conditions hazardous for humans and instruments in space and on the
ground. Accurately forecasting space weather is thus increasingly important for
our technology-dependent society and will be critical while planning and
operating missions to the Moon and Mars. This project will develop a new
generation of software capable of near real-time modeling from the Sun to
Earth's orbit (inner heliosphere) and predicting intense space weather events.
The tools developed by this project can not only dramatically improve the
accuracy and performance of currently operational space weather models, but also
allow the broader scientific community to experiment with and extend these tools
to create new capabilities that could eventually be transformational for
operational activity. This work will also provide a leap forward in the
computation and simulation of complex, turbulent plasma systems and is expected
to have impact in several areas, including space physics and astrophysics. The
project team includes both early-career and senior researchers at U.S.
universities, NASA centers, national labs, and in the private sector; support
for the non-academic collaborating institutions is to be provided by
NASA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structuring of the solar wind into fast and slow
streams is the source of recurrent geomagnetic activity. The largest geomagnetic
storms are caused by CMEs propagating through and interacting with the solar
wind. The connection of the interplanetary magnetic field to CME-related shocks
and impulsive solar flares determines where solar energetic particles propagate.
Therefore, data-driven modeling of stream interactions in the background solar
wind, and CMEs propagating through it, is a necessary part of space weather
forecasting. At present NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center forecasts the
background solar wind and CME arrival times using empirically driven models. The
goal of this project is to develop a data-driven, time-dependent model that will
improve the current state of the art. The new model will consist of: 1) a
surface flux transport model, 2) potential field solver, and 3) an MHD solar
wind model. It will provide more accurate solutions and be scalable on massively
parallel computing systems, including Graphic Processor Units. Products from
this project will provide a leap forward in the computation and simulation of
complex plasma systems involving multiple discontinuities. The developed
software will also be useful for astrophysical problems possessing a distinct
spherical geometry, including exoplanets, early sun, and sun-like stars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made as a part of the joint NSF-NASA pilot
program on Next Generation Software for Data-driven Models of Space Weather with
Quantified Uncertainties (SWQU). All software developed as a result of this
award will be made available by the awardee free of charge for non-commercial
use; the software license will permit modification and redistribution of the
software free of charge for non-commercial use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.