* 2028722
* Rational Design of Oxide Cathode Coatings for High Performance Li-ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Louis Piper, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 611,209.00

Li-ion batteries (LIBs) are ubiquitous, used as energy storage devices in
portable electronics and electrical vehicles. Increasing the energy density of
these batteries is necessary to allow for longer runtime of cell phones and the
increased range of electrical vehicles. Critical to increasing the energy
density of LIBs is enabling high-voltage charging of current LIB cathodes. This
effort is hindered by the rapid capacity fading over charge-discharge cycles
caused by parasitic reactions between the cathode and the electrolyte that also
undermine the battery’s safety. One effective strategy to overcome this problem
is to coat the cathode surface with a chemically inert material as a barrier to
prevent the parasitic reactions from occurring. The goal of this project is to
understand the functionality of the surface coating to enable high-voltage
cathodes for high energy density LIBs. This research will address a major
challenge in the advancement of LIBs. To broaden the participation in STEM, an
art-science partnership will be implemented to connect scientific advances to
real-world applications. This will be implemented in the existing First-year
Research Immersion and the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates programs
at Binghamton University. This research will also offer workforce training
opportunities for students to gain proficiency in manufacturing-level battery
assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercialized Li-ion battery technologies are
reliant on Ni-rich layered oxide cathodes to achieve the high energy density and
power output required for today’s applications (electric vehicles, grid storage,
etc.). Coating layers have been widely employed as engineering solutions to
improve the performance and reliability of these oxide cathodes, yet their
underlying functionality during cycling remains unclear. This project addresses
aluminum oxide coatings (Al2O3 and LiAlO2) and their impact on Li-ion transport,
cathode-electrolyte interface stability, and cycling performance for two
systems: high quality LiCoO2 thin films and commercial LiNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2 (NMC
811) micron-sized particles. Atomic and chemical X-ray spectroscopic and
diffraction characterization will be connected to ab initio molecular dynamics
simulations to directly identify the extent to which detrimental degradation
pathways, e.g. particle cracking, oxygen loss, and transition metal reduction,
are avoided with the use of aluminum coatings. The research will provide insight
into atomic level processes in order to guide the development of robust coating
layers that can be scaled up into manufacturing-grade
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.