* 2028473
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Influencing Young Adults’ Science Engagement and Learning with COVID-19 Media Coverage
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Asheley Landrum, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 91,928.00

This RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter related to
the COVID-19 pandemic. This award is made by the AISL program in the Division of
Research on Learning, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act. The major public policy of social distancing relies, in
part, on the cooperation of younger and healthier people who may not experience
symptoms and can spread the virus unknowingly to more vulnerable populations.
Science journalists, who are on the front lines of covering the pandemic, can
play an important role in educating millennial audiences about the science
behind the virus, how it is transmitted and effective ways to prevent the virus
from spreading. This award will help the STEM field better understand how to
engage millennial audiences with effective COVID-19 media content and to
urgently capture professional knowledge on crisis reporting. KQED and Texas Tech
University are suited to rapidly implement a science media informal science
learning project targeting millennials and younger audiences in light of their
current NSF-funded "Cracking the Code: Influencing Millennial Science
Engagement" collaborative research and evaluation project (DRL 1810990 and
1811091). The project team has built a functional research protocol for its
media practitioner and academic researcher collaboration, and will apply these
new RAPID funds to complement on-going efforts, mobilize the existing team,
research protocol, and research tools to respond to the communication challenge
of reaching younger adults posed by COVID-19. Content to be created includes: 1)
Radio broadcasts - daily news coverage, live talks; 2) A real-time blog - live
Coronavirus updates and 3) Social media content on Facebook, Instagram and
Twitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will explore the following
research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) How could COVID-19 coverage be designed to best
inform, engage and educate millennials and younger audiences about the science
of virus transmission and prevention?&lt;br/&gt;2) What are some best practices
for crisis reporting, as journalists respond to both constantly updated
information and changing audience needs, that can be used by media outlets (such
as advisors PBS Digital Studios, PBS NewsHour, NOVA, NPR Science, and more)?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research protocol centers around "media testing
cycles," which are time-bounded studies (5 months long) exploring a subset of
research questions about the effectiveness of KQED's science content (articles,
videos, social media posts and radio reporting) at reaching younger audiences.
Steps include identifying problems that are suited for empirical examination;
formulating plausible competing hypotheses on the nature of those problems and
their potential solutions; and crafting study designs calculated to support
valid, realistic inferences on the relative strength of those hypotheses. Data
will be gathered from COVID-19 audience "chatter" from Twitter and Facebook
through Crimson Hexagon, a social media listening platform. In addition to the
social media listening, researchers will conduct a thematic analysis of the
questions currently being collected through the audience engagement platform
Hearken, where KQED has gathered nearly 2,000 questions to date about the virus
and lifestyle changes. This data will also help the project team understand
knowledge gaps about prevention and transmission of the virus. These two
qualitative studies will be conducted concurrently and reported to KQED
journalists quickly to inform reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texas Tech
researchers will create a virus transmission and prevention knowledge
assessment. This assessment will be validated using a national online survey.
The project will examine knowledge differences based on, for example, generation
and gender. TTU will examine relationships between performance on this
assessment and two relevant measures: science curiosity and ordinary science
intelligence. The national survey will help identify what knowledge gaps are
present in which audiences. Using this information, KQED journalists will
develop "explainers" and other news content, to meet audience needs and to fill
knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.