* 2028650
* Providing a Cohort Model to Increase Self-efficacy and Career Success of High-achieving, Low-income Undergraduate STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Blake Mathys, Ohio Dominican University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 05/31/2026
* USD 649,959.00

This project will contribute to the nation’s need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. To do so, it will support the
graduation of high-achieving, low-income STEM undergraduates at Ohio Dominican
University. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to
14 full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Chemistry,
and/or Environmental Science. First-year students will receive up to four-years
of scholarship support. This project will combine scholarships with a student
cohort model that includes common coursework, a designated learning community
space, faculty mentoring, internship opportunities, a summer bridge program,
research opportunities, graduate school preparation, and career counseling.
Because of the University’s diverse student population, the project may increase
the number of workforce ready STEM graduates from underrepresented populations.
It also has the potential to improve understanding of how academic support and
other interventions affect the success of undergraduate STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Through the creation of the St. Albert Scholars
cohort, it aims to provide high-impact experiential learning and immerse
students in a comprehensive experience that promotes access to student services
and creates a College-to-Career culture. It is expected that achieving these
aims will support increased Scholar retention, graduation rates, and career
placement. Research has demonstrated that higher self-efficacy results in
improved retention and persistence. The project’s research plan will study how
support activities such as mentoring and undergraduate research impact student
their impact on student self-efficacy and success. Ohio Dominican University’s
student population has a diverse mix of students, presenting a novel opportunity
to explore the intersectionality of student identities and the impact that the
identities have on self-efficacy and success. A longitudinal study will examine
the effectiveness of a multi-year, progressive set of academic interventions on
two student cohorts from admission to graduation. The activities and results of
this project may be applicable to other liberal arts institutions. This project
will be evaluated by measuring student persistence to degree completion, self-
efficacy, and placement in STEM careers or graduate programs upon matriculation.
Research findings and best practices demonstrated by the project will be
disseminated through publications and regional/national science education
meetings. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.