* 2028622
* RAPID: New York Covid-19 Chronicle and Oral History Archive
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Peter Bearman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is the gravest public health crisis the United States has
faced since the Influenza pandemic of 1918, but it will not be the last.
Disaster research is often by necessity retrospective, providing accounts of
past actions and ongoing recoveries. The temporal profile of the COVID-19
pandemic presents an opportunity for social research in the middle of an
unfolding crisis, providing contemporaneous insights into risk perception and
sensemaking under duress, community and organizational resilience,
transformations in social structure, and real time adaptations to severe
economic and social dislocations. Concentrating on New York City, this project
will create a contemporaneous record of the city’s battle with COVID-19 across
the epidemic curve. New York is a critical site for understanding the course of
this pandemic because it was an early epicenter of the disease in the U.S.,
because it has a robust municipal emergency management system with deep
experience of past disasters, health-related and otherwise, and because it is
home to one of the nation’s strongest urban healthcare systems. The project will
provide real time findings about New York City that will be relevant to
jurisdictions in earlier phases along the arc of the pandemic, thus assisting
other governmental leaders in planning effective responses. This project will
also rigorously document the COVID-19 emergency to better understand how it is
unfolding, to better inform the recovery, and to learn lessons that will aid our
fight against the next pandemic and other extreme events. These findings will be
critical to leaders at all levels of government so as to promote the safety and
security of U.S. residents in the years ahead.

The current COVID-19 pandemic challenges community and organizational resilience
and necessitates transformations in social structure. To analyze these changes,
this project combines three approaches to data gathering that capture the
evolving and multi-dimensional impact of the COVID-19 crisis on New Yorkers.
First, a survey of 1,000 people will track shifts in stress responses, helping
behaviors, social isolation, and resilience. Demographic data gathered from the
survey will inform and refine recruitment of new participants. The sample will
be stratified across different scales of the response: everyday New Yorkers,
frontline workers--including first and second responders, critical
infrastructure and other essential workers--and strategic level decision makers,
managers, and planners. These results will be complemented by data from a diary
study with 500 participants, and a sequence of oral history interviews with 200
narrators at expanding intervals, to produce a rich longitudinal perspective on
the relationship between micro shifts in attitudes and relations, and macro
transformations in urban structures and dynamics. Findings will inform
sociological theories regarding the relationship between micro- and macro-levels
of social organization, disaster preparedness and response, risk perception and
social stress.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.