* 2028412
* RAPID: A Multi-Wave Study of Risk Perception, Information Seeking, and Protective Action in COVID-19
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Lauren Clay, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 47,972.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will survey adults in the states of
New York, Louisiana, and Washington about their risk perceptions, information
preferences, and the actions they are (and are not) taking to protect themselves
from the COVID-19 pandemic. In order to capture any changes in these patterns
for each state over time, the survey will be conducted every month for six
months. These changes become even more critical as states move to reduce
restrictions on people’s movements and the looming probability of a second wave
of COVID-19 later this year. This study will improve the research and health
community’s understanding of how people perceive risks, particularly when the
threat itself is not visible. This study will also provide critical insights
into behavioral influences on health during a pandemic in fulfillment of NSF’s
mission to advance national health, prosperity, and welfare. Looking at risk
perceptions, preferences, information sources, and protective actions at
multiple points in time is important as the scale and severity of this pandemic
have evolved rapidly, as have state-level responses to those changes. This study
offering a unique lens into the evolving nature of pandemics, pandemic
responses, and potential resurgences of pandemics that can be applied to the
ongoing COVID-19 response and other disasters that evolve over time. In the
context of the current COVID-19 pandemic, capturing these monthly changes at the
state-level will help emergency managers, health care practitioners, government
officials, and other parties involved with the pandemic response that must adapt
their responses to these dynamic conditions as the pandemic continues to unfold.
These insights also contribute to NSF’s mission to secure the national defense
by providing necessary knowledge to stave off unintended consequences attending
future infectious diseases in the United States. By involving undergraduate
students as research assistants on the project, and by integrating findings into
classroom instruction and making the data available for thesis and dissertation
research, this study will also support the education of the next generation of
emergency management and public health practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 provides the opportunity to examine how people
obtain, interpret, and respond to health risk information regarding a
significant, widespread infectious disease event. Grounded in the Protective
Action Decision Model (PADM) introduced by Lindell and Perry (2012), this
project explores how people utilize health risk information and other social and
environmental cues to shape their understanding of significant health risks
posed by COVID-19. This study aims to characterize how people use health risk
information and other cues from the social and built environment to make
decisions about protective action given the lack of visible cues associated with
the virus itself. The study will model patterns of risk perception and
protective action over time, space, and place due to changes in health risk,
public health response, and community restrictions. Adopting a multi-wave cross-
sectional design, the research team will survey samples of 500 individuals in
New York, Washington, and Louisiana for a total of 1,500 participants in each
wave of the study. Six waves of data collection will be completed at monthly
intervals in order to capture changing risk perceptions and behavioral responses
as the pandemic and pandemic response continue to evolve. The research is
extended using PADM by identifying: (1) what cues people use to make decisions
when there are no visible environmental cues, and (2) by examining changes over
time as a novel event unfolds. In addition to the contribution to basic science,
study results have implications for practice both during the COVID-19 pandemic
and in response to future disasters. The research team will communicate findings
to practitioners though a variety of sources including the student-led, faculty
supervised Virtual Operations Support Team (VOST) at the University at Albany to
facilitate information dissemination to the New York State Division of Homeland
Security and Emergency Services (DHSES). Findings will be further disseminated
at scientific meetings, in peer-reviewed academic journals, and in practitioner
fora, as well as incorporated into course content and made available for theses
and dissertations. Finally, data will be published in the DesignSafe-CI
repository upon completion of primary analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.