* 2028230
* Increasing the Persistence of STEM Majors through Nanoscience-Themed Activities that Support Academic, Professional, and Personal Engagement and Development
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Brandon Mitchell, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 01/31/2026
* USD 999,644.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at West Chester University, a
comprehensive, primarily undergraduate institution. Over its five-year duration,
the project will provide scholarships to 18 full-time students who are pursuing
baccalaureate degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Forensic and Toxicological
Chemistry, Geosciences, Mathematics, or Physics. Scholars will enter in two
annual cohorts of nine students and receive up to four years of scholarship
support. In addition to the scholarships, the project will provide Scholars with
a comprehensive suite of evidence-based academic, professional, and personal
engagement and development activities that are embedded within an overarching
nanoscience theme. The activities will span Scholars’ entire academic career and
include a STEM-oriented summer camp, Orientation and Learning Community
activities, a STEM-themed journal club, opportunities for nanoscience research
summer experiences and industry internships, and career planning and graduate
fellowship grant-writing workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific aims include: (1) To
implement a four-year program of evidence-based, integrated academic,
professional, and personal experiences; (2) to contribute to an understanding of
the impact of student cohorts and other psychological and social factors on
student success and retention and graduation in STEM; and (3) to broaden the
participation of low-income high-achieving STEM students in Biology, Earth and
Space Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics. Drawing on a
phenomenological approach, the mixed methods research and development effort
will examine the lived experience of Scholar cohorts to document and explore how
growth mindset, desirable difficulties/productive struggles, and metacognitive
practices during learning impact student success, retention, and graduation with
a STEM degree. Across individuals, time, and methods/measures, the project’s
triangulation strategies will support the development/collection of data, the
use of multiple data sources and methods/measures, analyses of the data to
include addressing convergence, inconsistency, and contradiction, and the
establishment of the trustworthiness, credibility, and validity of the study
findings. The project has the potential to advance knowledge about activities
and factors that differentially influence student success, retention, and
graduation in STEM. A mixed methods formative and summative evaluation will
inform project improvement, as well as document and assess project processes and
student outcomes. Results from the project will be made available through the
project website, publications, and presentations at education-oriented
conferences and venues. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.