* 2028474
* EAGER: Advancement of Computational Modeling to Understand Mechanisms of Neonatal Brachial Plexus Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Michele Grimm, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2024
* USD 359,999.00

Neonatal brachial plexus palsy (NBPP) occurs at a rate of 1/1000 births, with
10-20% of children who sustain the injury experiencing a permanent paralysis of
some or all of the muscles in one of their arms. It occurs when the nerves that
supply the arm – the brachial plexus – is injured. It is widely accepted that
the vast majority of NBPP are biomechanical in nature and occur during the birth
process. An improved understanding of the mechanisms through which the brachial
plexus is stretched during the birth process is necessary in order to better
inform clinical interventions and decision making that may reduce the occurrence
or severity of the injury. Computational modeling provides the best approach to
understand the mechanism of injury in a vulnerable population, such as newborns.
This project will develop an advanced computational model to represent natural
biological variability and the full process of delivery in order to investigate
the mechanism of NBPP. The paralysis that results from NBPP can result in a
lifelong disability, as it affects motor innervation of the entire upper
extremity. Before new recommendations for clinical interventions and decision
making can be developed, it is imperative that the mechanism of injury is more
completely understood. Once developed and validated, this model will serve as a
foundation for future computational work to investigate the mechanisms of other
biomechanical injuries that occur during the birth process – including
potentially vascular injuries (e.g. cerebral hemorrhages) and bony fractures. In
addition to the scientific impact, the research team will work with established
outreach programs at Michigan State to explain the importance of biomechanics in
understanding how injuries occur and to excite the public about the field of
biomechanics. Modules developed for outreach will be made available in virtual
formats, which will broaden the reach of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two scientific objectives have been
established to support the goal of this project: 1) to develop an advanced model
that combines finite element and rigid body modeling methods to mimic the
appropriate boundary conditions and delivery forces involved with the occurrence
of NBPP; and 2) to utilize the model to parametrically investigate the factors
that affect the stretch that occurs in the brachial plexus during the birth
process, which subsequently increases the risk of injury. The model will
integrate and advance techniques related to modeling of biological soft tissues,
including non-linear soft tissue structures of complex geometries and active
muscle tissue. It will significantly advance the science of NBPP biomechanics by
including advanced modeling for both maternal and neonatal tissues, a novel
approach within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.