* 2028363
* EAGER: Nutritional landscapes, physiological ecology &amp; mechanistic drivers of bumble bee population dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sarah Woodard, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 198,889.00

Bees play essential roles as pollinators of a wide variety of plant species,
including for many of the most nutritious human food crops. However, we are only
beginning to understand how, in turn, bee populations are limited by the
availability of nutrients they obtain from pollen and nectar from flowering
plants. This project examines how wild bumble bee populations are impacted by
floral resource availability, focusing on a life stage (spring nesting) wherein
bees are particularly sensitive to food resources. A combination of fieldwork
and laboratory experiments will be employed, with the former focusing on wild
bee population dynamics and the latter designed to more directly test how food
availability impacts bee survival and reproduction. Undergraduate students at a
Hispanic Serving and Minority Serving Institution will participate in the
research and be mentored to support their careers in science. The field research
will take place in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and brochures for National Parks
and Forests will be generated to inform the public and land managers about
bumble bees, their nutritional needs, and site-specific floral resources. This
project will reveal the specific nutritional challenges faced by native
pollinators in order to reveal the most effective avenues for promoting
pollinators and agricultural sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutritional
regulation of population dynamics is a central focus of ecology, and yet the
nature of this regulation can be difficult to elucidate because organisms and
their food resources are often highly variable across space and time. This
project uses wild bumble bees of the Sierra Nevada Mountains as a model system
for identifying how pollinator populations are regulated by the availability of
nutrients from floral rewards (nectar and pollen). The project uses controlled
laboratory experiments that manipulate food availability, and resulting vital
rate responses, to parameterize a demographic model for bumble bees. In
parallel, it examines relationships between wild bee population dynamics
(inferred from genomic data) and floral resource availability to assess
predictions from the model. Together, these components will advance the overall
goal of integrating nutritional and physiological ecology to reveal the drivers
of bee population dynamics across fluctuating resource
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.