* 2028709
* RAPID: Inexpensive, rapidly manufacturable respiratory monitor to provide safe emergency ventilation during the COVID-19 pandemic
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Jose Principe, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 185,037.00

The goal of this project is to develop technology that can improve patient care
and increase patient safety during pandemics such as COVID-19 that flood medical
facilities. This project will develop an inexpensive, portable, in-circuit
respiratory monitoring technology that enables safe and effective care of
multiple patients needing ventilation during a crisis when facilities and
clinicians are stretched thin. The system can provide remote alarms and
monitoring of any ventilated patient -- saving clinical time and precious
personal protective equipment (PPE) required to enter a COVID-19 isolation room,
as well as dramatically increasing safety when using emergency ventilators. The
system will also be designed to provide decision support in a rapidly changing
environment and can collect important data for analysis of patient physiology to
also improve care. The system also includes the ability to individualize
treatment and monitoring to provide safe and effective ventilation of multiple
patients on a single ventilator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned design is the
result of the team's long experience with ventilator and respiratory monitor
design and is based on existing medical device software and proven ventilator
technology. The system has been designed to use novel algorithms and sensing,
while being rapidly manufactured with off-the-shelf components where possible.
Other critical components that may be unavailable due to the crush of the
pandemic have been designed to be easily 3D printed or injection molded, based
on existing, proven designs. The team propose to build a monitoring and control
device using an inexpensive tablet as the user interface and a smart sensor
using Internet of Things (IOT)-based processor boards to monitor and collect
data and provide safety advice to the over-worked clinicians. A safe, easily
manufactured, modified pneumatic exhalation valve controlled by the monitoring
system with pressure from the airway circuit itself will be added to
individualize treatment for patients sharing a ventilator. This project provides
the monitoring and control to safely and effectively use existing tools to
ventilate patients. Beyond its pandemic uses, next generation versions of the
technology can be used in isolation rooms of the future and also in resource-
limited areas of the country and the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.