* 2028829
* SBIR Phase II:  Enabling Technologies for Noninvasive Oxygen Imaging in Regenerative Medicine
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Mrignayani Kotecha, O2M Technologies, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,187,210.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address a major hindrance in developing
efficient artificial tissues and organs designed to solve multiple health
issues. Currently, poor oxygen and nutrient delivery at the core of the
artificial tissues is one of the major causes of graft implantation failure. The
public health benefit of replacing damaged tissues and organs is at par with
curing cancer. Almost every part of the human body has been considered a
candidate for tissue engineering that strives to solve many medical problems
such as arthritis, Type I diabetes, stroke, vascular diseases, liver and kidney
damages, etc. The technologies developed in this project will assist in the
quality control of artificial tissues. This project will serve the preclinical
imaging market with a dedicated oxygen imaging instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will develop technologies to address a significant shortcoming in
developing artificial tissue grafts and organs. Tissue engineering regenerative
medicine (TERM) is the fastest growing branch of medicine. TERM aims at the
replacement or regeneration of damaged cells, tissues, or organs with artificial
cell replacement devices, tissue grafts or organs, to restore normal biological
function. However, the dream of artificial tissue has not been realized because
of the lack of technologies that can provide maps of physiological parameters
such as oxygen. The project will develop new enabling technologies for oxygen
imaging in biomaterials, multi-well plate, and macro-encapsulation devices. The
project will also manufacture the oxygen sensitive spin probe. It is expected
that three-dimensional noninvasive oxygen imaging of tissue grafts and cell
encapsulation devices will pave the way for off-the-shelf artificial tissue
grafts and organs and make tissue manufacturing a
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.