* 2028633
* Collaborative Research: CAS-MNP--Precursors of Long-Distance Aerial Transport of Microplastics from Urban Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Gabriel Katul, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 243,176.00

Micro-plastics (MPs), which are plastic particles of sizes smaller than 5 mm,
have been studied in aqueous environments for more than 15 years. These studies
have raised public awareness about the adverse effects of MPs on aquatic
ecosystems (fish in particular and their food-web in general) and many countries
are beginning to limit the use and disposal of plastics because of them. Oceans
are viewed as the ultimate sink of MPs, where MPs are assumed to be transported
primarily via aquatic environments (runoff to creeks, rivers, streams, or sewage
discharge, etc.). There is mounting evidence that MPs are present in many
terrestrial systems that are presumed to be pristine. However, only speculation
about long-distance atmospheric transport (&gt; 100 km) and deposition has been
offered to explain their presence in these regions. Such findings are prompting
interest in the mechanisms by which MPs escape from their main source and travel
long-distance aerially. Because of human activities that produce materials that
lead to the formation of MPs, cities are considered major sources of MPs. This
project is centered on understanding the primary processes and mechanisms in
which MPs are transported from urban sources to the atmosphere. The project will
lead to findings necessary for policy makers and eco-toxicologists concerned
with whether and how MPs should be regulated in light of the rapid expansion in
industries that use plastics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daunting scientific
challenges to be confronted are the complexity of air flow and variable releases
of MP types in urban settings, the interaction between urban canopy (streets,
buildings, etc.) and deposition/escape of MPs, the MP particulate properties,
and weather conditions. To address the overall project goal, 3 inter-related
science questions are proposed: Q1 How MPs associated with urban emission
sources get transported out of an urban system? (Tasks 1-3); Q2 How do different
characteristics of urban surface morphology (e.g. high-density urban center
versus low-density residential areas) interact with the spatial configurations
of MP source/sink distributions (street network) to impact their transport and
deposition? (Task 4), and Q3 How to quantify the chance of MPs becoming air-
borne in relation to urban surface morphology and weather patterns? (Task 5).
The state-of-the science computer simulation runs and MP trajectory tracking
models will be interfaced and used to address Q1-Q3. The urban morphological
properties characterizing cities and the physical-chemical properties of MPs
will be systematically explored to unpack connections between morphology, MP
property, weather patterns and the transport of MPs out of cities. Data-driven
approaches such as machine-learning will also be applied to simulation results
to enable formulation of models that can be used for MP regulations in the
future. The project explores a new outreach activity that leverages resources of
a non-profit organization `Wiki Education'. Wiki Education specializes in
training students to edit information in Wikipedia while providing high-quality
information on issues confronting society today and in the foreseeable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.