* 2028922
* RAPID: Strategic Science Communication in the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Bernhard Leidner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2021
* USD 193,832.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is a global crisis threatening millions of lives, the
economy, and national infrastructures, including healthcare, housing markets,
and industrial supply chains. Health organizations, government, and local
communities have introduced various measures to reduce the impact of the
pandemic. In this global context, this project examines and compares peopleâ€™s
compliance with these measures over time, and across diverse cultural and
governance contexts. Specifically, it focuses on how different value and belief
systems influence (non-)compliance with containment measures as the pandemic
unfolds. In doing so, the research enhances basic understanding of
science/policy communications and their impact on public attitudes and
behaviors. Ultimately, the project helps identify best science communication
practices to inform and educate people about COVID-19 and similar crises.

Policies and scientific recommendations aimed to contain the spread of the
COVID-19 virus have generated critical discussions about the prioritization of
collective versus individual values. Tradeoffs often focus on public security
and health versus individual autonomy and civil liberties. As a result, large-
scale societal crises have the potential to shift value prioritization both
during and beyond the crisis. By integrating theories from social and cross-
cultural psychology, this research explores the role of different value systems,
including basic human values, social values, and cultural values, in public
responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. A collaborative research network will
collect primary data from representative adult samples at three time points
during the pandemic. Changes are tracked in public endorsement of different
values over the course of three months. Analyses focus on how these changes
predict attitudinal and behavioral responses to policies and scientific
recommendations. The project also examines the roles of factors such as the
severity of the pandemic, socio-economic condition, and existing value systems
in these changes. The research will advance scientific understanding of basic
human values, how people respond to science communications, and how best to
design such communications to achieve important societal goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.