* 2028462
* Controlling the Interaction Between Carbon Dioxide and Cementitious Materials Using Biomimetic Molecules
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Frank Foss, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 11/30/2023
* USD 491,969.00

This research aims to make sustainable infrastructure materials, including
supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs) and alkali-activated materials
(AAM), last longer by reducing their deterioration when these are exposed to
carbon dioxide. This research will further contribute to the low-carbon future
by advancing the understanding and applications of cementitious materials that
can directly serve as carbon dioxide sinks. The outreach effort of this research
involves developing a multidisciplinary workforce with faculty members and
students from civil engineering, materials science, and chemistry to address the
challenges of creating sustainable and durable materials for civil
infrastructures. The direct educational benefits include mentored research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students as well as
underrepresented groups. These opportunities will provide students with exposure
to advanced research facilities and motivate them to pursue higher education in
the field of infrastructure materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
capitalize on the biomimetic approaches of engineering the growth, aggregation,
and characteristics of in-situ precipitated calcium carbonate particles to
control the interaction between cementitious materials and carbon dioxide. The
specific objectives include: (i) determining the effectiveness of in-situ
precipitated metastable calcium carbonate (mCaCO3) and calcium carbonate-organic
hybrid (mCOH) phases to avoid degradation of calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H)
and calcium aluminum silicate hydrate (C-A-S-H) gel phases when exposed to
external carbon dioxide, thus enhancing the carbonation resistance of
cementitious composites containing AAMs and SCMs; (ii) investigating how
biomimetic molecules can be used to precipitate specific mCaCO3 with controlled
morphologies and properties in carbonation cured matrices so that their in-situ
formations can be leveraged to develop high-performance cementitious matrices;
(iii) investigating the functional relationship between biomimetic molecules and
the polymorphic crystallization of calcium carbonate particles, and therefore,
developing non-natural and affordable biomimetic molecules that can be used as
chemical admixtures in cementitious materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.