* 2028065
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Community Collective Action to Respond to Climate Change Influencing the Environment-health Nexus
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Luke Matthews, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,860.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a multidisciplinary approach
to help improve how formal and informal health systems address changes to heat
stress, infectious disease, and food systems. The project will work with citizen
science and non-profit groups based in the Alaska and Trinidad and Tobago
(Caribbean) to provide a contrast of locations with similar challenges. While
the project will develop an assessment technique to help community organizations
address climate change health risks, it will also develop techniques to overcome
collective action problems, which often prove as a barrier for community action
toward these challenges. The project will identify a set of indicators and
techniques for assessing the potential to overcome collective action problems
that will be coupled with assessment tools that can be used to advance climate
change related research. The project will also provide additional knowledge on
how to better integrate often siloed knowledge on environmental change, health,
and risk management— especially as applied to heat stress, infectious disease,
and food systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.