* 2028651
* RAPID: Point-of-Need Detection of COVID-19 using CRISPR-Enabled Cell-Free Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Jewett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic highlights a limitation of laboratory-based testing for
the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus in that it does not scale with a sudden and dramatic
increase in volume. Laboratory tests, often based on quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR), require equipment, time, expertise and infrastructure,
resulting in severe logistical challenges and ultimately resulting in inadequate
testing. There is a critical need for diagnostics that can be rapidly deployed
at the point-of-need (PON) to enable global surveillance of infectious diseases.
Towards addressing this need, this project incorporates a new CRISPR-based
approach called CRISPR Isothermal Amplification (CIA) that enables one-pot
diagnostic amplification and detection of the SARC-CoV-2 virus at ambient
temperatures. This scheme builds off innovations in cell-free synthetic biology
and biosensing that enable rapid, low-cost, and PON detection of chemical
contaminants and viral pathogens. The platform technology under development
could serve several purposes from a quick-screen technology to inform triage and
isolation strategies, to a clinical test used on the front lines. There is also
the potential for the technology to eventually serve as an at-home test to help
inform which subpopulations and sectors of the economy could safely return to
productivity towards the end of the pandemic. In addition, the test has the
flexibility to be rapidly reprogrammed to detect new emerging pathogens. This
work is pursued in close collaboration with a commercial partner, Stemloop,
Inc., in order to quickly transition the technology for manufacturing,
deployment, and distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a new
CRISPR Isothermal Amplification (CIA) approach to enable a one-pot amplification
and detection of the SARS-CoV-2 genome in an assay for the virus. CIA uses
programmed Cas 13 systems to recognize SARS-CoV-2 RNA, trigger nucleic acid
amplification and create a detectable output simultaneously in the same reaction
where amplification occurs. Computational models of each process are developed
alongside the experimental systems and used to guide optimizations to achieve
attomolar sensitivity. The method is unique in that no DNA primers are required.
The amplification and detection processes are designed to take less than one
hour and cost less than one dollar per test to
manufacture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.