* 2028775
* EAGER: Effects of radiation on life history  in “resurrected” Daphnia lineages exposed to fallout from 1950s atmospheric nuclear testing
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Matthew Walsh, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,978.00

Between 1951 and 1962, the U.S. Department of Energy detonated one hundred
nuclear weapons during above-ground testing at the Nevada Test Site (NTS), near
Las Vegas. The resulting fallout deposited radioactivity across much of Arizona,
Nevada, and Utah. Together with hundreds more tests around the world, the
bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, as well as the 1986 and 2011
accidents at Chernobyl and Fukushima Daiichi power plants, it is clear that the
atomic age has increased radioactive exposure for human and non-human organisms
around the globe. In the short term, radiation exposure raises rates of genetic
change (i.e., mutation) and negatively affects survival and reproduction for
most organisms tested. In the long term, however, the evolutionary impacts of
radiation exposure are not yet clear. Do mutation rates stay elevated over time?
Do populations adapt to withstand radiation exposure? Do survival and
reproduction stay depressed or recover? Answers to these questions are directly
relevant to the long term health of human and non-human populations near places
like Fukushima and Chernobyl. They are more broadly relevant to long-standing
questions about how mutation rate and natural selection interact during
adaptation. Several undergraduates and two graduate students will be trained in
diverse laboratory and bioinformatic analyses, including members of
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project asks: how have
wild populations evolved following radiation exposure? This is a difficult
question to answer because science is often missing baseline, pre-radiation
population data. Moreover, for many organisms, only a few generations have
passed since irradiation. This project overcomes both of these problems using an
organism with short generation times and an approach called resurrection
ecology. Resurrection ecology is the collection of historical population samples
in the form of dormant eggs that have been deposited through time in sediments.
In particular, this research focuses on dormant eggs of small, freshwater
crustaceans in the genus Daphnia. Daphnia create annual egg deposits that spend
the winter on lake bottoms before hatching in the spring. Some of these eggs do
not hatch, however, because they are buried by sediment. This study will take
sediment cores from lakes inside and out of the NTS radioactive fallout zone to
collect dormant Daphnia eggs deposited before, during, and after above ground
nuclear testing. The researchers will hatch eggs from those eras and raise
offspring in laboratory conditions to measure rates of hatching, survival, and
reproduction. If radiation exposure negatively impacted these populations, then
researchers expect that populations from sediments deposited during and shortly
after nuclear testing will have relatively low rates of survival and
reproduction. If populations adapt to radiation exposure over time, the
researchers predict that more recent resurrections will have higher rates of
survival and reproduction, on par with pre-nuclear
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.