* 2028999
* RAPID: COVID Information Commons (CIC)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Jeannette Wing, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 10/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project will create a COVID Information Commons (CIC) website to facilitate
knowledge sharing and collaboration across various COVID research efforts,
especially focusing on all the NSF-funded COVID Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
projects. The CIC will serve as a resource for researchers as well as decision-
makers from government, academia, not-for-profit and industry to leverage each
other's findings, and invest in and accelerate the most promising research to
mitigate the broad societal impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. It will also serve
as a model for integrated knowledge sharing and collaboration on other public
health challenges, in benefit to society. Projects will be able to enter and
publish information about their efforts in ways that are most relevant and user-
friendly for a variety of potential stakeholders from academia, industry,
government, and non-profit sectors. Information will be organized in multiple
ways, for example, by research topics areas and by geography. In addition to
information from NSF COVID-19 RAPID projects, the COVID Information Commons will
incorporate coronavirus-related information from NSF Open Knowledge Network
projects, as well as from other NSF research projects in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID Information Commons will utilize information
science methods to bring together information about the collection of COVID-19
RAPID projects funded by the National Science Foundation. A wide array of
research efforts are underway to study the impacts of the pandemic in fields as
far ranging as biophysics, social justice/inequity, behavioral science, public
health, supply chains, and risk management. The CIC will semantically link
information across projects to provide a more holistic view across distinct
efforts, including efforts such as the COVID projects in the NSF Open Knowledge
Network. The resulting, concise, curated, integrated resource will provide
insight into NSF-funded COVID RAPID projects and facilitate collaborations among
such efforts. These objectives will be achieved using information science
approaches to 1) compile a comprehensive list of NSF COVID RAPID awards, along
with relevant details for each project, 2) link to any publicly available data
sets and data feeds, 3) organize the information and data feeds, for example, by
categories of research areas and/or geography, using a meta-data schema
developed for the resource and existing taxonomy and semantic frameworks; 4)
design and develop a web portal to allow project teams to publish their data, or
links to the data, and present project information in ways that are most
relevant and user friendly for researchers in academia, industry, and
government; 5) integrate the schema.org COVID-19 annotated data to enable more
effective identification, retrieval, and integration of relevant data. A Minimum
Viable Product for the website will be developed first, working with
stakeholders in the community to prioritize features and add new functionality.
In addition to the Information Commons, the project will also assess the effort
and feasibility of implementing a data and model commonsâ€”to share datasets as
well as data-driven models, such as machine learning models related to
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities with funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.