* 2028952
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Principles for Edge Sensing and Computing for Personalized, Precision Healthcare at National Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Fan Ye, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,163.00

Personalized, precision healthcare (PPH) utilizing edge sensing-computing can
collect, analyze and interpret continuous, multi-modality data, both physical
and physiologic, producing information, knowledge and insight needed for real-
time disease onset and progression monitoring at both the individual and
population levels. This planning proposal will (i) identify the challenges and
investigate the principles and potential solutions for the edge sensing-
computing paradigm; (ii) engage diverse academic, community and government
stakeholders to collectively define the functional and performance requirements
for PPH; and (iii) create and validate preliminary approaches and devise a
concrete, detailed plan for scaling PPH to national levels. It is well aligned
with NSF’s mission to “advance the national health, prosperity and welfare.”
This project can generate enormous social and economic benefits for communities,
healthcare systems, and other stakeholders. If successful, the project will
enable the monitoring of epidemics (e.g. disease outbreaks/spread, early
detection/preemptive intervention of acute/infectious diseases) and the
management of chronic physical and psychological conditions. The PIs will 1)
disseminate publications, data and systems in academic, industry and community
venues; 2) integrate CISE student education (including female and under-
represented minorities) at different levels; 3) mentor high-school students on
joint health-technology research; 4) cultivate a technology-literate healthcare
workforce; and 5) pilot the technologies for immediate benefits to nearby
communities while studying how to scale to other rural, suburban, and city
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore, design, and evaluate
potential solutions for enhancing the scalability of edge sensing-computing-
based PPH in four dimensions of different types of sensing data, analytic
algorithms, diseases, health conditions, and population sizes. The PIs will
identify challenges and validate approaches guided by three principles: privacy
as a first-class citizen, design for faults and exploitation of scale. The team
will: 1) define new abstractions and quantifiable metrics for end-to-end
security and privacy guarantees across hardware, software and application stack;
2) investigate systems for multi-temporal resolution processing of heterogeneous
healthcare data, incorporating composition of components from possibly untrusted
third parties and accommodate noises, disturbances or even adversary-controlled
data; 3) explore novel AI/machine-learning algorithms suitable for PPH learning
and inference, including AutoML for neural-network architecture search, model
compression and federated learning at extreme scale while meeting security,
privacy and robustness constraints; and 4) develop heterogeneous hardware
accelerators and general design methodologies and tools for neural-hardware
architecture co-design, efficient acceleration for time-series, point-cloud and
language/sound understanding, and on-device edge
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.