* 2028036
* RAPID: A Controlled Response to COVID-19
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Behrouz Touri, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The forecast and containment of epidemics are central themes in public health
and are well-studied in the literature through modeling and simulations. In the
case of COVID-19, the lack of a vaccine, and the limited response to treatment,
can lead to possible acute respiratory complications that may nevertheless be
non-lethal, provided that patients have access to respiratory support in
intensive-care units equipped with ventilation machines. Proactive planning and
optimal allocation of resources are key challenges to face in the current
emergency. In this scenario, the project studies the response to the pandemic
from a network service point of view. Namely, it aims at determining actionable
strategies under which the hospitals' response system can reach an equilibrium
state where the spreading of the infection occurs, but the spreading rate does
not lead to service overflow. There has been widespread recognition on the need
to “flatten the curve,” representative of the infection spreading, and different
strategies to achieve this objective have been enforced by governments across
the world. The project’s research can be viewed in this context as a principled
approach to predict how “the curve” will respond to different strategies,
whether it can be kept below the hospitals' saturation threshold for a given
amount of time, and what is the societal cost required to achieve this
objective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given a service-rate constraint dictated by
hospital capacity and dynamic equations describing the spread of the infection,
the project aims at deriving a control policy expressed in terms of public-
health policies that meets the-service rate constraint of the local health-care
system while minimizing their economic impact. Since societal constraints can
make such an optimal strategy cost-prohibitive, or infeasible, the project will
also study strategies that, given a certain cost budget, lead to the most
desirable (time-varying) arrival rate that minimizes the global mortality rate
of the population. While derived solutions are expected to be optimal in the
context of the proposed dynamical-system model, results will also be validated
using extensive simulations driven by real population data, in order to
demonstrate their wider applicability in a practical
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.