* 2028791
* RAPID: Monitoring the Spatial Spread of COVID-19 through the Lens of Human Movement using Big Social Media Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Zhenlong Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 108,717.00

Human population movement is among the critical dimension that drives the
spatial spread of COVID-19. During such a global pandemic, monitoring and
analyzing human movement patterns or population flows are critical for us to
gain a better understanding into current and future infectious risk at the
population level. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will utilize big
social media data, artificial intelligence (AI), and spatiotemporal analysis to
monitor and model the spatial spread of COVID-19 at different spatial scales
(from local to regional to global) through the lens of human mobility patterns.
Results of this project, disseminated through an interactive online dashboard,
will provide enhanced situation awareness for government official and the
public, offering insights and facilitating a collective public awareness of the
role people play in the evolution of the COVID-19 crisis. The information
provided by the dashboard can help government officials, public health managers
and emergency responders to answer critical questions during the pandemic, such
as: “What is the current and future infectious risk of a state, county, or
community?”; “How effective are the social/physical distancing practice in
containing the virus?”; and “What are the consequences for different strategies
for reopening our economy and communities?”. The successful implementation of
this project will advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare during
COVID-19 pandemic and future public health crisis. This project will support
education and diversity through engaging graduate and undergraduate students
from different backgrounds in data collection, analysis, modeling, tool
development, and community outreach and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Big
social media data have been widely used in human mobility studies, yet little
research has been conducted to validate the capabilities and limitations of
using these data for studying human movement at different geographic scales
(e.g., from local to global) in the context of global infectious disease
transmission. By leveraging the team’s expertise in spatial computing, big data
analytics, infectious disease modeling, public health education and behavior
modification, and community engagement, this project aims to develop a novel
data-driven approach, including innovative models, efficient computing
algorithms, and an interactive dashboard, to monitor, model and map the spatial
spread of COVID-19. Specifically, we will (1) develop a novel origin-
destination-time data model to efficiently extract historical and near real-time
population flows at varying spatiotemporal scales from billions of geotagged
social media (Twitter) posts; (2) develop a predictive model using a spatial-
temporal fused neural network to estimate future infectious potential by
incorporating population flows with other factors; and (3) perform
spatiotemporal and geostatistical analysis for aggregated population flows and
daily confirmed cases at varying spatial scales to examine the spatiotemporal
dynamics and associations between human movement and spatial spread of the
virus. Methodological findings of this project are expected to make significant
contributions to the development, application, and extension of models and
methodology in a variety of human mobility studies. This research will promote
the progress of geospatial science and have broad impacts in diverse fields that
can benefit from a better understanding of human movement, such as public
health, natural hazard, transportation, and tourism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.