* 2028737
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Increased access to infrastructure for distance education in hydrologic science
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Nandita Basu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 49,611.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a sudden shift to online teaching for most
universities in the United States, and many globally. With little time to
prepare, water resource and hydrology professors and lecturers must generate
online content rapidly for at least the spring and summer semesters of 2020,
with an increasing possibility this format will extend into the fall 2020 term.
At the same time, there is large variation in access to and preparation for
online delivery among institutions and individual faculty. In the hydrologic
sciences, we expect preparation for the transition to online instruction and the
resultant learning to vary based on program size, institution, instructor
experience, and availability of instructional support. Taken together, there is
a significant risk that hydrologic instruction will divide into “haves” and
“have nots” as a result of these critical differences. Equal access to critical
support and instructional resources during the transition from traditional to
distance learning in response to the COVID-19 pandemic is critical to closing
this gap and providing equal access to high quality instruction in the
hydrologic sciences. Thus, our goal is to enable access to educational
infrastructure and training for instructors, and ultimately students, in the
hydrologic sciences in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement six key activities to achieve
our goal including: (1) facilitating two-way communication between instructors
and students through panel discussions and survey templates; (2) enabling
sharing of course materials through CUAHSI’s HydroShare platform; (3) developing
open-source, data-driven educational resources; (4) developing a guest lecture
database for hydrologic sciences; (5) community training and support using
distance education materials and platforms; and (6) hosting a series of
workshops and producing a synthesis report on distance education in the
hydrologic sciences. The result of these activities will be a leveled playing
field for accessible, quality education to all instructors and students in
hydrologic science. Moreover, we expect these efforts to foster a community of
online educators in hydrologic science who will develop and use educational
resources that will persist well beyond the present COVID-19 pandemic. Finally,
the expanded use of distance education resources supports ongoing initiatives to
expand Diversity, Equality, and Inclusion in the hydrologic sciences by CUAHSI
and the HydroLearn platform to share undergraduate educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and Education and Human Resources programs in the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.