* 2028348
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Local Government Response to COVID-19: Juneau Alaska, a case study in adaptive governance, risk management, communication, and decision-making
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Robert Orttung, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 05/31/2022
* USD 58,297.00

In anticipating the spread of COVID-19 in Alaska, local communities are
assessing their response capacity in terms of emergency medical facilities,
policymaking, and preventative cultural practices. Subarctic and Arctic local
governments are overwhelmed with the need to provide information about the risks
presented by the virus to a broad area. This project focuses on the coastal
community of Juneau, Alaska (pop. 32,061) as a use case for examining formal and
informal institutional responses and adaptive capacity in facing an
unprecedented viral outbreak in isolated areas with limited resources. The
project team examines how decisionmakers interact with various social groups,
including Indigenous communities, and how they made use of local knowledge in a
variety of communication strategies. This research tracks responses in real time
and identifies areas where they were effective and where bottlenecks occurred
that prevented effective coordination. The results identify lessons learned
during the pandemic and provide guidance on how official and societal groups can
better collaborate in future crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study makes
several fundamental scientific contributions with broad impacts for disaster
response in small communities. First, the project delivers a case study of a
disaster response in a remote, isolated Alaskan community with limited
infrastructure and capacity. Second, this study tests, in real time, current
knowledge on crisis responses, helping us identify weaknesses in existing
theories of adaptive governance, resilience, local self-organization, and
disaster communication. Finally, drawing on the findings of the study make it
possible to provide a model of effective crisis response for similarly situated
isolated communities. The results have implications for other northern
communities as well as other isolated, remote areas of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.