* 2028534
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Understanding At-Risk Adolescents' and Parents' Daily Experiences During COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* April Thomas, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 04/30/2024
* USD 98,435.00

While the COVID-19 pandemic has far-reaching effects on communities and
individuals, its impact on at-risk youth may be particularly pervasive and
distinct. This RAPID project will study how at-risk adolescents and their
parents experience COVID-19 in the initial time period following the novel
coronavirus pandemic. The research will compare adolescents’ sleep, social
skills, social relationship quality, stress, mood, substance use, mental health
symptoms, physical health, psychosocial development, externalizing behavior, and
delinquency across the COVID-19 outbreak. The project also will examine whether
juvenile incarceration exacerbates the potential impact of COVID-19 on youth
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage in a longitudinal study
of at-risk (justice-involved, low-SES) adolescents to address how adolescent-
parent dyads respond to and are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. This research
will use multiple methods, including self-report, collateral report, official
records from the partnering department of probation, electronic daily diary
reports, and actigraph technology, to assess changes in adolescents’ and
parents’ functioning on a variety of outcomes in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. The findings will evince physical and mental health risks in response
to the pandemic among at-risk youth. As well, the research will provide best
practices for juvenile detention facilities and departments of probation in
times of crises to ensure that youth continue to receive important
rehabilitative services while maintaining the health and safety of youth, legal
actors, and community members. Results will contribute to the limited existing
knowledge base on the needs, risks, and potential protective factors of a
vulnerable group of youth during a global state of
emergency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.