* 2028935
* RAPID: Impact of inhibitors on SARS-CoV-2 polymerase and fidelity control of RNA synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Jin Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) is the core enzyme responsible for
replication and transcription in RNA viruses such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.
Investigating the mechanism of action of RdRp offers promise for development of
new antiviral therapeutics and for understanding the emergence of drug
resistance, which is critical for an effective response to the COVID-19 crisis
caused by SARS-CoV-2. This project will employ molecular modeling to investigate
the structural dynamics underlying RdRp function. Notably, Remdesivir, a
nucleotide analog, will be utilized to interrogate RdRp fidelity and better
understand how it contributes to viral evolution, as well as the basis for the
antiviral activity of this drug. The project also offers training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students in computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular modeling and all-atom molecular dynamics
simulations of conserved SARS-CoV RdRp enzymes are planned to investigate the
structural dynamics and energetics governing the nucleotide addition cycle and
replication fidelity. The project is guided by specific questions, including how
nucleotide analogs impact selection of the correct nucleotide by RdRp, how non-
nucleotide inhibitors affect the RdRp mechanism, and what mutations in RdRp
might enable drug resistance. The outcomes are expected to yield novel
mechanistic information about this important target enzyme for therapeutic
intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.