* 2028297
* RAPID: COVID-19 Behavior, Perception, and Control Across Geographic and Economic Gradients
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* A. Townsend Peterson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

COVID-19 is a respiratory disease caused by a recently discovered, novel
coronavirus. Since its discovery in Wuhan, China, in 2019, COVID-19 has already
led to over 2 million cases globally. It has spread globally, including to many
vulnerable countries without adequate healthcare infrastructures. Many different
responses have been tried, including social distancing, school and event
closings, and travel bans. This project will develop mathematical models to
address three fundamental questions: 1) how much participation and coordinated
control is needed for effective protection? 2) what independent control efforts
can compensate for lack of coordination to achieve effective protection? and 3)
how do community population demographics, socioeconomic conditions, and health
care infrastructure impact outcomes? This project aims to inform coordination of
disease control policies at all scales (local, regional, national,
international) to aid in curtailing the ongoing and future outbreaks. This
project will advance fundamental understanding of the impacts of control efforts
via a new risk perception-driven infectious disease model, and predict which
drivers of public demand for community-level control efforts might lead to
potentially harmful long-term decisions. The project will involve training two
doctoral students in techniques related to mathematical modeling of disease
dynamics and spread. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many mitigation options are being
weighed and implemented for COVID-19, with different decisions made at different
administrative levels, including alternative quarantine strategies and different
degrees of “lockdown”. All of these decisions come with different perceptions of
risk. The PIs will develop and analyze disease transmission models that
incorporate various factors including public perception of risk, age-structure
with a hospitalized population, and spatial structure with different scales
spanning local communities to an entire country. These models will be used to
explore impacts of community population demographics, socioeconomic conditions,
and health care infrastructures, and how these factors impact control efforts
under different social and economic settings. With the results of these models,
policy- and decision-makers can consider the impacts of specific features of the
communities under their administration as contributors to a broader network of
public health efforts and choose the optimal mitigation steps. This work will
inform coordination of disease control policies to curtail the ongoing outbreak
directly. The results of this project, while tailored specifically to inform
COVID-19 virus control strategies, will be applicable to any novel infectious
disease outbreak in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
being funded by the CARES Act supplemental funds allocated to
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.