* 2028173
* AGS-PRF: Novel Analyses of Total Solar Eclipse Data as a Tool for Coronal Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Benjamin Boe, Boe, Benjamin R
* Fellowship Award
* Lisa Winter
* 11/30/2022
* USD 190,000.00

A total solar eclipse (TSE) is a rare event where the shadow of the moon blocks
out the surface of the Sun on the Earth. This enables scientists to study the
very hot, tenuous outer layer of the Sun, known as the corona. This project will
enable a postdoctoral research fellow to study TSE observations to understand
the solar wind and corona – which is important in predicting space weather
effects. The project also supports outreach activities with the local Hawaiian
community, through a high school scholars’ program and additional outreach and
mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work includes four distinct sub-
projects on coronal physics based on existing white-light and narrowband
emission line data from TSE observations: (i) An investigation of solar wind
source regions in the corona using freeze-in distance and temperature
diagnostics; (ii) A Differential Emission Measure (DEM) analysis using multiple
Fe lines; (iii) Absolute calibrations of the imaging data to determine the
density and structure of both the K corona (electron scattering), F corona (dust
scattering) and absolute line emission; and (iv) Compare the TSE results with
cutting edge coronal and solar wind models which make explicit predictions that
can be tested with TSE observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.