* 2028011
* Supporting Undergraduate Mathematics and Computer Science Students with Scholarships and Culturally Responsive Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Cyril Ku, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at William Paterson University, a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Over its
five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships to 26 full-time, first
year and transfer students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in mathematics,
computer science, and computer information technology. First-year students will
receive up to four years of scholarship support and transfer students will
receive up to two-years of scholarship support. The Scholars will have access to
multiple supports and increased opportunities to engage in research and
internships. Scholars will also be mentored by faculty trained in culturally-
responsive mentoring, which includes issues such as cultural competence and
implicit bias and normalizing feelings about being a low-income or first-
generation student. The project aims to produce new knowledge about the
potential for culturally responsive mentoring and individual development plans
to support undergraduate student retention, graduation, and post-graduation
placement in STEM-related employment or graduate work. The University has a
tradition of educating first-generation college students, many of whom are
children of immigrant parents. As a result, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in STEM fields for a population diverse students,
including Latinx, low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project objectives include
to: a) enroll three cohorts of low-income, academically talented students as
Mathematics and Computer Science Scholars, supporting them with scholarships; b)
improve year-over-year retention rates for Scholars who are first-time, full-
time, first-year or transfer students; c) improve graduation rates for all
Scholars; and d) perform a research study that investigates the relationship
between college retention for low-income students and strength-based, culturally
responsive mentoring. The intended project outcomes include strengthening
recruitment of women into the target STEM majors, increasing enrollment across
the targeted majors, and, consequentially, increasing the number of STEM
graduates who enter the STEM workforce. These outcomes can contribute to the
STEM workforce needs of New Jersey and the United States. The research plan will
use methods consistent with Design and Development research projects described
in the NSF Common Guidelines for Education and Research and Development and will
focus on the project’s four objectives. Pertinent findings will be disseminated
through the University website, meetings, conference presentations, and
publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.