* 2028728
* RAPID: Epidemiological and Phylogenetic Models for Contact-Based Control of COVID-19
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Cameron Browne, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,009.00

The current COVID-19 pandemic shows that effective and responsive public health
systems are crucial for curbing emergent outbreaks. Increased case detection,
contact tracing, and broad quarantine and social distancing measures, have been
vital for containing COVID-19 outbreaks. Mathematical modeling and analysis can
provide important insights into the efficacy of these “contact-based” non-
pharmaceutical interventions. However, model parameterization requires detailed
case data, which is often challenged by inconsistent, unreported and
asymptomatic cases. To overcome these difficulties, the researchers will:
develop outbreak models of COVID-19 with quarantine, tracing and social
distancing and derive new results on final epidemic size and reproduction number
under quarantine measures to flatten and shrink the epidemic curve. The
researchers will also integrate case and phylogenetic data for an innovative
framework that reveals region-specific control and predicts how to best
implement contact-based measures for efficiently containing the outbreaks.
Results will be communicated with policymakers, along with scientific and public
audiences, in order to have a real-time impact on the coronavirus
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consider compartmental outbreak
models of COVID-19 with responsive quarantine, tracing and social distancing
measures. The novel formulation allows for derivation of outbreak size,
dependent on contact tracing and broad quarantine intervention parameters.
Reproduction number estimates and model fitting of case, tracing and quarantine
data will quantify region-specific control characteristics. Sensitivity of
epidemic size to combinations of contact tracing and social distancing measures
will be assessed to understand viable strategies for flattening and shrinking
epidemic curves. Long term scenarios of loosening and tightening of quarantine
interventions for sustainable control will be investigated through analysis and
simulation of the models. In addition, through interdisciplinary collaboration,
the researchers will incorporate multi-region stochastic versions of the
epidemiological models with phylodynamic computations of genomic data to improve
model projections in the presence of possible unknown chains of transmission and
area-specific responsive interventions. A “forward simulation-backward
coalescent” approach will track migration events and produce phylogenetic tree
signatures for matching model simulations to phylogenetic data. The overall
combined phylodynamic and epidemic model analysis will quantify heterogeneous
disease spread and contact-based control efficacy to inform public health
authorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being funded by the
CARES Act supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.