* 2028449
* RAPID: Rapid Monitoring and Assessment of Critical Pharmaceutical Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,901.00

Over the past decade, the U.S. has persistently experienced significant
therapeutic drug shortages, jeopardizing patient care and diminishing economic
prosperity due to increased healthcare costs. The current COVID-19 epidemic
threatens to overwhelm hospital supplies of medicines and therapeutics in large
urban centers as part of the first wave of infections across the country. The
situation is exacerbated by the fact that effective medicines to treat COVID-19
disease are currently under development or in testing phases, resulting in very
limited supplies. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will collect
useful, time-sensitive data related to operations of hospital pharmacies as they
dispense these critical therapeutics during the pandemic. The analysis of these
data will provide insight into the pharmaceutical supply networks with the goal
of breaking the cycle of repeated and recurrent shortages, as pointed out in the
FDA's Drug Shortage Task Force's report in 2019. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will collect quantitative and qualitative information on the inventories and
distribution of available and emerging therapeutics to document the allocation
of scarce medicines to hospital patients in a large urban hospital system.
Quantitative data on demand and supply (physicians' orders, current and forecast
inventory levels, available suppliers, prices, etc.) will be collected through a
collaboration with Massachusetts General Hospital and OrbitalRx, an online
pharmaceutical exchange platform. In addition, qualitative information will be
collected from pharmacists' notes and interviews with pharmacy personnel that
documents the decision-making processes and workflows associated with allocating
scarce therapeutics resources to critically ill patients suffering from
COVID-19. The research is expected to help identify gaps in information flows
and decision-support models that are most critical for the management of drug
shortages under extreme circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.