* 2028535
* RAPID: Superhydrophobic and Photocatalytic Antimicrobial (SPA) Coatings
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Nikolai Kouklin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 198,326.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in drastic socioeconomic, educational,
political and cultural impacts worldwide. Despite the measures currently
undertaken, the latest projections of COVID-19 death toll range upwards of
100,000 across the U.S. The World Health Organization considers the main route
of COVID-19 transmission to be through contact with surfaces that have been
contaminated with small respiratory droplets that are released when COVID-19
patients cough or exhale. The virus that causes COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) retains
infectivity on stainless steel surfaces for up to 72 hours, and the current
absence of a vaccine and effective antiviral drugs makes it critical to explore
novel approaches to breaking the chain of viral transmission. The project
focuses on design and initial laboratory and field testing of a spray coating
technology that can be applied to a variety of surfaces to both repel virus-
laden droplets and photocatalytically deactivate viral pathogens that lodge on
coated surfaces. More broadly, the project supports graduate and undergraduate
training in the areas of surface coating technology and catalysis, and also
engages local hospitals and university medical research facilities in assessing
the efficacy of the coating technologies for combating a broad range of airborne
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research investigates the
pathogen inhibiting efficacy of superhydrophobic and photocatalytic
antimicrobial (SPA) coatings, a group of sprayable materials which, through
their combined modes of action, can confer self-disinfecting properties to a
wide array of surfaces, such as metals, concrete, ceramics, glass, and wood, to
help prevent the transmission of viral, bacterial, and other pathogens for a
prolonged duration of time, ranging from several months to several years. The
SPA coatings represent a novel two-pronged approach to repelling and
deactivating viral pathogens. The coatings consist of nano-TiO2 and ZnO
siloxane-modified superhydrophobic layers that serve to repel respiratory
droplets, thus minimizing the ability of pathogens to linger on surfaces, while
also facilitating cleaning procedures. The superhydrophobic layers are
intermixed with TiO2, ZnO, and Ti-phosphate layers that impart photocatalytic
activity. The photocatalytic material has potential to deactivate any pathogens
that remain on the surface through the release of hydroxyl radicals. Doping of
the materials with cuprous compounds further enhances the antimicrobial effect.
Efficacy against the COVID-19 virus is the primary justification for the urgency
of the research, which will proceed in parallel via both lab and field testing.
Beyond the immediate impact on the current pandemic, the resulting technology
will improve our nationâ€™s preparedness for future waves of the same virus or
other airborne pathogens. In addition, data obtained during the current pandemic
will provide a fast track to scale-up, manufacturing and widespread deployment
of the anti-viral coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being funded by
the CARES Act supplemental funds allocated to ENG and
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.