* 2028523
* COVID-19: RAPID: Networked Compartmental Modeling and Analysis for Spread of COVID-19
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Cameron Nowzari, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is caused by a novel coronavirus, which was only
identified in December 2019. Due to the novelty of the virus and the speed at
which it is currently sweeping the world, not only is there very little known
about the virus but there is also very little data. Despite the lack of data,
there are many important questions that need to be answered. Is social
distancing working effectively in `flattening the curve’? How much more
effective would mandated shelter-in-place be in containing the spread? Is it
worth the social cost? What is the effect of 10% of the population ignoring
these protocols? What is the marginal benefit of enforcing quarantines versus
implementation cost? Today the important questions seem to be related to
mitigation as the biggest concern is the immediate matter at hand: the impending
peak of hospitalizations due to COVID-19. However, it is also necessary to be
looking ahead to a potential resurgence of this virus with a new set of
questions. What will be the effect of asynchronously `opening up' different
parts of the country as people are still recovering from COVID-19? How will we
know we are not lifting restrictions pre-maturely? Precise answers to these
questions are needed in order to make informed policy decisions, and this
requires a deep understanding and accurate models of COVID-19 which are simply
not available today. Unfortunately, there is no time to learn about this virus
before needing to act to mitigate the tremendous damage that is already being
incurred socially, economically, and even in terms of lost lives. Instead, new
data must be rapidly incorporated into models and these questions must be re-
visited on a constant basis to be able to quickly provide at least a reasonable
understanding of the important questions above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the rapidly evolving modeling problem for COVID-19. Taking a
systems point of view, this project seeks to investigate the effects of various
overlooked artifacts of COVID-19 in the leading models used to inform policy
decisions today. The numerical methods and mathematical models can provide
significant complementary support to the epidemiologists worldwide on
understanding how the virus spreads. The outcomes of this project will be novel
stochastic and deterministic networked meta-population models as opposed to the
commonly seen lumped population models. The models developed will expand simple
Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) models to capture a number of different
properties specific to COVID-19 by adding more compartments. These models will
provide a more rigorous analysis of the network effects of the ongoing pandemic
which may prove especially useful as different parts of the country, or even the
world, are imposing/lifting various levels of mobility restrictions at different
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.