* 2028754
* Collaborative Research: Snapshots of Miocene to Recent Paleoenvironmental and Paleoecological Conditions in the Northern Neotropics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Anders Noren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,547.00

During the last 20 million years, Earth has experienced several climatic changes
that affected environmental and ecological conditions in several locations
around the world. While numerous studies from high latitude regions have
provided a wealth of information about the effects of these past climatic
fluctuations, how they affected conditions in the continental tropics is poorly
known, mainly due to the lack of long geological records that can be used for
scientific investigations. In this project, the Lake Izabal Basin in Guatemala,
which preserves one of the longest records of continental sediments in the
tropics, will be studied to develop a better understanding of how the area
responded to key climate events in the past. In addition to the project’s
scientific outcomes, the project will provide educational and research
opportunities to two graduate students through participation in an international
research project. The project also will reach a broader audience through the
development of geoscience class modules for elementary and middle school science
classes and educational geoscience workshops for K-12 science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While numerous studies from high latitude regions have
provided a wealth of information about the effects of late Cenozoic climatic
fluctuations on environmental and ecological conditions, our knowledge from
tropical regions is minimal by comparison. The proposed project focuses on the
intersection of sedimentary systems and ecosystems in the Lake Izabal Basin in
eastern Guatemala, a large pull-apart basin that contains a thick
sedimentological record that extends into the Miocene. The investigation will
use the sedimentological record through the study of outcrop data representing
the basin’s basement and initial infill from the Oligocene-Pliocene, industry-
acquired seismic data covering the Miocene-Recent, drill cuttings from a well
spanning the Miocene-Recent, and long sediment cores (&gt;10 m) covering the
last 30,000 years. The project will provide educational and international
research opportunities to two graduate students through training in geophysical,
sedimentological, and palynological data acquisition, processing, and
interpretation, thereby contributing towards a stronger geoscience workforce.
The project will also reach out to a broader audience by visiting science
classrooms in Missouri and presenting and sharing research results during STEM
days for elementary and middle school female students at Missouri University of
Science and Technology. Finally, involvement and collaboration with Guatemalan
institutions will provide international research opportunities and
collaborations and enhance transfer of knowledge among U.S. and Guatemalan
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.