* 2028481
* PPoSS: Planning:  Data Centric Computing for Scalable Heterogeneous Memory and Storage Systems Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jun Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This award supports planning for a large-grant project addressing the
scalability issue among heterogeneous memory and storage systems that are
composed of many parallel memory banks and disks, specifically for big-data and
deep-learning applications. Emerging big-data and learning applications
significantly increase both frequency and volume of data transfers over time in
computer systems, which consequently result in non-negligible contention and
load-imbalance issues among large-scale parallel memory storage systems. Such
concerns can derail computing scalability. To grow to the requisite scale for
real-world impact, there is a need for a cross-layer approach that optimizes the
entire hardware/software stack. This project supports an interdisciplinary
planning process, with researchers from computer architecture, high-performance
computing (HPC), security and privacy, systems, and algorithms. This project
will also contribute to society through engaging under-represented groups from a
Hispanic Serving Institution and research dissemination for computer science and
engineering education and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will plan to
build a research team with the capability to address the interdisciplinary
scalability challenges to large-scale heterogeneous memory and storage systems.
The PIs exploit application hints such as additional sampling flexibility at the
full hardware/software stack to reduce the amount of data-transfer traffic among
memory and Input/Output. This is intended to realize the ultimate objective,
namely maintaining a shared-nothing architecture in low-level memory and storage
and thus achieving high scalability. Specific research thrusts are: 1)
conducting workload and application-characteristics studies for various
applications such as autonomous driving and high-performance computing, 2)
exploring an innovative way to develop an application-aware, data-centric task
scheduler for parallel memory banks and disks to achieve high-scalability, 3)
developing several machine-learning algorithms to enhance task scheduling, and
4) investigating the applications of homomorphic encryption for sensitive
datasets in data analytics and sampling applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.