* 2028199
* PIC: CMOS-compatible, monolithic, and high-performance optical isolators on silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Juejun Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Optical isolators are optical diodes which only allow uni-directional
transmission of light. They constitute an essential component in chip-scale
photonic circuits, although their integration with photonic chips has been
challenging due to material and processing incompatibility. The program seeks to
develop an isolator solution for chip-scale photonic circuits which can be
manufactured leveraging standard semiconductor microfabrication processes
offered by the American Institute for Manufacturing Integrated Photonics.
Success of the project will have an immediate impact on fields such as optical
communications, optical analog computing, and magnetooptical sensing. The
scientific research will be tightly integrated with educational and outreach
initiatives at MIT and the AIM Photonics Academy. We will also collaborate with
the Lab for Education &amp; Application Prototypes to develop both online
interactive modules and hands-on experiments for K-12 students and workshop
participants from academia, government, and industry around the
globe.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical: Optical isolators are essential optical
components safeguarding the stable operation of lasers and photonic integrated
circuits (PICs). None of the current approaches for on-chip optical isolation,
however, meets the stringent demands for practical deployment of these devices
in state-of-the-art PICs: high isolation ratio, minimal insertion loss,
broadband operation, small footprint, passive operation, polarization diversity,
as well as compatibility with scalable Si manufacturing. This program will lead
to a transformative solution to this challenge by developing the first optical
isolator on Si that fulfills all the aforementioned requirements. In addition to
exploring device design and processing innovations to enable unprecedented high
performance, the program will also validate scalable manufacturing and
integration of the isolator device through prototyping at the American Institute
for Manufacturing Integrated Photonics (AIM Photonics) leveraging standard Si
manufacturing processes, followed by backend-compatible monolithic deposition of
magnetooptical garnet materials. This multi-faceted approach will provide a
practical solution to bridge the large performance gap between current on-chip
isolators and the target for their deployment in PICs and solve a longstanding
challenge facing the integrated photonics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.