* 2028087
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Grant: The Interactive Effects of Risk and  Climatic Variation on Food Storage Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Brian Codding, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 13,562.00

This project will examine how risk, an inherent part of the human condition, can
result in the adoption of complex behavioral patterns, specifically as it
relates to the decisions of subsistence farmers facing volatile climatic
conditions. Previous research on the topic by both anthropologists and
archaeologists relies on economic utility theory to derive predictions about
whether to expect risk-averse or risk-prone behavior in specific socio-
environmental circumstances. Archaeology is uniquely situated for investigating
how people cope with risk because of its ability to draw on the historical depth
of the human experience. While industrialized agriculture dominates the global
food supply today, many regions of the world still rely on subsistence
agriculture. With increasing global temperatures, these subsistence farmers face
growing concerns about sustainability and may not have established government
safety nets in place to protect them from crop failures. What behaviors will
people devise and adapt to cope with increasing climatic volatility and
accompanying risk? By studying how past people implemented practices to mitigate
risk, researchers and policymakers can better understand how people today will
respond to the economic effects of a changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on a region in Utah with a history of long-term human
occupation. Inhabitants employed a range of strategies for storing agricultural
products, including the construction of storage containers placed high in canyon
walls in difficult and dangerous to access locations. What drove the imposition
of such intensive storage strategies? To address this question, the researchers
build upon existing frameworks of utility theory and behavioral ecology to
derive predictions explaining the diverse food storage strategies. Using
archaeological field data, a regional paleoclimatic reconstruction from tree
rings, and newly generated radiocarbon dates from organic material collected
from storage containers, the researchers will evaluate how changes in annual
precipitation and agricultural productivity affected decisions to store
agricultural products through time. The resultant model will be an important
tool for understanding risk mitigation behaviors in humans, with broad
applicability. The data generated will contribute to regional chronologies,
helping to build a clearer picture of prehistoric human occupation of the
region, and help resource managers better protect and preserve these
archaeological resources. The collaborative focus of the project provides a
unique hands-on educational experience for members of the public, as well as
providing invaluable training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.