* 2028062
* RAPID: Rural Crisis Decision-Making: Risk Information Management and Reactions to Precaution Recommendations During the COVID-19 Pandemic in Appalachia
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Jamison Conley, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 109,440.00

The spread of the coronavirus has led to extensive dissemination of information
as well as misinformation, but protective recommendations center mainly on urban
issues (e.g., avoiding public transit or working from home) that may be
irrelevant or impossible in rural settings such as the Appalachian region of the
U.S. Understanding the risk information needs and management strategies of
individuals in this rural region is vital to managing the response to the
COVID-19 pandemic and future pandemics, as these areas appear to be particularly
vulnerable to such health crises for a host of reasons (e.g., increased
morbidity and mortality in rural populations, limited access to healthcare).
Reactions to the coronavirus have not been reliably preventive or defensive due
to a host of psychological, communicative, political, and demographic factors
that influence how individuals process and respond to information related to
significant, widespread health threats such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The
interdisciplinary approach of this research considers individual-level
psychological characteristics, communicative processes, relational interactions,
and media use behaviors intrinsic to risk response, as well as the interplay of
partisanship and relied-upon partisan information sources and place-based
constraints on information and care access that characterize rural America and
especially Appalachia. Knowledge gleaned from this research will help improve
Appalachian residents’ health and ability to use communication strategies more
effectively in response to future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a multi-
wave quantitative panel study, this research investigates responses to the
coronavirus pandemic in rural Appalachia. The research features an 8 week
longitudinal study of Appalachian adults recruited and managed by Qualtrics.
Each individual completes bi-weekly surveys to measure and examine trajectories
of coronavirus/COVID-19 perceptions and reactions to official precautions. This
project seeks to understand how individuals’ perceptions of risk, efficacy, and
precautions, and factors such as stress and anxiety change over time due to
time-invariant predictors and time-varying predictors. Time-invariant measures,
assessed only during the first wave of data collection, include personality
traits, uncertainty intolerance, partisanship, political ideology, travel time
to nearest primary care facility, health insurance coverage, and personal
demographics (i.e., age, sex, education, income, and race/ethnicity). Time-
variant measures, assessed at all four time points, include perceived COVID-19
severity and susceptibility and precaution efficacy; COVID-19 uncertainty
discrepancy, emotional reactions, anticipated outcomes, efficacy perceptions,
and information management behaviors; evaluation of COVID-19 messages, media
use, COVID-19 thought-listing, depression, anxiety, and stress, repetitive
thoughts and behaviors related to COVID-19, COVID-19 interpretation bias,
employment status, and perceived impediments to care. Results from this research
will advance knowledge of human behavior across several social science
disciplines, inform applied research regarding anxiety and mental health in
Appalachia, and improve health communication interventions designed to increase
protective health actions in future health crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.