* 2028074
* RAPID: Disinfection and Reuse of Health-Care Worker Facial Masks to Prevent Infection coronavirus disease
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Pierre Herckes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Health care providers rely upon facial masks as a key element in protection
against aerosol transmitted diseases such as coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). There is currently a severe shortage of respiratory masks leading to
unprecedented changes in healthcare protocols, to not only not change masks
between patients but reuse masks over several hours or days, against common
medical practice and creating serious risks of cross-contamination of patients
and infection of personnel. Fast and effective sanitizing methods are needed to
allow for the safe reuse of masks to protect patients and health care workers
alike. The novel protocols need to assure rapid destruction of the virus while
not compromising the protection efficacy. This project aims at designing a novel
germicidal ultraviolet light irradiation system using light emitting diodes
coated with nanoparticles to maximize the irradiation efficiency. Nanoparticles
enhanced irradiation sources will be optimized to assure a more equal
distribution of the germicidal light dose across curved surfaces (such as molded
masks), increasing the process speed, while decreasing the potential damage by
excess radiation. Potential radiation damage to mask material will be
investigated while mask performance will be carefully monitored. The project
will yield a novel nanotechnology enhanced ultraviolet disinfection system,
while also providing critically needed scientific data on ultraviolet damage
potential of masks in general and impacts of irradiation on protection efficacy.
The project will make immediate broader impacts as it partners with health care
practitioners. The funding will support the training of minority, undergraduate
and graduate students in applied nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak has led to a severe
shortage in respiratory protective equipment for health care providers. The
quest for processes to rapidly sanitize facial masks for safe reuse revealed
some scientific knowledge gaps and technological challenges, even for common
processes such as Ultraviolet Light irradiation. Technologically, delivering
uniform light dosages to curved surfaces such as masks, to minimize total
radiation dose and potential material damage while saving time and energy
remains a challenge. This project will use nano-enabled, durable ultraviolet
-light emitting diodes connected to optical fibers to optimize delivery of
ultraviolet doses to non-flat surfaces. Scientifically, little information
exists on ultraviolet damage to facial masks and the impact on the capture
efficiency of the masks. This project will characterize chemically the nature of
the ultraviolet radiation to the mask materials while also investigating
potential changes to particle collection efficiency of the material. The capture
efficiency and hence protection efficacy is a nanoparticle issue (virions are
~125 nm), beyond simple physical size as particles will also be trapped by
electrostatic interactions, particularly important at nanoscale. The latter is
really poorly understood in the context of facial masks and impact of humidity,
particle size and potential radiation induced material surface changes. This
project will contribute to ultraviolet radiation technology development,
nanoscale insights on nanoparticle trapping and particle filter interactions.
The project will support minority, undergraduate and student graduate training
and have immediate impacts by direct collaboration with health care
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.