* 2028125
* SWQU: Composable Next Generation Software Framework for Space Weather Data Assimilation and Uncertainty Quantification
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alan Edelman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,100,000.00

This project seeks to develop the next generation of software for space weather
modeling and prediction by bringing together experts in geospace sciences,
uncertainty quantification, and software development, management, and
sustainability. The electronic technologies that govern modern life are deeply
dependent on satellite technologies such as the Global Positioning System (GPS),
which helps us navigate cities and manages air-traffic all over the world. These
satellites are also the de facto timing standard of technology and commerce,
used to synchronize banking transactions worldwide, our smart-phones, and the
internet. Yet, the accuracy and robustness of their signals are highly
vulnerable to geospace disturbances. Satellite orbits have to be controlled
precisely and to do so, geospace disturbances have to be predicted in advance.
Space weather models with quantifiable predictive capability are the tools that
are needed, and are presently largely absent, to continue to advance the
satellite technologies and everything that depends on them. The composable
software framework to be developed under this project will serve as a foundation
that can be expanded on and improved over time, growing both the space weather
prediction capabilities and the space weather modeling
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Composable software is the crucible of
computational science, allowing scientists to add their contribution to the
numerical realm without having to repeat the work of others. The goal of this
project is to build a next-generation framework for space weather uncertainty
quantification and data assimilation, as the foundation of the growing body of
computational tools for the field. The "must-haves" for this framework will be
modern dispatch-based composability, reproducibility, ease-of-use, performance,
portability, and extendability to today's and tomorrow's heterogeneous and novel
architectures. This project will produce computationally scalable algorithms and
open-source Julia-based software framework for data-driven models of space
weather with the following properties: i) Composability: Software is composable
when features and behaviors work together. For example, if uncertainty
quantification can be applied to a program without a rewrite, the program and
the uncertainty quantification compose; ii) Sustainability: Software is
sustainable when the author of the program can leave the project, and new
members of the project can maintain the software; iii) Portability: Software is
portable when it can perform on heterogeneous hardware with a variety of
underlying architectures; iv) Reproducibility: Software is reproducible today
and into the future when a convenient and backward compatible pathway exists for
users to readily examine, run, share, and modify code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is made as a part of the joint NSF-NASA pilot program on Next Generation
Software for Data-driven Models of Space Weather with Quantified Uncertainties
(SWQU). It is supported by NSF Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences,
Division of Mathematical Sciences, Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, and
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. All software developed as a result of
this award will be made available by the awardee free of charge for non-
commercial use; the software license will permit modification and redistribution
of the software free of charge for non-commercial use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.