* 2028443
* RAPID: Computational studies of the structural dynamics, function and inhibition of the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus spike protein
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Ioan Andricioaei, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 10/31/2022
* USD 199,622.00

This NSF Rapid response Research (RAPID) project funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences will
support a project that is aimed to thoroughly characterize the dynamical
transitions the coronavirus membrane-surface spike (S) glycoprotein by computer
simulations both locally upon receptor/antigen binding and globally upon fusion.
The spike protein binds a receptor on the surface of the cell and undergoes a
long-time, large-scale conformational transition that triggers fusion. This
project will emphasize the role of deploying recent advances in enhanced
sampling simulations to obtaining thermal and kinetic averages that make valid
connection to the timescales of the experiments. Lessons learned from this
project will not only improve the understanding of the structure and dynamics of
the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein but will deepen the molecular biophysics
understanding of viruses in general. In addition to direct scientific insights,
the project will impact the education of graduate, undergraduate, and middle-
school students, inform a large research community, and engage the broader
public through outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 novel
coronavirus, identified as the cause for the pneumonia pathology reported in
Wuhan, spread quickly and became a global pandemic. The project will employ
novel computational techniques grounded in rigorous statistical mechanics to
understand the role of the dynamics for the function of the spike protein, the
key macromolecular component whose structural rearrangements are responsible for
antibody neutralization and entry to the host cell for infection. In its
recently released prioritization recommendation, the World Health Organization
stressed the need for antigens to target this spike protein. This project will
help in the interpretation of biochemical measurements on neutralization
sensitivity, receptor reactivity, and immunity response changes due to
widespread infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.