* 2028986
* RAPID: Improved phylogenetic approaches for characterizing the epidemiological dynamics of COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Matthew Pennell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2022
* USD 105,309.00

Phylogenetic trees constructed from viral genomes sampled from patients contain
information about the historical pattern of transmission and dispersal of
infectious diseases. Mathematical models of evolution allow researchers to infer
critical epidemiological parameters, such as the transmission rate, from the
information encoded in phylogenetic trees. Because future predictions and policy
decisions depend on these estimates, it is crucial that their accuracy and
limitations are well understood. Recent findings suggest that many commonly used
mathematical models of disease evolution may yield highly inaccurate parameter
estimates and may severely underestimate the associated uncertainty, thus
potentially leading to sub-optimal policy decisions that are either ineffective
or needlessly disruptive. This project will clarify precisely what
epidemiological insights can be reliably inferred from phylogenetic trees and
will develop new approaches to robustly characterize the spatial and temporal
spread of COVID-19. Further, the project will determine which environmental,
biological and policy factors affect the spread of COVID-19 based on
phylogenetic data. The computational methods developed will be shared as
standalone open source R packages that can be used for analyzing and guiding
decisions against ongoing and future epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use mathematical and computational methods to examine how and to
what extent transmission, recovery and detection rates as well as the basic
reproduction ratio (R0) and pathogen prevalence could possibly be estimated from
phylogenetic data. The project will focus on models commonly used in
phylogenetic epidemiology, including birth-death-sampling models and coalescent
models with variable rates through time. The project will investigate whether
the likelihood function of these models can be brought into special forms that
reveal which epidemiological scenarios can possibly be statistically
distinguished, similarly to the researchers' recent work on macroevolutionary
birth-death models. Further, the researchers will develop more robust measures
to characterize pathogen population dynamics over space and time from
phylogenetic data, than currently possible. To that end, they will simulate a
large number of epidemiological models and search for quantities that are
preserved across statistically indistinguishable scenarios. The researchers will
focus on the SARS-CoV-2 clade (the virus causing COVID-19) and will examine the
implications of their findings for COVID-19 spread dynamics, based on published
genomic data. In particular, they will perform comparative analyses between
SARS-CoV-2 sub-clades as well as over space and time, to determine how various
environmental, biological and policy factors affect the spread of the
virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.