* 2028419
* Travel Support: Student Program for Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing Conference (PEARC20)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Gwen Jacobs, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of the Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing (PEARC)
Conference series is to provide a forum for discussing challenges,
opportunities, and solutions among High Performance Computing (HPC) center
directors and managers, computational scientists, end users, students,
facilitators, educators, HPC system administrators and user support staff, as
well as industry and government agency representatives from across the United
States and around the world. The conference follows the successful five-year
conference series that was hosted by the eXtreme Science and Engineering
Discovery Environment (XSEDE) program. Building on the success of XSEDE
conference series, PEARC aims to broaden the community by including additional
campus, national, and international cyberinfrastructure and research computing
partners. The conference will be held online from July 26-30, 2020. The project
will fund students to participate in the conference, especially in the student
program activities, and also fund a small number of junior faculty and
researchers to participate in the conference. Some students are presenting
papers and posters at the conference, will be given priority for funding The
project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the
progress of science as it provides a forum to disseminate research efforts,
connect researchers, and train the next generation of
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to Covid-19 travel restrictions, the
conference will be fully virtual. The student program committee for the
conference is recruiting students with an emphasis on diversity and inclusion of
underrepresented groups and from a diverse set of institutions. For the student
program, students will participate in (1) a student mentor program, which pairs
a student with a senior mentor to help guide the student through conference
activities, (2) a student volunteer program, to help run and organize the
virtual conference, (3), a speed networking session, where students can meet
1-on-1 with conference exhibitors, and (4) a panel discussion, where students
will attend a panel conversation about careers in HPC and career paths into HPC.
The funding provided by NSF will have a significant impact on the careers of the
future generation of researchers in high performance computing, while
encouraging diversity in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.