* 2028344
* RAPID: Exploring Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Undergraduate STEM Education by Student Gender, Race/Ethnicity, and Socioeconomic Status
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Nathanial Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2022
* USD 127,748.00

The COVID-19 pandemic presents unprecedented challenges to undergraduate
education. Although the disruption affects the entire academic community, the
impacts are not equal. For example, students with low socioeconomic status,
first generation students, and women may be affected more strongly by the
disruptions than other students. Thus, based on studentsâ€™ demographics, the
pandemic may be more likely or less likely to exacerbate existing or create new
differential impacts on students. This study seeks to investigate this likely
unequal impact among a large sample of students enrolled in calculus courses in
spring 2020. A survey will gather student voices by probing how this disaster
has affected students in STEM career pathways. The survey needs to be conducted
immediately to gather the information from the students as they experience the
disruption in their collegiate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
study is to conduct a timely mixed-methods study to collect data from a
representative sample of undergraduate STEM students from varied backgrounds.
The data will include the student voice about their experiences including: 1)
the transition away from campus; 2) the challenges experienced; 3) the degree to
which challenges affected attendance, academic performance, withdrawal rates,
and college dropout rates; and 4) factors that facilitated success or failure
among among all students, including underresourced and underrepresented
students. After gathering data via the survey, the project team will facilitate
15 focus groups of about six students, balanced by socioeconomic status, race or
ethnicity, and gender. Using a socioecological framework, the project team will
analyze factors across multiple levels, ranging from the individual to public
policy, and use the survey and focus group data to develop a quantitative
survey. This work represents novel STEM-education research in an urgent and
unique context. The findings may immediately inform interventions to address the
needs of current undergraduate STEM students in the US. Formal reports and
recommendations that arise will be published and disseminated in Fall 2020 and
Spring 2021. In the longer term, results may inform evidence-based
recommendations regarding distance versus on-campus learning for students,
including students from underresourced and underrepresented backgrounds. This
RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program in the
Division of Undergraduate Education (Education and Human Resources Directorate),
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.