* 2028470
* Building an EPSCoR Community for Science and Technology Innovation
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Steve Stanley, Arkansas Science & Technology Authority
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2022
* USD 49,700.00

This grant will facilitate participation by Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdictions in a conference focused on expanding
the capacity to impact economic development. The Arkansas Economic Development
Commission (AEDC) will use the funds to provide stipends to EPSCoR program staff
and their colleagues from jurisdictional economic development and policy offices
to attend the State Science and Technology Institute’s (SSTI) annual meeting.
Further, AEDC and SSTI will work with an advisory committee of EPSCoR
jurisdictions to produce a pre-conference roundtable and a track of sessions
within the full conference agenda. This structure will provide opportunities to
improve EPSCoR jurisdictions’ impacts by expanding knowledge of others’
activities and building denser professional networks within and across
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a means of strengthening the economic
development and research capacity potential of EPSCoR jurisdictions, AEDC will
convene EPSCoR stakeholders—including jurisdictional office staff,
commercialization and economic development professionals, and policymakers—for
the SSTI annual meeting in Little Rock, Arkansas. During the three-day event
focused on strengthening innovation economies, AEDC and SSTI will convene
multiple sessions of interest to EPSCoR stakeholders, including a track of
sessions specifically related to universities’ roles in economic development,
and will hold a roundtable specifically for attendees from EPSCoR jurisdictions
to discuss how they can more effectively leverage university R&amp;D to generate
greater investment in research capacity and economic development outcomes. The
conference therefore provides an opportunity to bring together the EPSCoR and
economic development practitioner communities to strengthen connections and
expand the opportunities for peer learning and discussion, which should
translate to improved economic development impacts in EPSCoR jurisdictions. The
grant will enable AEDC to create a scholarship program for EPSCoR stakeholders
to attend the conference, with scholarship awardees then providing detailed
feedback on how the information and connections available at the event may
inform future policies or activities in their
jurisdiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.