* 2028069
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: New Generation of a Bio-inspired Protective Mask Based on Thermal &amp; Vortex Traps
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Saikat Basu, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 62,824.00

With the rapid spread of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) worldwide,
highly-protective respirator masks can be crucial to safeguard the uninfected
population. While virus transmission occurs via tiny aerosols, current mask
coverings rely purely on passive filters; and can benefit from enhanced aerosol-
collection and virus-inactivation mechanisms. We propose to engineer a highly-
efficient, easy-to-use, cost-effective respirator design that will be
significantly more efficient at capturing tiny aerosols. A combination of
copper-based filters and an air-transmission passage inspired by nasal
structures in animals with an enhanced sense of smell will facilitate droplet
capture, followed by virus inactivation via thermal and ionic effects. The final
respirator design will directly address the urgent global shortage and immediate
national need for more effective masks. By preventing nosocomial transmission,
the product can also be a critical game-changer for the healthcare community.
For an accelerated concept-to-product transition, we will seek collaborations
with virology labs and pharmaceutical companies for detailed testing with live
COVID samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will engineer a
novel, highly-efficient, virus-preventive respirator mask inspired by nasal
structures in animals with enhanced olfactory sensitivity. Small aerosol
droplets that can carry viruses will be captured from inhaled air by using a
combination of copper-based filters and a bio-inspired tortuous passage with
periodic thermal gradients induced by spiral copper wires. The aerosol capture
will be articulated by modulating the dynamics of flow structures in the
convoluted geometry (vortex trap) and by thermophoresis action along the
respirator’s internal walls (thermal trap). Cyclic cold/hot temperature changes
on the walls, along with ionic activity from the copper material, will be used
to inactivate the trapped viruses. The use of these mechanisms is supported by
published observations on earlier and current strains of coronavirus. The
project will integrate the theoretical, experimental, and computational
expertise of the principal investigators in optimizing the design for a new-age
respirator, which can be radically more effective at preventing the transmission
of COVID-19. To meet the urgent public need, the researchers will establish
collaborations with pharmaceutical and manufacturing companies as well as
university-based Biosafety Level – 3 lab units for non-clinical in vivo testing
and to ensure rapid prototype development of the proposed respirator
masks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Thermal
Transport Processes program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.