* 2028295
* RAPID: Single-cell dissection of the cell types and mechanisms underlying SARS-CoV-2 entry in host cells via the ACE2 receptor and protease TMPRSS2
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Alexander Tsankov, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The new coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) is a global threat to worldwide economies and
public health due to its highly contagious nature and rapid spread. To develop
optimal strategies for containment and treatment of the coronavirus epidemic, it
is critical to understand the cell types and biological mechanisms that mediate
viral entry and propagation across the human population. Recent advancements in
single-cell technologies now make it possible to measure the expression of genes
at a cell-type resolution. This project aims to provide a comprehensive survey
of the cell types used by SARS-CoV-2 for viral entry across the nasal airways,
lung, and gut tissue and to understand physiological basis of how age, gender,
and smoking history may predispose healthy individuals to infection.
Identification of cells containing the two proteins known to mediate viral entry
[the receptor protein angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) and the
transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2)] will elucidate the gene expression
programs and signaling pathways associated with cells used by the novel
coronavirus for host entry. Analysis of single-cell chromatin accessibility
(scATAC-seq) data from the lung will identify the cell-type specific
transcription factors and regulatory regions associated with these gene
expression programs. This improved understanding of the signaling pathways, gene
expression programs, and regulatory mechanisms of coronavirus infection of cells
may lead to novel, patient- and region-specific therapeutic targets to combat
the spread of SARS-CoV-2. The single-cell data will be made available for
download, analysis, and visualization, thus providing a valuable resource to the
scientific community.In addition to dissemination of the findings and
contributing to potential treatment strategies for the control of coronavirus
infection, the project will support the training and professional development of
a data scientist and of a computational research associate.

The catastrophic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic caused by the novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) highlights an urgent need for improving scientific
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of viral entry and propagation. SARS-
CoV-2 uses the host ACE2 receptor protein and protease TMPRSS2 to gain cellular
entry; however, what organs and cell types express these genes and how they
interact with the host immune system remain obscure. Recent advancements in
single-cell technologies now allow for the dissection of cell types and cell
states at unprecedented resolution, which has led to groundbreaking discoveries
in tissue biology. This project will integrate single-cell RNA-sequencing data
across multiple individuals to assess how expression patterns of ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 in the lung, the primary organ linked to coronavirus infection, are
associated with an individualâ€™s age, gender and smoking history. It will also
provide a broader context of the distinct cell types in the lung and gut
expressing ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and elucidate the gene expression programs and
signaling pathways that are associated with viral entry in healthy individuals.
Finally, analysis of single-cell chromatin accessibility data from different
lung regions will identify the key transcription factors and regulatory
mechanisms driving the expression programs related to viral entry. Taken
together, this project will lead to a better understanding of coronavirus
infection mechanisms.

This RAPID award is made by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Program and the Symbiosis, Defense, and Self-recognition Program in the BIO
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.