* 2028340
* Increasing the Recruitment, Retention, and Graduation of STEM Undergraduate Student, with Emphasis on First-Generation College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Michael West, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 998,819.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-
achieving, low-income students at South Dakota School of Mines. About a third of
first-year students enrolled in the South Dakota School of Mines are first-
generation college students. On average, these first-generation students persist
at a much lower rate than students whose parents have had successful experiences
in higher education. Although, on average, about 50% of the School’s
undergraduate students earn bachelor’s degrees within five years, only about 24%
of first-generation students do so. Over its five-year duration, this project
will provide scholarships to at least 35 different full- or part-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in engineering, science, or technology. The
Scholars will be admitted in two cohorts and receive up to four years of
scholarship support. The project intends to help the Scholars successfully
navigate the higher education system from admission to graduation. Academic and
social support will begin at recruitment and include mentoring by trained
mentors. The project expects that, reflecting demographics of the student body,
at least a third of the Scholars will be first-generation students. The project
will test the hypothesis that the success of first-generation STEM
undergraduates is not limited by their interests or ability, but by the complex
higher education system itself. Furthermore, the project predicts that
supporting Scholar’s ability to navigate their college experience will increase
their persistence and graduation. Many first-generation undergraduates are from
low income, diverse backgrounds. As a result, a significant broader impact of
the project arises from its potential to help increase the diversity of talent
in the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project has three specific aims: 1)
connect existing campus academic resources to enhance student success,
particularly of first-generation students; 2) bolster Scholars’ social
connectivity to campus by creating a network of students, faculty, and staff
that Scholars trust; and 3) provide need-based scholarships to relieve financial
burden and allow Scholars to prioritize their education. The project activities
are designed to support Scholars’ development of greater emotional intelligence,
which will be assessed by a scientifically validated instrument that examines an
individual’s social and emotional strengths and weaknesses (EQ-i2.0). Using
evidence-based resiliency research, the project will implement supports that are
particularly relevant to first-generation students. It is predicted that the
project’s research findings will demonstrate a positive correlation between
increases in emotional intelligence and retention/graduation rates. Project
findings will be disseminated nationally through publications, conference
presentations, NSF S-STEM meetings, and a project specific webpage. A plan is
included for formative and summative project evaluation by a private consulting
firm. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.