* 2028261
* RAPID: Coping with COVID-19: Emotion Regulation Strategy Implications for Behavior, Social Outcomes, and Well-Being
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Michelle Shiota, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 58,206.00

The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 is producing an extraordinary set of stressors and
demands. The country is facing a life-threatening health crisis and associated
economic fallout. That stress is exacerbated by unexpectedness,
unpredictability, contradictory and uncertain information, and low personal
control. At the same time, people are asked to adopt a series of unfamiliar
social distancing and hygiene behaviors in an attempt to “flatten the curve” of
the coronavirus’s spread. Enacting the CDC-recommended behaviors requires both
emotion regulation and effortful self-control. Research on emotion regulation –
the ways people attempt to alter or change their own emotions – distinguishes
among several strategies such as looking for a “silver lining” in upsetting
events, reaching out for social support, intellectualizing the problem, and
distraction with television and games. The coronavirus pandemic provides a
unique set of circumstances in which to examine how reliance on different
emotion regulation strategies predicts people’s health-related behaviors and
emotional well-being given these unusual circumstances. Findings from this
research will inform future public policy recommendations that encourage health-
promoting behaviors in stress-related situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines the extent to which daily use of 16 distinct emotion
regulation strategies predicts adoption/maintenance of CDC-recommended social
distancing, hygiene and healthy social engagement behaviors. The research also
examines how these emotion regulation strategies influence various prosocial and
antisocial behaviors, psychological well-being, and loneliness. For three weeks,
participants complete a daily questionnaire measuring their use of specific
emotion regulation techniques that day; every seventh day they also answer
questions about their behavior (e.g., mask-wearing, avoiding social gatherings,
technology-mediated socializing, donating money or supplies, hoarding), as well
as loneliness, anxiety, and depression, during the previous week. Data analyses
will ask which emotion regulation strategies, or combinations of strategies,
predict the most desirable profile of behavioral and well-being outcomes. The
research tests important emotion regulation theories and their applicability
within the unique coronavirus pandemic context and has the potential to inform
future stress-related intervention efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.