* 2028077
* RAPID: A Virtual Reality simulator to train first responders involved in health care efforts related to the COVID-19 virus outbreak
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,08/31/2023
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 103,339.00

All health-care workers may not have the necessary background and training to
handle contagious diseases, and different contagious diseases need different
types of precautions to be taken. In this context, training these responders to
handle the novel virus COVID-19 infected patients become paramount. This project
involves the creation of a Virtual Reality based simulation environment to
support training of first responders including nurses in hospitals, communities,
and cities in the US in order to respond more effectively to the recent COVID-19
outbreak. The COVID-19 virus pandemic has placed an overwhelming strain on the
Nation's ability to treat patients; the number of patients who need to be tested
continues to rise (and is expected to increase substantially in the coming weeks
and months). Currently, there is an urgent need to train such responders
(nurses, physician assistants and others) to perform the screening/testing
activities in a methodical, safe and efficient manner. By creating a Virtual
Reality simulator for such training, this project will accomplish two
objectives: (i) increase the pool of first responders involved in COVID-19
testing; and (ii) develop a more effective process to train and prepare such
first responders. The simulator's training modules will also be used to
introduce university students to the process of designing and building such
Virtual Reality simulators for medical and healthcare
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the number of COVID-19 patients continuing
to increase rapidly, it is critical that the Nation have a larger pool of
trained first responders. The creation of such a Virtual Reality training
simulator will address this urgent need. This innovative simulator will provide
a user-friendly and effective training experience for the nurses and other
health care assistants to perform various triage-related screening and testing
activities. An interdisciplinary team of researchers including first responders,
nurses and triage coordinators (from a hospital partner) will collaborate in a
unique participatory design-based approach to designing and building this
training simulator. With the involvement of COVID-19 first responders and
medical specialists, an information centric process model (ICPM) will be created
that captures the functional and temporal relationships of various activities
involved in the triage-based patient interaction process including screening,
testing, and treatment. The creation of such an ICPM will provide a robust and
structured foundation to create the simulation environments, which will be
distributed to hospitals nationwide. On-line workshops will be held (after
creation of this simulator) to help with the use of this simulator by hospitals
and clinics. Conference and workshop papers targeting medical and healthcare
professionals will be presented to highlight the design and use of this training
simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.