* 2028842
* Collaborative Research: Geoengineering of Urban Green Infrastructure to Improve Outdoor Livability
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Peter Hess, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Urban population in the United States is confronted with degraded air quality
and elevated thermal stress, especially under heat waves. These two
environmental stressors impact human health impose new challenges to urban
livability. Urban green infrastructure (UGI), as an integral part of the built
environment, has been considered as one of the effective mitigation strategies
for potentially improving air quality and reducing thermal stress. Past research
extensively evaluated the impact of UGI on either heat or air pollution
separately but a few recent studies account for the non-trivial interactions
between heat and air pollution. Such interactions raise the question of whether
heat and air pollution mitigation is always achievable when implementing UGIs.
This project therefore aims to elucidate how UGIs impact the interactions
between urban thermal environment and air pollution across multiple spatial
scales. Additionally, this project will develop a new method for evaluating the
design strategies of UGI by considering the human health implications of heat
stress and air pollution combined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
address two scientific questions: 1) How does the occurrence of extreme heat
events affect the joint impacts of heat and air quality? 2) What mitigation
outcomes are expected given different design strategies of UGI under normal and
extreme heat conditions? To answer these questions, the research team will apply
the Weather Research and Forecast model (WRF) coupled with chemistry (Chem) and
urban canopy model (UCM) with improved representation of UGI. The coupled model
will be evaluated with observational data under normal summer and high
temperature conditions. The effects of the present UGI in both NYC and Phoenix
in mitigating heat stress and air pollution will be quantified by considering a
combined statistic that measures the joint health impacts. Different UGI
implementations (spatially undifferentiated vs. targeted) at both the
neighborhood and city scales will be evaluated. The study will include: (i)
integrated representation of urban vegetation at the neighborhood scale in the
urban canopy model; (ii) a process-based method based on a combined statistic to
evaluate the health impacts of heat stress and air pollution at the neighborhood
and city scales; (iii) fusing livability assessment, urban climates, and urban
planning on multiple spatial scales through synergistic activities with
landscape architects and stakeholders. Advanced numerical atmospheric physics
and chemistry modeling, in conjunction with a new approach for analysis and
quantification of UGI design scenarios is targeted to shed new light on
engineering solutions and environmental sustainability. The main research
outcomes anticipated are: (1) a process-based approach to systematically examine
the influence of vegetation for both local climate zones and city level; (2) a
portfolio of urban landscape planning strategies at the neighborhood scale, that
is scalable to the city level; (3) a novel objective indicator of outdoor
livability informed by new science based on heat- pollution coupling. Close
interaction with landscape architects and stakeholders will facilitate public
awareness of the importance of urban green infrastructure, particularly for
environmental stressors that have important consequences of sustainable and
healthy outdoor livability. An initiative for establishing a shared database for
the urban livability indicators with different UGI scenarios will be established
at the end of the project, accessible to other academic researchers, citizens,
and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.