* 2028406
* EAGER: SARE: Secure LiDAR Systems with Frequency Encryption
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sajjad Moazeni, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Today’s smart devices, robots, and vehicles are becoming ever more autonomous
and this places utmost importance on their reliability and safety. To meet these
safety demands, light detection and ranging (LiDAR) systems have been used to
make a 3D map of environment in order to navigate the autonomous agent and avoid
collisions. A LiDAR measures the distance by illuminating a target with laser
light and detects the reflection with a sensor. They are becoming an inevitable
part of autonomous vehicles, drones, and robots by providing this vital sensing
and imaging capability. However, today’s LiDARs also impose potential human and
public safety threats due to their security vulnerabilities. For instance, an
attacker can deliberately send a spoofing signal to the victim’s LiDAR which
cannot differentiate the spoofing signal from the actual reflected signal. In
doing so, attacker can overwrite the actual reflected signal. Eventually, the
attacker can trick the victim by hiding or misrepresenting its actual location,
leading to serious security and safety issues. While LiDAR systems are on the
verge of commercialization, these scenarios are unavoidable and the prevention
techniques have not been well studied and researched. This project aims at
investigating these issues and proposing a new secure scheme based on frequency
encryption. In addition to LiDAR, this approach will have significant broader
impacts on securing various types of wireless optical systems and satellite
communications as well. Furthermore, this research involving electro-optical
system design offers many exciting opportunities to incorporate new materials
and paradigms into the curriculums and STEM-related K-12 outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the hardware-level security issues of
complex electro-optical systems such as a LiDAR requires new unified electronic-
photonic modeling and co-simulation frameworks. This work develops such a
platform by utilizing Verilog-A and MATLAB behavioral models and incorporating
all relevant electro-optical dynamics. This platform enables simultaneously
studying the performance and security vulnerabilities including jamming and
spoofing of LiDAR systems. In particular, this project focuses on beam steering
frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) LiDARs since they are the most
promising and robust LiDAR technology as of today. Additionally, the results
will be experimentally verified using a benchtop lab setup. Finally, a novel
ranging approach called frequency encrypted FMCW (FE-FMCW) will be developed and
implemented which can protect the state-of-the-art FMCW LiDAR systems from
malicious attacks with minimal compromise on performance. In order to do so, a
holistic design methodology based on mixed-signal electronic and photonic
circuit design and signal processing will be deployed to realize and implement
the newly proposed FE-FMCW LiDAR. This technique relies on a new optical phase-
locked loop (OPLL) design which can encrypt the frequency chirp-rate of the
laser while maintaining required linearity and bandwidth for FMCW signals. The
frequency encryption code is generated on the integrated-circuit chip and it
will be unique to each LiDAR hardware system. This new technique will transform
the system architecture of future LiDAR systems and many other emerging
electronic-photonic systems as well as ensuring their security and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.