* 2028195
* Cultures of Stem Cell Research
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Amit Prasad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 02/29/2024
* USD 185,030.00

Stem cell research has been marked by scientific, ethical, and juridical
concerns for nearly two decades. Additionally, stem cell therapy has wide-
ranging implications for medical practice and for the future of bioscience, but
important cultural differences in clinics and labs remain under-analyzed. This
project focuses on the rise of stem cell research and epistemic cultures in
three different labs that translate stem cell research into frontier science and
stem cell therapies as they shift towards a market-oriented political culture of
commercialization. The three labs to be investigated differ in terms of their
transnational funding and networks, their standards for evidence-controlled
experiments, their verification by the larger scientific community, and their
level of commercialization. Instead of analyzing stem cell research through the
lens of the nation-state, this project focuses on cultural differences of stem
cell science within a nation. It thus investigates a broad range of settings
that make knowledge production and circulation possible in stem cell research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the mechanics of knowledge
production in three laboratories in the context of the shift towards market-
oriented political culture of science. It has two main objectives: (1)
Investigation of differences in the epistemic cultures of stem cell research at
the three laboratories by exploring differences in the deployment of literary,
social, and material technologies in the production of scientific knowledge. It
explores whether and how differences in the mechanics of knowledge production
explain the differing epistemological and social responses towards the epistemic
things produced at these three laboratories. (2) Investigation of the impact of
the shifting market-oriented political culture of science on the three stem cell
laboratories. The project, thus, explores: (a) how political culture has
impacted the practices of the three laboratories, and (b) whether and how the
national and international networks of the laboratories have led to differential
impact on the credibility of the scientific practices at those laboratories
despite their being located within the same regulatory
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.