* 2028632
* RAPID:  Collaborative Research:  Optimizing non-pharmaceutical and pharmaceutical interventions for controlling COVID-19 at the community-level
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Martial Ndeffo Mbah, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2021
* USD 87,492.00

During emerging infectious disease outbreaks, such as the current novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, mathematical models are important tools to help
inform public health recommendations and best utilization of limited resources.
This research will develop and analyze data-driven mathematical models to
predict the spread and evaluate the success of various public health
intervention strategies to control COVID-19 in the US and abroad. The models
will account for the characteristics of the pathogen, the variation of
transmission that occur within community and in hospital settings, and
geographical difference in transmission. The broader impacts from these models
will provide real-time information to assist public health officials and
decision-makers in making critical decisions on COVID-19 control policies and
resource allocation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard modeling approach such as
compartmental population-based approach may not be suitable for modeling the
spread of COVID-19, due to the high-level of heterogeneity of such systems,
disease pathways, population makeup, host interactions on different levels of
organization (household, workplace/school, social activities), and adaptive
features of human behavior. The investigators will employ an individual-based
modeling approach (IBM) that will accommodate such local heterogeneities. The
investigators will use social, demographic, and epidemiological data of COVID-19
cases in the US and Korea, as well as hospital-level and city-level contact
tracing data of COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, to parameterize their models. First,
they will develop an IBM hospital-based model to explore different hospital-
based interventions for mitigating the risk of nosocomial transmission of
COVID-19 between patients and healthcare workers. Second, they will develop an
IBM community-based model to evaluate and identify optimal non-pharmaceutical
and potential pharmaceutical interventions for COVID-19 control in different
local communities (city-county scale). The non-pharmaceutical interventions will
include, amongst others: case isolation at home or hospitals, voluntary self-
quarantine, stopping mass gathering, closure of schools, universities, or
workplaces, and social distancing such as reduction of contacts, wearing of
protective masks, and reduction of individuals' movements. Pharmaceutical
interventions will include novel vaccines and antiviral
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.