* 2028612
* EAGER: AI-Enabled Optimization of the COVID-19 Therapeutics Supply Chain to Support Community Public Health
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Erick Jones, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,993.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has proven to be particularly deadly in the nation's
densely populated cities. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) will investigate methods that integrate Artificial Intelligence (AI),
data science, and automatic data capture technologies to design supply
mechanisms that effectively deliver therapeutic medicines to underserved urban
communities that are particularly vulnerable to this this disease. While few
reliable therapeutic treatments are currently available, as medicines and
ultimately a vaccine are developed, the challenge will be to create an effective
delivery mechanism to support urban communities. Because hospitals are expected
to operate at capacity treating only the most severe cases, these new supply
chains will focus on the home as point-of-care. The project represents a
collaboration between the PI and the City of Houston Department of Health and
Human Services (HDHHS) which currently supports the city's hospital districts,
the veteransâ€™ administration, and neighborhood healthcare centers. The supply
chain models investigated in this project are expected to have wide
applicability to similar large urban environments across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports fundamental research in
technology-enabled supply chain design to effectively deliver therapeutics to at
risk populations in an urban setting. The research has three primary objectives:
1) investigate the Automated Data Capture and Artificial Intelligence needed to
automate the COVID-19 Healthcare Supply Chain; 2) model the COVID-19 Supply
Chain from manufacture to home delivery that addresses the needs of at risk
populations and communities; and 3) identify the readiness and the societal cost
benefit of this model for use when medicine and supplies become ready for the
COVID-19 outbreak Available data from HDHHS on location of vulnerable
individuals and their social determinants of health will be integrated in an
optimization-driven AI engine to target, map and assist health departments to
prioritize their limited resources for response planning and to adapt their
tactics to the needs of neighborhoods and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.