* 2028492
* AGS-PRF: An Observational-based Modeling Approach for Solar Energetic Particle Access to the Equatorial Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Rachael Filwett, Filwett, Rachael
* Fellowship Award
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 228,000.00

Many questions remain about how solar energetic particles (SEPs) interact with
the geomagnetic field. These particles stream into the geomagnetic environment
following explosive events, such as flares and coronal mass ejections from the
Sun. Particles may become trapped in the geomagnetic field and the energy of
these particles as well as the geospace environment, including current systems,
affect how far they penetrate. This postdoctoral fellowship supports research on
this topic, which is important to understanding space weather impacts to
sensitive systems like satellites, which can be damaged by SEPs. In addition to
supporting an early career scientist, this project includes the creation of a
space weather demonstration that will be used in educational outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive observational-based modeling
approach will be employed to provide statistical insights into what processes
affect SEP access into the geomagnetic field. The study utilizes 20 solar
energetic particle events, which occur during a range of storm and non-storm
conditions, from January 2013-December 2017, and which are measured with at
least two satellites. Using a multi-spacecraft approach, the observations will
be examined at a wide variety of radial distances, energies, and at a range of
magnetic local times simultaneously. Utilizing the east-west directional flux
anisotropy for solar protons observed in the inner-magnetosphere it is possible
to measure particle cutoffs in the near-equatorial region. They will compare the
energy and directional dependent cutoffs measured in-situ to the geomagnetic
cutoffs calculated via the use of particle tracking models. Using the Tsyganenko
2005 particle tracing model they will determine which current systems contribute
to suppressed geomagnetic cutoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.