* 2028571
* EAGER: Dewetting dynamics at liquid/air interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Sushant Anand, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 136,391.00

Oil-water systems are commonplace and form the basis of numerous processes in
industries such as pharmaceuticals, food, cosmetics, agrochemicals, and
nanomaterials. Not all interactions between oil and water are beneficial,
especially in situations such as oil spills in oceans. Although recent
investigations have probed different facets of oil spillages, several questions
remain unanswered. As an example, the process by which oil droplets impacting on
the ocean surface eventually spread to form thin films is not well understood.
This project will elucidate this process in detail using a combination of
experiments and mathematical models. The proposed research is transformative as
it has the potential to probe new pathways for oil spill proliferation, and it
will shed light on involved processes that have been largely overlooked. The
results should expand the understanding on oil spills by providing a
comprehensive experimental data and a validated theoretical framework that can
inform better containment strategies. The knowledge gained can be applied to
other oil/water systems such as separation/extraction columns or thin films. The
project's findings will be disseminated through outreach programs and
presentations at national and international conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aftermaths of a dewetting event at liquid-air
interface by an oil droplet will strongly depend upon the chemical properties of
these oils, the bulk liquid properties, and the presence of particles within
these oil drops. Consequently, the research will use simulant clay particles
with the auxiliary objective of devising a method to arrest the spreading. Post
a dewetting event, the research will study the spreading behavior of oils in
absence and presence of microparticles and such behavior will be quantified in
the form of dimensionless groups to classify the predict behavior of the
spreading oil. The data collected from this investigation should also help
develop more accurate drop size distribution models. The investigation will
touch upon diverse fields such as interfacial fluid science of thin liquid
film/drops and synthesis of colloids. The possible control of dewetting by
microparticles could also lead to methods for formulating Pickering emulsions
which could then find novel uses within many
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.