* 2028441
* Development of an Integrated View of Plasma Instability Processes in the Lower Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Roman Makarevich, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 329,702.00

Earth's ionosphere is a mixture of neutral gas and charged particles. The
ionosphere is generally broken out by layers, defined according to the
wavelengths of the radiation most commonly absorbed. The E-region extends from
90-150 km and is ionized through X-ray and ultraviolet radiation. The F-region
(150-600 km) is ionized by extreme ultraviolet radiation. Although waves and
disturbances ("structuring") occur throughout the ionospheric medium ("plasma"),
studies often focus on; either the E or F layer owing in part to limitations of
experimental and theoretical; techniques employed. As a result, development of a
unified view of ionospheric plasma structuring processes remains incomplete.
This proposal will fill this gap by (1) developing a unified plasma instability
theory applicable in the broad range of altitudes including the previously
unexplored transitional valley region between the E and F region peaks and (2)
observing the valley region with a radar that routinely receives returns from a
broad range of altitudes. The proposed research leverages NSF assets and
knowledge synthesis to contribute fundamentally to the theory of plasma
instability and structuring. This knowledge is relevant to the communication and
navigation industries, and therefore to society. The integrated theory will be
incorporated into UAF plasma physics classes, that currently rely primarily on
original journal publications rather than teaching modules. The proposal will
also fund a new Ph.D. student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
address the fundamental question of what combination of destabilizing and
stabilizing factors results in the plasma perturbations growing in amplitude and
producing ionospheric structures. The actual proposal activity consists of three
interconnected projects: 1. Development a unified theory of ionospheric plasma
instabilities including thermal, inertial, and gradient effects for arbitrary
altitude and propagation; 2. Determination of the critical gradient length
required to destabilize plasma in the non-isothermal case for arbitrary
altitude; 3. Analysis of SuperDARN and ISR data to investigate small-scale
irregularity occurrence in the previously unexplored transitional "valley"
region (~150 km). These measurements are expected to provide support for a
theory that strong gradients are required to make plasma unstable in the valley
at small scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.