* 2028624
* High Endurance Phase-Change Devices for Electrically Reconfigurable Optical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Feng Xiong, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 380,000.00

Award Title:&lt;br/&gt;High-endurance phase-change devices for electrically
reconfigurable optical systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Materials whose optical properties can be tuned electrically
are essential to operations of many modern technologies that we rely on daily,
for example, smartphone displays and fiber internet. For emerging applications
in tunable optical components, high-speed computing, and advanced optical
storage, a group of materials that can be reconfigured at the atomic level,
known as “phase-change materials,” is particularly promising. When their atoms
are arranged in either an ordered or disordered state, these materials exhibit a
dramatic, stable, and reversible change in their optical properties, which could
enable devices with very compact form-factor, low energy consumption and
insensitivity to vibration. While many proof-of-concept optical devices have
been demonstrated using phase-change materials, few can be controlled using
electrical signals—a prerequisite for real world implementation. Additionally,
these electrically controlled phase-change devices have shown poor endurance and
switching cyclability, the cause of which is not well understood. The team
proposes to address this challenge by first investigating the role of heat and
mechanical expansion in the various layers comprising these devices using time-
dependent optical and electrical measurements. Secondly, the team will use high
resolution imaging techniques to study the role that migration of various types
of atoms has on the reversibility of the phase-change material. Finally, the
team will use these results to construct phase-change devices with improved
reliability and explore the possibility of scaling them up to sizes needed for
applications requiring larger tunable optical components. The team seeks to
educate middle-/high-school students on topics related to novel materials in
daily life from school districts with historically serving under-represented
minorities, using a combination of interactive workshops and hands-on demos.
This project also provides training for two graduate students in advanced device
fabrication and characterization techniques, and hosts undergraduates from
underrepresented groups during the summer months to broaden participation in
STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Phase-
change materials, such as Ge2Sb2Te5 and GeTe, are particularly promising for
reconfigurable optical devices owing to their fast, dramatic, non-volatile, and
reversible change in refractive index. Experimental demonstrations of
reconfigurable smart windows, reflective displays, metasurfaces, and photonic
devices for memory and computing have re-ignited interests in these materials.
For phase-change devices with dimensions greater than the optical wavelength, an
electro-thermal approach to switching is most promising, but limited prior work
showed poor endurance and cyclability (1000 cycles or less) compared to the high
endurances (greater than 10 million cycles) demonstrated for phase-change data
storage. The team proposes that the endurance is limited by poorly matched
thermal properties of materials within these devices, while the degrading
optical contrast often observed is due to phase segregation and void formation
in the phase-change layer. To validate this hypothesis, the project has three
aims: (1) improve the lifetime of electro-thermal phase-change devices by
properly matching the thermal expansion coefficients of the materials within the
device layers; (2) reduce the cycling-induced degradation of optical contrast by
reducing thermal gradients within the device and improving deposition
conditions; and (3) identify the effects and limitations of scaling on phase-
change optical devices. The proposed approach will overcome the limited
cyclability of these electro-thermally switched phase-change devices by studying
the thermal response of the device layers through complementary thermal-
mechanical modelling, dynamic optoelectronic measurements, and advanced nano-
characterization techniques. The insights gained by understanding and addressing
the current limitations of electro-thermally controlled optical phase-change
films are expected to be broadly applicable to such fields as tunable optical
coatings, non-von Neumann computing, electrical-optical conversion, and
reconfigurable photonic and RF systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.