* 2028269
* EAGER: SARE: In-Sensor Hardware-Software Co-design Methodology of the Hall Effect Sensors to Prevent and Contain the EMI Spoofing Attacks in the Analog-RF Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mohammad Al Faruque, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will create a novel in-sensor defense methodology to make the
state-of-the-art Hall sensors robust against external Electromagnetic-
Interference (EMI) spoofing attacks. Prior works in the literature focused only
on the safety of the analog-RF electronics by making them robust against EMI in
the device level. However, little attention has been paid on the security of
analog sensors (e.g., Hall sensors) tightly connected to the analog-RF
electronics. Nowadays, many analog-RF electronics are integrated with different
onboard Hall sensors. Therefore, security threats from unconventional attacks
may come with EMI-spoofing the onboard Hall sensors and such attacks may
propagate to the connected analog-RF electronics, hampering the integrity of the
whole system. For example, it has been demonstrated that an attack by spoofing
the Hall sensors of the solar inverters using an external magnetic field can
intentionally perturb the grid frequency, voltage, and inject false real or
reactive power to disrupt the power system. Similar attacks may also happen in
other critical systems as onboard Hall sensors are nowadays pervasive in various
RF applications (e.g., autonomous vehicles, smart grids, robotics, industrial
plants, missile guidance, and military defense) because of their low cost, high
linearity, and acuracy. Therefore, the research community needs to solve such an
important security challenge. This project will have a large impact on the
safety and security design of analog-RF systems. The outcomes of this project
will be disseminated to the broader communities involving academia, industry,
and government via publications and presentations. Moreover, the results of the
proposed research activities will be integrated into course work and other
educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making only the analog-RF
electronics robust may not be effective to ensure the security of connected
systems against external EMI spoofing attacks through the onboard analog Hall
effect sensors. This research will develop a novel hardware-software
architecture of in-sensor embedded core. The in-sensor embedded core will
integrate the Hall sensors with Digital Signal Processing (DSP) cores using the
in-sensor memory block peripherals to keep the connected analog-RF systems safe
and secure. Detecting an EMI spoofing attack is critical and it is even more
critical to keep the connected RF systems operating properly while under an
attack. In the proposed architecture, three equidistant Hall elements embedded
in a single Hall sensor will be used to detect and measure any type of external
EMI spoofing attack. A novel algorithm will be developed to separate the
external EMI spoofing data from the original signal data by using two different
platforms, namely the FPGA and the DSP core, to accomplish two different types
of tasks (time-sensitive processings tasks and control-oriented tasks)
respectively. The communication between the FPGA and the DSP core will use the
Direct-Memory-Access (DMA) to increase the bandwidth. Moreover, the proposed
methodology will be low-power and will not hamper the existing data-processing
speed and data rates of the connected analog-RF systems. This technique not only
detects the external EMI spoofing attack but also contains the attacks inside
the Hall sensors in real time, so that the attacks cannot propagate further to
the connected analog-RF systems. If successful, this methodology can be further
developed and applied to other types of analog
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.