* 2028734
* SaTC: CORE: Small: GOALI: Predicting and Labeling Email Phishing from Social Influence Cues and User Characteristics.
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* John Harris, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Phishing is a dangerous and popular cyber attack that exerts high costs on
Internet users and corporations and that has strong implications for national
security. Most anti-phishing solutions have focused on automatic detection via a
combination of vetting of known malicious websites (blocklists) and using
machine learning to filter phishing. Although successful in practice, these
approaches cannot prevent new phishing strategies from reaching users because
determining malicious intent in text remains an unsolved problem. Messages and
websites used in attacks constantly change, rendering blocklists and learning
models quickly outdated. This project is developing a warning tool for web mail
that exposes to users a key invariant of phishing attacks: the application of
persuasive influence in the message text, framing the message as either
potentially causing a gain or a loss, and creating emotional salience of its
content (positive or negative). This project is performed in collaboration with
the Google Security and Anti-Abuse Team. It has large potential for technology
transfer and organic collaboration between industry and university. The project
also has an educational component through a workshop on phishing awareness for a
K-12 public school in Gainesville, Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tool to be
created and tested relies on a novel machine learning framework that exposes
different types of influence cues in text via a combination of topic modeling,
sentiment analysis, and standard machine learning algorithms. Warnings are
generated according to an estimated user susceptibility score for the email,
which is computed via susceptibility datasets in collaboration with Google. Tool
evaluation is based on a behavioral-based user study that investigates whether
or not the tool reduces real-life susceptibility to email phishing. The overall
goals are to improve human-based detection and users' decision-making processes,
and to reduce users' likelihood of falling for
phishing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.