* 2028652
* Experimental study of the conformation and dynamics of active colloidal polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2024
* USD 371,978.00

An active fluid is a dispersion of self-driven particles in a liquid medium.
This type of fluid is relevant to a broad class of biological and physical
systems including suspensions of swimming microorganisms, synthetic colloidal
swimmers and vibrated granular rods. Recent theories and simulations have
greatly extended the study of simple active fluids made of compact solid
particles to elongated flexible objects such as soft chains and filaments. Such
research has transformed our understanding of the dynamics of flexible objects
in nonequilibrium conditions (for example, biopolymers within living cells) and
revealed unexpected collective dynamics of active fluids. Nevertheless,
benchmark experiments that can quantitatively verify the wide range of
theoretical and numerical predictions are still missing. This research project
aims to address this gap and to perform experiments that study the shape and
dynamics of active DNA-linked long chains of colloidal particles, the so-called
colloidal polymers in analogy of linear polymer molecules. Two specific systems
included in these studies are passive colloidal polymers immersed in light-
powered bacterial suspensions and active Janus colloidal polymers whose activity
arises internally from individual Janus particles via chemical reactions. The
ultimate objective is to explore the possibility of using self-driven active
colloidal polymers as artificial flagella. The project includes outreach efforts
on designing demos for undergraduate fluid classes and for summer short courses
attended by industrial practitioners. The project also aims to forge close
collaborations between academic and industrial
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA-linked colloidal chains provide a concrete
example of the classic bead-spring model of polymer molecules. By conveying
activity to DNA-linked colloidal polymers, the research team will investigate
the conformation and dynamics of active colloidal polymers and understand the
fundamental polymer scaling relations out of equilibrium. The researchers will
verify important theoretical and numerical predictions on the unusual behaviors
of active polymers such as the swelling of polymer chains with activity, the
self-assembly of hairpin structures, and the activity-induced softening and
coil-to-globule transition. Moreover, by exploiting the collective dynamics of
linked active Janus particles, the project participants will study a new
approach for creating self-driven artificial flagella with periodic non-
reciprocal beating motions. Such a flagellar structure would then be tested for
driving the locomotion of synthetic microswimmers. Taken together, the project
provides not only benchmark experiments corroborating existing theories and
simulations but also a new way to engineer synthetic microswimmers for cargo
delivery at microscopic scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.