* 2028992
* EAGER: SARE: Security and Functionality of Energy Storage Devices from an External Electromagnetic Attack
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jonghyun Park, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project supports fundamental research that contributes to new knowledge in
the safety and security of energy storage devices under an electromagnetic
attack. Energy storage devices are ubiquitous in the modern world, but they are
very sensitive to electromagnetic radiation originating from internal devices or
external sources. This project investigates the impact of electromagnetic
radiation on the state of energy storage devices and their health/safety
conditions. The research outcomes will enable the development of technologies
and energy storage system designs that can detect, mitigate, and prevent
detrimental interference from electromagnetic radiation and to protect the
performance, safety, and security of energy storage devices used in the
healthcare, energy, biomedical, aerospace, and chemical and automotive
industries, which benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves
several disciplines including electrochemistry, electromagnetics, manufacturing,
control, and materials science. The multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden
the participation of women and underrepresented groups in research and
positively impacts engineering/science education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the fundamental relationship
between electromagnetic fields and the performance, safety, and security of
energy storage devices and their management systems through non-destructive
experimental measurements. The study will identify the effects of
electromagnetic radiation on battery status and electrochemical behavior,
including state of charge, state of health, battery degradation physics, and
cycling performance. The study explores the possible damage or accelerated
degradation due to overcharge and over-discharge caused by the excess current
generation from electromagnetic radiation. The team tests different operating
conditions (current, voltage range) and temperature, device design, packing, and
chemistry by an integrated measurement coupled with an electrochemical and
electromagnetic field scan analysis. Furthermore, the effects of the strength,
frequency, and direction of electromagnetic field on battery damage and
degradation are examined by measuring the battery degradation and functionality.
The study also relies on a coupled electrochemical-electromagnetic model with
degradation physics, along with advanced material characterization technique to
improve the understanding of the non-destructive measurement
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.