* 2028542
* RAPID: Silver and Copper-based Nanowire Structures for Antiviral Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Anne Murray, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 198,800.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The current COVID-19 pandemic has identified
key problems in the US strategic preparedness for a national biological
disaster. One of those is a shortage of N95 respirators, which provide critical
protection to medical personnel as they treat infected patients. This issue is a
direct consequence of the one-time-use nature of these N95 respirators; polymer
fiber filters, including N95 and HEPA filters, capture and accumulate live
pathogens, and so become biohazardous. In the proposed work, metallic nanowire
bird’s nests and electrospun fibers are presented as approaches to resolve these
problems, resulting in an improved respirator. The porous metallic nanowire
bird’s nests allow air to pass through, similar to a polymer fiber filter, but
the metallic surfaces possess antibacterial and antiviral qualities. As a
consequence, pathogens captured in the bird’s nest are inactivated, improving
the protection to medical workers and prolonging the usefulness of the
respirator. The same metallic nanowires will also be integrated into a free
surface electrospinning device, resulting in polymer fibers which are hairy with
the antibacterial/antiviral nanowires. Electrospun respirators can be melted
down in-house and re-spun into new respirators. This recycling step allows for
respirators to be continuously re-used, removing the need to constantly re-
stock. These efforts together may resolve the shortages of respirators in the
current pandemic and present a superior filter product with bioactive
components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This work seeks
to develop reusable, bioactive filter materials for N95 respirators. Current
filter materials are one-time-use and accumulate live pathogens, making them
intrinsically unsanitary. We propose to respond to these problems using two
approaches. In the first approach, freeze-cast metallic nanowire bird’s nests
will be prepared using Ag and Cu nanowires. The porous structure of the bird’s
nest allows air to pass, similar to a traditional filter, while Ag and Cu have
been shown to have antibacterial and antiviral qualities as nanoparticles.
Nanowires may present higher efficacy against pathogens due to their ability to
puncture the cell and viral membranes. In the second approach, electrospun
polypropylene fiber mats will be prepared as an alternative to traditional air-
blown polymer filters. The electrospun textiles can be grown to custom fit
operator’s faces providing an exceptional seal for use as a respirator. Used
respirators can be melted on-site (melting temperature 210-280 °C) and re-spun,
to prepare new, sanitary respirators. Incorporating nanowires into the molten
polypropylene will result in polymer fibers with fine metallic nanowire hairs.
As before, the metallic nanowires will confer antibacterial and antiviral
qualities. The efficacy of the bird’s nest, the electrospun filter, and hybrid
textile will be rapidly tested using suspensions and aerosols of bacteria and
bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria). Escherichia coli and Bacillus
subtilis will serve as non-pathogenic surrogates for Gram-negative and Gram-
positive bacterial pathogens, respectively. An enveloped bacteriophage in family
Cystoviridae will serve as a non-pathogenic surrogate of SARS-CoV-2. The
proposed research will investigate the feasibility of nanowires as antibacterial
and antiviral agents, develop a new, nanostructured filter material, and explore
an alternative fabrication methodology, resulting in new materials and
techniques with direct consequences to the US preparedness for biological
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.