* 2028145
* RAPID: Measuring the Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Broadband Access Networks to Inform Robust Network Design
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nicholas Feamster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 187,395.00

This project is to study the effects of the shifts in Internet traffic resulting
from the COVID-19 pandemic on the broadband Internet access infrastructure.
Specifically, the project investigates how traffic volumes are changing as a
result of changes in daily patterns of life, as well as how those shifts in
traffic volume affect network utilization, network performance, and application
performance. These questions have become increasingly critical during the
COVID-19 pandemic, as large fractions of the population have come to depend on
reliable Internet access that performs well for a variety of applications, from
video conferencing to remote learning and healthcare. It is important to
understand how various policies involving isolation, distancing, and closing of
schools, libraries and services are affecting the usage patterns on the
Internet, right at the time when the entire society is coming to rely on the
network more than ever.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve an
unprecedented coordination of data about network traffic load under crisis,
through granular measurements, propriety data sharing agreements, as well as
extensive baseline data spanning over ten years. This project aims to study two
fundamental research questions: (1) What is the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic
on network traffic patterns on broadband access networks? and (2) How well do
(and will) the infrastructure and applications sustain these changes in traffic
patterns? To study these questions, the project plans to take a multi-faceted
approach, exploring issues including access performance and interconnect
capacity when using critical applications when the network is under strain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This measurement study will shed light on the extent to
which the existing Internet infrastructure can sustain exogenous shocks that
dramatically shift the location, nature, and scale of network traffic and help
identify vulnerabilities. Insights into the state of broadband Internet
performance will yield important insights about how broader government policies
to close schools and rely on remote e-learning may affect the broader
population. Understanding the increased strain on the Internet on other
application areas in medicine and public health, including patient compliance
and remote caregiving, may lead to improved design of the Internet for such
application areas. The project's activities will be posted to
https://cdac.uchicago.edu/broadband.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.