* 2028174
* RAPID: Collaborative: A privacy-preserving contact tracing system for COVID-19 containment and mitigation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Yaling Yang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 60,748.00

A crucial tool in the fight with COVID-19 is a contact tracing system that can
identify individuals who had close contacts with confirmed cases in the past.
Such a mechanism can alarm these individuals so that they can voluntarily self-
quarantine. In addition, when these individuals start to have symptoms, a
contact tracing system can prioritize them for testing, which will make more
efficient use of the limited test capacity and provide early treatment for
infected individuals. However, due to strict privacy-protection laws in US and
many western countries, it is a challenge to deploy such a system. To solve this
urgent problem, this project builds a privacy-preserving contact tracing system,
named COVID Detector. COVID Detector relies on smartphones to track both patient
and healthy person's past locations and leverages cryptographic computations to
ensure that no private data is exposed during the contact tracing computation.
This project addresses the broader need to support, in a privacy-friendly
manner, user contact tracing in a modern, complex and highly-connected world.
This discussion is presently highly relevant in the context of balancing public
health and individual user privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there
are a few existing contact tracing apps for COVID-19, anonymity of user/patient
identity is the best that they can provide to protect user privacy. COVID
Detector is the first that provides strong protection of both user/patient
identity and user/patient trajectory data. COVID-Detector uses homomorphic
encryption techniques to match the trajectory of confirmed COVID-19 patients
with that of healthy users in the ciphertext domain, so that healthy users can
determine their infection risk level. The matching process reveals neither
healthy users' nor patients' location data to any party. The use of homomorphic
encryption technologies in trajectory tracking is novel and has not been applied
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.