* 2028782
* EAGER: SARE: Detecting Zero-Day Side-channel Attacks in Sensor Rich Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Fadi Kurdahi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project introduces a method using an automated flow to detect side channel
attacks over sensor-rich cyber-physical systems. The approach has the ability to
identify, almost instantly and with high precision, anomalous behaviors
indicative of possibly hazardous situations with either a known signature or
never encountered during pre-deployment testing. The goal of this project is to
have a prototype demonstrating its readiness for transition to practice and
eventual deployment. Three types of threats are tackled: (1) Deliberate
intrusions employing zero-day attacks and sophisticated evasion techniques; (2)
Insider threats: abuse of privileges by insiders with or without spoofing of
user identities; (3) Anomalous behaviors never encountered during pre-deployment
testing of safety-critical systems and possibly indicative of malfunctioning.
These anomalies include accidental or inadvertent failures due to bugs as well
as physical side channel attacks that gives rise to execution of emergency
actions. Anomalies in many safety-critical cyber-physical systems are
particularly dangerous. For example, attacks against a car such as antilock-
braking system (ABS) sensor spoofing, wireless command injection, and engine
control unit (ECU) infiltration have been demonstrated, leading ultimately to a
car crash or significant drift off the road. The importance of the research
cannot be overstated when it comes to safety-critical and mission-critical
cyber-physical systems that are increasingly relying on artificial intelligence
and machine learning for decision making, situational awareness, and general
reasoning. The explainability conundrum of deep learning algorithms and models
coupled with the need to certify the overall system for safety and security
points to the criticality of imposing continuous checks on these two criteria
(safety and security) during operation to safeguard not only against
unanticipated behavior but also the potential bugs and failures in system
hardware including sensors/actuators. The research will create a framework
allowing cyber-physical systems to be certified for safety and security through
the ability to detect and diagnose unsafe and insecure anomalous
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research combines a scalable Runtime
Verification (RV) framework intended for embedded systems and a Paraminer
specification mining tool for Anomaly Detection (AD). A critical feature in this
RV+AD approach is the ability to monitor properties using not only traces
relevant to CPU execution, but also other system components such as memories,
buses, sensors, and actuators. This observability across both the cyber and
physical states adds significant capabilities to deal with physical side channel
attacks which are extremely hard to detect or thwart. This can be achieved by
correlating traces from both program execution on the CPU(s) and sensor data. In
a power side channel attack, for example, the current sensor data can be
correlated with execution of critical advanced encryption standard (AES)
encryption algorithms running on the CPU to detect periods of potential
vulnerability, and engage obfuscation measures to thwart such attacks. The
approach in this project is hardware-based whereas the prior state-of-the-art
approaches have been software-based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.