* 2028387
* CAREER: Inclusive Privacy: Effective Privacy Management for People with Visual Impairments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/16/2019,05/31/2023
* Yang Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 341,522.00

This project aims to provide people with disabilities, particularly those with
visual impairments, better privacy tools when working with computers. Although
information privacy is a concern for everyone, common tools such as spam-
detecting captchas, password strength meters, security alert messages, and
browser icons that indicate secure connections are often designed without
considering people with visual impairments and thus are hard for this group to
use. Meanwhile, common workarounds such as audio screen readers and requests for
help from other people come with their own privacy risks. To better understand
the privacy challenges people with visual impairments face, the researchers will
first study their use of and known privacy concerns around technologies. They
will then work with people with visual impairments to generate, test, and
improve a number of design ideas that might address those challenges and
concerns. Finally, they will work to generalize the studies and designs to other
populations, including older adults who might have different privacy
expectations than younger people as well as people with cognitive impairments.
The research will lead to a better understanding of privacy needs across the
population, as well as "inclusive" designs for privacy management tools that can
be better not just for underserved populations but for all people. To spread the
knowledge and increase the impact of the work, the team will hold workshops at
relevant research communities and with local disability groups, as well as
develop course materials on inclusive and accessible privacy for the Security
Education (SEED) labs program that is widely used in education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is organized around three main phases. The
first phase aims to learn more about the privacy needs of people with visual
impairments through a combination of longitudinal diary studies, in which people
record and answer questions about incidents where they felt their privacy was at
risk, and observational studies of people with visual impairments and their help
givers using technology in context. The second phase looks to develop better
privacy support tools; the team will focus first on privacy threat reminders and
tools for privacy-respecting collaborative use as these are key issues that
arose in preliminary work, but will also develop tools in response to the
concerns identified in the first phase. In each design activity, the researchers
will use a participatory design approach that includes people with visual
impairments (and when appropriate their help givers) on the design team, working
together at both local disability support centers and at the research lab.
Designs will follow a standard iterative process, starting with initial
requirements generation and review, moving through brainstorming and low-
fidelity prototypes, and finally developing and testing high-fidelity
prototypes. The third phase involves using the results from the first two phases
to generate guidelines for inclusive privacy design -- that is, general privacy
guidelines that may apply to a wide range of user populations with varying
abilities. To do this, the team will conduct research similar to phase one, but
with groups of older adults, people with cognitive impairments, and a group of
younger people without disabilities; they will also test the privacy tools
generated in phase two with these groups to both identify new issues that arise
in these populations and modify the tools to be more broadly inclusive.