* 2028885
* Principles of Geometrically-Frustrated Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Gregory Grason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 433,337.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to advance fundamental understanding of
geometrically frustrated self-assembly of soft materials. Self-assembly is a
process by which nanoscale “building blocks” spontaneously associate into multi-
unit structures, which underlies structure formation of a vast range of useful
material structures in the biological and synthetic world. This project aims to
advance fundamental understanding of a new “class” of such systems, known as
geometrically frustrated assemblies (GFAs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric-
frustration occurs when the shape and interaction between building-blocks lead
to “misfitting” arrangements when they aggregate. Such frustrated building
blocks are not unlike “warped puzzle pieces” that can fit together edge to edge,
but whose shape misfit requires more and more straining to piece together larger
and larger patches of the puzzle. In the assemblies of these nanoscale analogs –
such as polymers, proteins, or colloidal particles – frustration can give rise
to new mechanisms for the assembly process to “sense its size”, which are not
possible in assemblies without shape misfit. The buildup of shape misfit in GFAs
is related to a unique behavior known as self-limiting assembly, in which the
self-assembly process can autonomously and robustly terminate a finite number of
building blocks that are predetermined based on properties of the sub-unit
shape, interactions and flexibility. As such, GFAs pose a potential pathway to
engineer new types of self-limiting assemblies, whose finite sizes can be
“programmed” from the design and synthesis of building block properties. So,
realizing the ability to engineer the self-limiting size of material assemblies
through programmed frustration would open up potentially transformative, bottom-
up pathways to fabricate functional material architectures, for example
injectable biomedical scaffolds or paintable photonic coatings, with the
complexity and size control that is currently only accessible via top-down
techniques, such as 3D printing and
lithography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capitalizing on this potential requires an
understanding of the basic principles that connect the properties of nanoscale,
frustrated building blocks to the emergent structures they form on size scales
much bigger than those subunits. These properties include building block shape
misfit, interactions, and flexibility. This project will develop theoretical
frameworks that address this core objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond
potential impacts on materials technology deriving from advancing the principles
of GFA, the project will achieve several additional broader impacts. These
include the training and mentorship of undergraduate and graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher in statistical and computational approaches to materials
physics, as well as efforts of the PI to advance participation of K12 student
populations from under-resourced communities in graduate student-led STEM
outreach and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to advance fundamental understanding of geometrically
frustrated self-assembly of soft materials. Geometrically frustrated assembly
(GFA) is an emerging paradigm in which the local misfits between soft “building
blocks" give rise to intra-domain stress gradients on size scales that far
exceed the block dimensions. The accumulation of long-range stresses in GFA
underlies scale-dependent behaviors without counterpart in canonical assemblies
that lack frustration, including the existence of self-limiting states where the
equilibrium assembly dimensions are finite, yet much larger than the subunits
themselves. The current understanding of GFA derives from continuum based zero-
temperature models developed to address seemingly distinct phenomena occurring
in microscopically diverse systems, including 2D crystalline shells, chiral
membranes, self-twisting fibers, and multi-layer stacks of curved sheets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, GFA has been studied as a seemingly atypical
phenomenon appearing in distinct&lt;br/&gt;systems. The broad objective of this
project is to advance a unified theoretical perspective on GFA, capable of
classifying and predicting behavior of microscopically distinct systems
according to common mechanisms and emergent outcomes. Project research addresses
two key and unmet challenges. First, how is the accumulation of frustration at
the mesoscale controlled by the microscopic properties of the subunits, such as
ill-fitting shapes and interactions, and how do these properties determine the
escape size, the maximum size beyond which frustrated assemblies are driven to
unlimited bulk states? This will be addressed through the analytical and
computational study of generic classes of “ill-fitting'' particles, which
determine the map from particle shape and intra-assembly mechanics to the escape
size of assemblies. Second, for a given frustration of mesoscale order, what
role do thermal fluctuations play in setting the self-limiting size and shape of
GFA, and how does finite temperature control phase boundaries between dispersed,
self-limiting, and bulk escaped states? This challenge will be addressed through
the study of a minimal model for GFA that will establish the statistical
mechanical foundation through its the finite-temperature
description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While geometric frustration is a broad theme
in condensed matter, it has heretofore been appreciated in bulk systems how its
emergent properties derive from extensive arrays of defects required in infinite
systems. The physics of GFA introduces previously unexplored aspects of
frustration, particularly associated with boundary degrees of freedom of finite
domains and emergent length scales associated with competing mechanisms of
frustration escape in soft systems. In so far that it has been studied, GFA has
been approached as a largely isolated phenomenon appearing in microscopically
distinct systems. This research will advance a unified framework for
understanding the emergent physics GFA across these distinct systems. Scientific
impacts of this research are further advanced through collaborations between PI
with experimentalists studying both existing GFA systems as well as those
targeting “GFA by design".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.