* 2028613
* Exploring cognition with multiple rewards:  A new dimension into the cognitive ecology of pollination
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Felicity Muth, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 686,176.00

Animals use multiple pieces of information from their environments to make
decisions such as where to search for food, or which option is the best choice.
How animals learn about available options has traditionally been studied in
relation to a single reward (such as a particular food item). However, animals
including humans often have to make decisions that vary in multiple types of
reward. The research from this grant will determine how animals make these more
complex types of decisions. To do this, bumblebees will be used: these bees
visit a wide variety of flower types and in doing so learn to visit the most
highly rewarding ones. The majority of research has focused on how bees learn
and make decisions based on a single reward from flowers (nectar), despite the
fact that bees collect multiple types of reward (the most common being nectar
and pollen). This research will increase our knowledge of bumblebee foraging,
which is particularly timely given recent bee declines. It will also more
broadly inform our understanding of how animals, including humans, make complex
decisions. The grant will support a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student
and undergraduate researchers. The research will be presented at national and
international conferences, as well as to the public through a number of outreach
events. Finally, 1-2 high school students per year will work alongside graduate
students on research projects, with the aim of encouraging students from diverse
backgrounds to pursue careers in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address how multiple rewards affect cognition (learning, memory and
decision-making), in three objectives. 1) It will be determined how learning is
affected by multiple rewards through establishing how single vs. multiple
rewards (nectar and pollen) affect how well a stimulus is learned, and the
timing of reinforcement. 2) It will be determined how animals make decisions
when choosing between options with multiple rewards, through addressing how bees
make decisions between flowers that vary in nectar and pollen quality. For this
objective it will also be determined whether absolute or comparative judgement
is used. 3) It will be determined how bees’ motivational state affects their
memory of flowers with multiple rewards, by addressing whether motivational
state when learning and remembering affects memory of reward or stimulus
quality. All objectives will be carried out using lab- and greenhouse-based
experiments with artificial flowers and commercial bumblebee
colonies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.