* 2028818
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Scaling Secure Serverless Computing on Heterogeneous Datacenters
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Michael Swift, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 89,832.00

Cloud computing has been a dominant computing paradigm that enables many
important computing capabilities including large-scale (big) data processing,
artificial intelligence, and scientific discoveries. A recent evolution of cloud
computing includes the move to serverless computing, which simplifies the
deployment of computation while enabling better scaling and higher resource
utilization. Meanwhile, datacenters, the backbone of cloud computing,
increasingly include heterogeneous compute and memory resources. The move toward
serverless computing and heterogeneous architecture of datacenters produces a
gap that unless addressed, results in inefficient use of resources. The project
seeks to address this gap in order to enable new applications and new
functionalities to be provided in the cloud, at lower cost and higher security,
providing platforms for the advancement of science, engineering, and commerce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future datacenters will consist of heterogeneous compute
and memory. Applications in the cloud are increasingly varied in their
requirements, such as degree and granularity of parallelism; memory latency,
capacity, and bandwidth requirements; and security and privacy requirements.
This project investigates serverless computing as a promising programming model
for heterogeneous platforms. Serverless platforms decouple system management
from application execution: applications provide functions that manipulate data,
and leave it to the platform to determine when the function should run, with
what input data, and on what physical machine. Current platforms, such as AWS
Lambda, Google Compute Functions or Azure Functions do not fully implement this
vision, as they do not expose heterogeneous resources nor manage all resources
automatically. This project explores novel abstractions for compute that extend
serverless functions to better leverage unique hardware characteristics, and for
memory to allow more automated leveraging of workload characteristics such as
locality and compute intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.