* 2028625
* RAPID: Design, Fabrication, and Testing a Prototype of Heatable Face Mask for Preventing Respiratory Diseases Contracted through Airborne
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Vesselin Shanov, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2022
* USD 239,990.00

Currently, there is a significant shortage of Personal Protective Equipment,
particularly face masks, due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. The
statistic shows that one COVID-19 patient consumes on average 17 face masks per
day worn by the medical personnel. The pandemic is also affecting personnel in
military and correction facilities. The post COVID-19 forecast describes that
the face masks will be required long after the infection and death toll curve is
flattened and declines. Wearing face masks will become a new norm for a long
period of time at workplaces, shopping centers, and public events.
Simultaneously, with the huge demand, face mask prices are increasing
dramatically. This project is targeting the design and fabrication of a
prototype of heatable and reusable face mask that can kill viruses caught on the
mask surfaces thus preventing their penetration within the human respiratory
system. This is achieved through resistive heating above the virus lethal
temperature. A thin and breathable hater film made of engineered carbon
nanomaterials will be used, which is porous and can be retrofitted or placed on
the outer surface of any commercial face mask. This heatable filter is powered
by a portable battery or a cell phone and is thermally insulated from facial
skin. The mask can be energized when worn by the user or in storage to disinfect
it. Faculties with diverse background as well as undergraduate and graduate
students, and eventually some industries, will be involved in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the proposal is to fabricate and
test a heatable and porous carbon nanotube air filter incorporated into a
commercially available N95 respirator or other face masks that are suitable for
healthcare workers dealing with pathogens. The Joule heating is generated by a
thin film consisting of a few layers of carbon nanotube sheet drawn from
vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays, however other carbon nanotube sheet
materials like Bucky paper can be also employed. The performance temperature
directly on the surface of the porous carbon nanotube heater is designed not to
exceed 85 °C, which will be enough to inactivate SARS-CoV-2. The selected
breathable insulating layers will attenuate this temperature down to the
harmless 37 °C when wearing the heated mask. A second mode of the mask operation
is proposed here when the protective equipment after use is activated by heating
for 30 seconds which will disinfect the stored mask for reuse. The objective of
this proposal will be achieved by pursuing the following aims: (a) design and
fabricate a breathable carbon nanotube heater that is flexible and requires low
voltage for powering via a portable battery or cell phone; (b) integrate the
porous carbon nanotube heater into commercial masks; (c) test the air flow rate
and the effectiveness of the mask to inactivate virus surrogates, and its safety
to be worn. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is seen in the merging
of a porous carbon nanotube heater with a conventional face mask, thus
converting it to a reusable Personal Protective Equipment, which is proposed
here for the first time. This mask does not have an alternative among other
commercial face protective equipment. The broader impact of this proposal can be
found in the multipurpose use of the invented face mask, which is expected to be
beneficial not only for healthcare providers, but also for military personnel
exposed to biological weapons, as well as for the general public preventing
viruses causing COVID-19. Faculties with diverse background as well as
undergraduate and graduate students, and eventually some industries, will be
involved in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.