* 2028773
* Photonic Moire Nanostructures for Scalable Fabrication of Quantum Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Scalable manufacturing procedures that can generate nanoscale patterns with no
natural geometric analog are useful in the formation of nanostructured device
structures. Ultrathin nanostructures (one thousandth the diameter of a human
hair) composed of metallic building units can control the flow of light in new
ways and transform modern bulky devices. Such surfaces will accelerate progress
in fabricating new materials and the emergence of domestic industries involving
quantum communication, enhanced light collection for solar cells, and compact
light emitters for optical circuits. Historically, the creation of complex
nanostructured designs has required precise, slow-production tools that are
expensive and time consuming. This research will explore highly reproducible and
broadly flexible methods to form surfaces with unconventional geometries for
light manipulation from simple and accessible lithography tools. By
incorporating the expertise of materials science engineers and computational
scientists, this research expands our nation’s leadership in scalable
manufacturing processes critical for quantum information processing and anti-
counterfeiting for national security. This work will also increase scientific
literacy through a combination of hands-on demonstrations to under-represented
communities and widely available video tutorials depicting the techniques used
in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superimposing periodic arrays at specific
rotational offsets produce interference patterns known as moiré patterns.
Depending on the offset angle, the moiré pattern may be highly symmetric or
aperiodic. Stacking two layers of 2D atomic materials at a “magic angle” has
resulted in electronic moiré potentials that show unexpected physical properties
including superconductivity and topological excitonic states. This project
develops scalable nanofabrication methods to generate large-area photonic moiré
nanostructures by building on moiré nanolithography. Although periodic
nanostructures can be fabricated by techniques such as nanoimprinting and laser
interference lithography, the patterns are typically limited to arrays with a
single repeating unit. With multiple exposures and a library of periodic masks,
however, moiré nanolithography can drastically expand the number of symmetries
beyond those realized by stacking 2D atomic materials. Pattern formation,
transfer, and processing will be optimized to investigate photonic properties
that may only be realized by nanoarchitectures organized into super-symmetries.
One application will focus on the nanomanufacturing of photonic structures that
may support topological states or that can be coupled to quantum emitters for
unprecedented light-matter interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.