* 2028860
* Using Tardigrades and Other Animals to Investigate Adaptations to Extreme Stresses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Robert Goldstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,035,111.00

The main scientific goal of this project is to discover how certain living
organisms can survive some remarkably extreme conditions. Tardigrades are a
group of microscopic, eight-legged animals that can survive being dried out,
exposed to extreme levels of radiation, or exposed to the vacuum of space.
Because some essential biological molecules are damaged by such conditions, to
survive and recover from these extreme conditions tardigrades must harbor
exceptional protective mechanisms, which are only partially understood and will
be investigated in this project. Identifying such mechanisms can suggest
possible long-term routes to protecting other fragile biological materials
including important biomedical products that have very short shelf lives.
Several graduate and undergraduate students and a post-doctoral fellow will be
involved in the research. The project will also leverage researchers' abilities
with microscopic organisms and microscopes in a program to build low cost,
tablet-based microscopes for elementary schools in high-poverty regions.
Workshops will be held to train teachers how to build these microscopes and
develop lesson plans to incorporate microscope use in their classrooms, and the
impacts of this program will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tardigrades are
among the few animal groups, including certain nematodes, arthropods, and
rotifers, that can survive desiccation with loss of nearly all intracellular
water. Furthermore, tardigrades tolerate other stresses that some of these other
groups do not survive. The goals of this project are to identify new protectants
made by tardigrades, understand how some strong protectants work in living
organisms, and begin to understand the evolutionary origins of animal
protectants. Genetic and molecular studies will be used to identify molecules
that contribute to tolerance to desiccation, freezing, oxidative stress, and
ionizing radiation, and the mechanisms by which some strong protectants work
will be studied. Results from this research have the potential to identify
protectant molecules that may be useful for biomedical purposes. The project
will also place inexpensive microscopes in elementary schools in high-poverty
regions of North Carolina and in other states. In pilot efforts, more than 500
low-cost microscopes have been built, mostly for North Carolina public
elementary schools, in teacher workshops held in schools, museums, and at an
annual teachers’ conference. This project builds on lessons learned in the pilot
efforts, expanding the project by running additional workshops, by training
other scientists to run similar workshops in other parts of the country, and by
collaboratively assessing key outcomes of the workshops. In addition, the
project involves training for one post-doctoral fellow, graduate students, and
undergraduate summer researchers, thereby contributing to STEM career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.