* 2028519
* Understanding SNX-BAR protein structure and function in yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Chi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 730,912.00

Autophagy is the cellular process of removing aged or damaged components from
the cell during routine cellular maintenance or during times of environmental
stress such as starvation. The recycled by-products of autophagy can also be
used to sustain critical metabolism for cell survival. Autophagy is conserved
from yeast to humans and must be tightly controlled to prevent biological
miscues that can result in aberrant cellular growth or death. The sorting nexins
are a family of proteins that have been directly implicated in many aspects of
autophagy, however the mechanism of their action there is poorly understood.
This Project seeks to determine the regulatory elements that govern sorting
nexin function during autophagy by determining the atomic structure and
analyzing the function of a newly discovered sorting nexin. The Project will
also provide graduate and undergraduate students an opportunity for training in
biophysical and biochemical research. The Project will have an impact outside
the laboratory by improving undergraduate curriculum through the development of
novel 3D printing and Virtual Reality (VR) inquiry-based learning modules. In
addition, the Project will create a course based undergraduate experience (CURE)
centered on macromolecular structure and function. Overall, the broader impact
will give scientists-in-training, including those from backgrounds
underrepresented in STEM, an opportunity to enhance their scientific
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sorting nexins (SNXs) constitute a diverse
family of molecules that play varied roles in membrane trafficking, cell
signaling, membrane remodeling and organelle motility. The SNX-BAR subfamily of
the sorting proteins are typically thought to function in endosome sorting, but
recently several have been shown to participate in autophagosome biogenesis.
However, the mechanism of their role in autophagy is unclear. Prevailing models
indicate that an evolutionarily conserved Phox-Homology (PX) domain, a feature
common in all sorting nexins, binds specifically to phosphatidylinositol 3-
phosphate (PI3P), the major lipid moiety of the endosome, to drive SNX-BAR
function. The goal of this research is to understand the structure and function
of a previously uncharacterized yeast SNX-BAR protein termed Vps501 and its
interaction with the SEA complex that is involved in autophagy. Preliminary data
suggests that Vps501 demonstrates a unique specificity for binding lipids and
requires conformational changes to uniquely interact with the vacuole membrane.
This Project will use a combination of biochemical, genetic and structural
biology experiments to accomplish its goal. The Project will connect patterns of
lipid specificity and structural characteristics in SNX-BAR proteins, while
providing a new paradigm for understanding the relationship between the endo-
vacuolar system and autophagy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.