* 2028849
* Partial Support of the Condensed Matter and Materials Research Committee
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project provides partial, 3-year support
for the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s (National
Academies’) Condensed Matter and Materials Research Committee (CMMRC). The CMMRC
is a multidisciplinary group, with membership drawn from universities, industry,
and government laboratories. It provides expertise to the National Academies and
support for the condensed matter and materials research communities. Among the
activities that the CMMRC engages in are the organizing of topical workshops on
frontier areas of materials/condensed matter research, and the preparation and
distribution of written summaries of those proceedings. Through its semi-annual
meetings and community outreach, the CMMRC provides opportunities for meaningful
engagement among members of the community and the agencies that support research
in these fields. Finally, it participates in the development of National
Academies’ projects that are of benefit to the condensed matter and materials
research communities, and assists in providing long-term stewardship of National
Academies’ reports that impact these fields, including the materials research
decadal survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This
project provides partial, 3-year support for the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine’s (“National Academies”) Condensed Matter and Materials
Research Committee (CMMRC). The CMMRC is a multidisciplinary group with
membership drawn from universities, industry, and government laboratories. The
areas of expertise represented on the committee are intended to cover the
breadth of the condensed matter and materials research fields.
&lt;br/&gt;CMMRC’s roles within the condensed matter and materials research
communities are to serve as a conduit for interactions between these communities
and the federal government, including the agencies that support this research,
and to monitor the health of and important new developments in these fields.
Among the mechanisms that CMMRC has used and proposes to continue to use to
fulfill its charge are (1) working with sponsoring agencies to initiate and
oversee annual workshops that focus on frontier areas of research, and drafting
workshop proceedings that summarize the presentations and ensuing discussions;
(2) working within the National Academies to develop other special forums such
as meetings of experts, and report-generating studies that relate to condensed
matter and materials research, where needed; (3) conducting two face-to-face
meetings each year that permit engagement among members of the condensed matter
and materials research communities and representatives of agencies that support
these fields; (4) providing long-term stewardship of reports that CMMRC helped
to develop and/or that impact the condensed matter and materials research
communities; (5) interacting with the professional societies and FACA committees
for condensed matter and materials research; and (6) serving as a resource and
providing expert advice to other standing committees and boards in the
development of National Academies’ activities that impact the condensed matter
and materials research fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.