* 2028136
* RAPID Collaborative proposal: Spatial dynamics of COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* John Drake, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 73,034.00

This project will develop a set of mathematical models of the spread of SARS-
CoV-2, the cause of COVID-19. The 2019-2020 global corona virus pandemic is
ongoing and poses an unprecedented challenge to the normal movement of people
within and between countries. The models developed by this research will provide
the means to determine how the risk of transmission varies over time between
specific locations and can be combined with other data sources to help determine
the primary routes of transmission and the actions that are successful in
slowing or halting the spread. These methods are designed to provide initial
models with limited data, while allowing for the integration of more robust
datasets as they become available. The proposed project will produce information
directly applicable to managing the geographic spread of SARS-CoV-2, will inform
CDC decisions and responses to the pandemic, and will provide a way to assess
changes to importation risk in close to real-time. In addition,the proposed
project will contribute to the training of a graduate student and an
undergraduate student.

Stochastic spatial models provide the means for determining the time-varying
risk of pathogen transmission between specific locations. This project will
develop extensions of these models that will be more effective at analyzing and
forecasting spatial spread of emerging disease. The project will develop a
spatial model that incorporates time-varying cases in each location, including a
reliable method for parameterization. It will use those models to estimate the
effects of travel restrictions and quarantines on the spread globally and within
the U.S. By closely studying the spread at the source of the outbreak it will
assess how travel patterns and interventions altered the pandemic trajectory.
The models will also assist in identifying areas at greatest risk of importation
of new cases when local transmission is controlled. These aims will be
accomplished by using publicly available data sources and compiling new
information on the timeline of interventions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.