* 2028426
* SaTC: EDU: JROTC-CS Project Impact Study
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Leigh DeLyser, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 12/31/2024
* USD 399,203.00

Cybersecurity talent is critically needed across the U.S. to ensure the
protection of data related to &lt;br/&gt;defense, labor workforce, healthcare,
financial ecosystem, and more. This directly aligns with part of the National
Science Foundation’s Strategic Plan "to advance the national health, prosperity,
and welfare; to secure the national defense; and for other purposes". To address
the need for more cybersecurity professionals, CSforALL (New York City
Foundation for Computer Science Education) has launched a privately-funded
demonstration project to include cybersecurity as a part of courses that Junior
Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) students take in high school. The project
now proposed aligns the ongoing demonstration project with rigorous research to
investigate the impacts of the JROTC computer science (JROTC-CS) program on
student and institutional outcomes for cybersecurity and computer science
education. The project will specifically examine the impact of the JROTC-CS
program across varying contexts, such as race/ethnicity, gender, socio-economic
status, access to broadband, and geographic location. The results will inform
adaptation of the program’s design and implementation to ensure that the program
provides equitable opportunities to students to learn computer science and
cybersecurity. The outcome of this study will include new instruments for the
collection of data to measure the impact of a cybersecurity education experience
on high school students. It will also contribute to our understanding of how
these education experiences impact academic achievement and interest in pursuing
additional courses and careers in cybersecurity and how to improve cybersecurity
education in high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year impact study
will address two overarching research questions. First, it will examine the ways
in which the JROTC-CS experience impacts the cognitive (e.g. knowledge and
skills) and non-cognitive (e.g. social and emotional behaviors) development of
JROTC cadets. Second, it will examine the ways in which the JROTC-CS experience
impacts the school curriculum program in Computer Science and Cybersecurity. For
example, does the JROTC-CS program lead to an increase in: the number of courses
in computer science and cybersecurity that are offered, awareness of inequities
in these courses, additional professional development experiences for teachers,
or additional students at the schools who are engaged in computer science and
cybersecurity? Aligning the current JROTC-CS demonstration project with research
on multiple and confounding factors will provide evidence for ensuring a high-
quality improvement science model that improves implementation of the project as
it scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.