* 2028464
* Collaborative Research: Presence, Persistence, and Inactivation of  Vesicle-Cloaked Rotavirus or Norovirus Clusters in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Danmeng Shuai, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 220,000.00

Rotavirus and norovirus are major causes of waterborne diseases worldwide. In
2018 it was discovered that both of these enteric viruses are often found in
small fluid-filled sacs called vesicles. These vesicle virus clusters are widely
found in stool and have been detected in wastewater. Rotavirus and norovirus
vesicles are more persistent, infectious, and resistant to disinfection compared
to non-vesicle viral particles. In spite of these concerning findings,
relatively limited research on the environmental behavior and fate of enteric
virus vesicles has been performed to date. The goal of this project is to
address this knowledge gap on rotavirus and norovirus vesicles in wastewater and
natural aquatic systems. To achieve this goal, the team will (i) identify and
quantify rotavirus and norovirus vesicles in wastewater, (ii) investigate their
stability and infectivity in model natural water and wastewater systems, and
(iii) evaluate their inactivation under exposure to sunlight. Successful
completion of this project will result in new knowledge on the distribution,
persistence, infectivity, and inactivation of enteric virus vesicles in
wastewater and natural aquatic systems. Further benefits to society will be
achieved through student education, training, and outreach integrating project
findings into course modules. The diversity of the Nationâ€™s STEM workforce will
be increased through the recruitment and mentoring of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent discovery of vesicle-cloaked clusters of
rotovirus and norovirus particles in stool and wastewater presents a challenge
to our current understanding of the environmental fate and health risks of
waterborne viruses. Although rotovirus and norovirus vesicles are more
infectious and are more resistant to disinfection than their constituent free
viral particles, there is very limited data and mechanistic understanding of
their fate, transport, transmission, attenuation, and inactivation in wastewater
and natural aquatic systems. The goal of this research is to address these
knowledge gaps by investigating the environmental fate and infectivity of
rotovirus and norovirus vesicles. To achieve this goal, the research team will
carry out an integrated experimental program organized around three specific
tasks. In Task 1, experiments will focus on the recovery, characterization, and
quantification of rotavirus/norovirus vesicles in hospital and municipal
wastewater using reverse-transcription droplet digital PCR (RT-ddPCR). In Task
II, the PIs will characterize the stability and infectivity of
rotavirus/norovirus vesicles in representative water matrices using a suite of
analytical tools and assays including dynamic light scattering (DLS),
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and integrated cell culture-reverse
transcription quantitative PCR (ICC-RT-qPCR). In Task III, the PIs will
investigate the kinetics and mechanisms of inactivation of rotavirus/norovirus
vesicles under sunlight exposure using similar assays as in Task II. Successful
completion of this project will lead to the development of new fundamental
knowledge on the environmental fate and infectivity of enteric virus vesicles in
wastewater and natural aquatic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.