* 2028411
* RAPID: COVID-19-Net: Integrating Health, Pathogen and Environmental Data into a Knowledge Graph for Case Tracking, Analysis, and Forecasting
* TIP,ITE
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Peter Rose, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 10/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This COVID-19 RAPID research program could help answer several key questions
about the pandemic, such as “What characteristics are in common among outbreaks
in the US and other locations?”, “How different are viral strains, and how these
differences affect transmission in different regions?”, or “How similar or
different the patterns of the coronavirus infection spread and its impacts are
compared to previous pandemics?” The multitude of diverse COVID-19-related data
streams, which are rapidly made available online with little coordination or
reliance on common standards, creates enormous challenges for researchers trying
to answer such questions today, and analyze and predict patterns of the pandemic
in its cross-disciplinary complexity. This project will do so by linking diverse
information about pathogens, health data, and environmental indicators into a
common knowledge graph, to let researchers trace the virus in different
geographic conditions and provide input into effective intervention policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core technical component of the project is a COVID-19
knowledge graph, which represents linked facts about different aspects of the
pandemic, from scientific literature and large data collections and models. The
project will develop a novel methodology for creating a knowledge graph from
disparate sources describing pathogens, population health, environmental
conditions, and critical infrastructure components. The graph will be created in
coordination with several partner projects working on the NSF Open Knowledge
Network. This will ensure that additional knowledge domains can be integrated to
support cross-disciplinary analysis. The results of the collaborative knowledge
network development will be published as a continuously updated online dashboard
for the general public and a collection of Jupyter Notebooks, open source
software to enable interactive computing, to help researchers explore various
aspects of the knowledge graph and improve our understanding of how the virus is
spread and what intervention strategies are potentially most
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.