* 2028506
* RAPID: Improving Capabilities to Measure the Robustness of Critical Communications Infrastructure: A Case Study of COVID-19 Quarantine-Induced Internet Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Ka Pui Mok, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2020
* USD 137,578.00

In the crisis of the CoVID-19 pandemic, the Internet is facing unprecedented
surges of traffic induced by the use of cloud-based telecommuting and remote
education tools for real-time video meetings and online classes. However,
existing network throughput measurement (speed test) platforms are often not
representative of the performance of cloud-based applications due to the
location of test servers. Measuring the performance of interconnections between
cloud platforms and Internet Service Providers (cloud-ISP links) is a critical
missing piece to understanding user-experienced performance of cloud-based
videoconferencing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design
and deploy novel experiments to measure network congestion of cloud-ISP links,
tracking evolution of performance degradations during mandatory sheltering-in-
place orders, and as large segments of the U.S. work force transition back to
their workplaces. This scientific measurement project will tackle three
challenges: 1) strategic selection of test servers within residential access and
transit ISPs, based on topology measurements and analytics, 2) scientific
characterization of the algorithms and behavior of speed tests, and 3) correct
interpretation measurement results. The experiments will leverage speed test
servers deployed by various commercial platforms (e.g., Ookla) as vantage points
to conduct throughput measurements from cloud platforms hosting high-bandwidth
applications. Operationalizing this experiment will provide longitudinal data to
analyze performance degradation of cloud-ISP
interconnections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable studying the
performance and reliability of critical Internet infrastructures in the U.S.
during this pandemic, by collecting and sharing data that sheds light on the
quality of experience of cloud-based telework applications. Visualized data will
be generated to provide longitudinal views of network performance, and identify
performance degradations at fine granularity, geographically and topologically.
The resulting tools and methods will help guide future infrastructure
improvements, and advance the ability to monitor an increasing critical
communications ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detail information and the data
of this project is available at
https://webspeedtest.caida.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.