* 2028580
* EAGER: Transforming Flexible Device Manufacturing by Bottom-up Growth of Nanocarbons Directly on Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Mostafa Bedewy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2023
* USD 244,748.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award focuses on
revealing the fundamental principles underlying laser-induced nanocarbon
formation, LINC, which is a new nanomanufacturing process capable of rapidly
growing a diverse set of nanostructured carbon materials directly on polymers.
This approach enables patterning of functional nanocarbons that are needed for a
number of emerging applications in healthcare, biomedical, automotive, consumer
electronics, and defense. This project enables customization of the nanocarbon
type with precise spatial distribution to rapidly create optimized structures
for different devices on the same substrate without the need for multiple inks
and successive printing steps. Instead of top-down deposition or printing of
nanocarbons such as graphene and nanotubes/nanofibers from ink, this research
focuses on bottom-up thermochemical synthesis of different nanocarbons from
polymers, which act as the carbon source under highly localized laser heating.
This project impacts a multibillion-dollar market for flexible electronics where
a major challenge is the integration of multiple functionalities, such as
sensing, energy storage and circuits onto the same flexible substrate. LINC is a
facile, scalable pathway to manufacturing of conformal/wearable and other
devices, which benefits US economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
EAGER project is to show a proof-of-concept for scalable direct patterning of
different nanocarbons with tailored morphologies and properties on flexible
substrates based on dynamic laser processing of polymers. The laser-induced
nanocarbon (LINC) method requires an understanding of the mechanisms and
kinetics of thermochemical carbonization of polymers and of the tunability of
the electrical properties of grown nanocarbons for sensing and other
functionalities. Hence, this project generates new knowledge by elucidating the
influence of the spatiotemporal evolution of optical energy (laser) flux and the
ensuing photothermal heating on the content of graphitic carbon as well as on
the transition between forming isotropic porous morphology and aligned
filamentary structures. As a result, this project constructs the causal relation
between gradients of laser energy density and the temperature-dependent
multiphysics phenomena of absorption, heat transfer, splashing dynamics, phase
transitions and chemical transformations, which dictate the formation of
different nanocarbons such as graphene, carbon nanofibers, and carbon nanotubes.
In addition to explaining the mechanisms of alignment and self-organization
among carbon nanofilaments, the project tests the fabrication and performance of
kirigami-based strain sensors directly on polyimide films. Moreover, the
scalability of this new approach is tested by continuous manufacturing of strain
sensors based on combining fast fiber laser scanning using a galvo system with
roll-to-roll processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.