* 2028733
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Fixpoint: an operating system and architecture for data-centric computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* David Mazieres, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 125,000.00

Computer operating systems run programs that read input data and produce output
data. However, today's operating systems generally don't keep track of enough
information to make sure that the process of generating a given piece of data
can be reproduced, especially when the program that produced it may have
considered input that came over the network, from a mutable file on disk, or
from a non-deterministic phenomenon such as thread scheduling. This project will
design a new kind of operating system, called Fixpoint, that explicitly
represents and names computations on data: each invocation of a program, in
terms of its minimal data-dependencies, in a reproducible content-addressed
manner. If successful, the project will have a significant impact on how
computer systems are used every day. By making all computation reproducible by
default and trivially shareable, Fixpoint can improve scientific reproducibility
and as a consequence increase the public's confidence in scientific results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of this project is that by changing the way
software is represented, substantial benefits can be unlocked in the areas of
scalability, security, efficiency, performance, and reproducibility. Fixpoint's
operating-system-visible dataflow will give it an ability to take advantage of
massive transient parallelism, which means that parallel tasks that effectively
require batch-processing today -- submitting jobs to servers and waiting hours
-- will become near real-time. This will change the kinds of operations that
people expect to do interactively at a computer. Errors discovered in data, even
after the fact, can be backed out of computations that depend on them, similar
to recalculating a spreadsheet today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.