* 2028861
* PPoSS: Planning: A Cross-Layer Approach to Accelerate Large-Scale Graph Computations on Distributed Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Josep Torrellas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

This work develops a set of new technologies in parallel and distributed
algorithms, high-performance numerical methods, compilers, and computer
architecture. These technologies accelerate large-scale graph computations on
heterogeneous distributed computers. Graph computations are used in many
domains, including computational-biology applications, road and network traffic
management, product recommendation, and path-planning problems in robotics. The
work uses a new approach to solving graph computations that relies on
approximation techniques, which allow the computation to be more parallel
without hurting correctness. Solving large-scale graph problems delivers
advances in multiple scientific domains, as well as in societal issues. The work
tackles the problem in a cross-layer manner, focusing on the synergies between
algorithms, numerics, compilers, and computer architecture. Optimizing in this
way exposes major opportunities. This work is done in collaboration with
industrial partners, including IBM, a leading developer of high-end computer
systems on which graph problems run. The work also includes an effort to revamp
the course offerings in the Computer Science Department at the University of
Illinois. In particular, it creates multidisciplinary courses in the general
area of graph-related problems, parallel computing, and related technologies. It
also provides research opportunities to undergraduates and under-represented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphs are one of todayâ€™s most important
application domains. As the compute and storage needs of individual graph
problems dramatically increase, there is a need to find solutions to these
problems that are both scalable and broadly applicable. This work performs a
cross-layer effort to accelerate large-scale graph computations on distributed
machines. In the algorithms area, the work investigates efficient parallel graph
algorithms by leveraging approximation, continuous optimization techniques such
as linear programming, and the use of sparsification methods. Different models
of parallel computation are examined. In the numerics area, this work brings
these algorithms to the state of practice by developing distributed-memory
libraries of sparse-matrix computations for approximate graph algorithms. These
libraries include techniques in graph algorithms, sparse linear solvers, and
numerical optimization. In the compiler area, the work develops novel techniques
for approximate computation of graph applications, as well as automated
verification approaches to guarantee their correctness. In the computer
architecture area, the work speeds-up the resulting sparse-matrix computations
with novel hardware. Specifically, hardware modules in the processors, memory
hierarchies, and network interfaces support a new data type that operates on
groups of graph vertices at a time. Also, heterogeneous nodes include hardware
accelerators of sparse computations that speed-up these applications multiple
times. Overall, the impact of this work will be advancing many graph
applications, helping scientific discoveries and improving social
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.