* 2028109
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Designing an Educational Intervention to Address Intuitive Misconceptions about COVID-19
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* John Coley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,715.00

Misconceptions about the transmission of COVID-19 can lead to noncompliance with
preventive public health recommendations. The first goal of this project, led by
researchers at Boston University and Northeastern University, is to understand
the deeper conceptual nature of these biological misconceptions. The research
will explore whether these ideas are specific to COVID-19 or whether they
reflect intuitive reasoning patterns of reasoning about biological phenomena
more generally, and how prevalent they are in early elementary school children.
A further focus of this research will be on caregivers and teachers–adults who
are important sources of information to children. Prior NSF-funded research has
shown that misconceptions about biological phenomena emerge early in development
and can become entrenched. Therefore, the second major goal of this research is
the rapid design and testing of a pilot educational intervention that addresses
children’s and adults’ reasoning about COVID-19 and also incorporates more
general information about the causal mechanisms that underlie biological
contagion. The intervention will be modeled on earlier interventions by the
investigators that used animated narratives to teach complex biological concepts
successfully to children and adults. This RAPID award is made by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program in DRL, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act. ECR supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans possess
powerful intuitive explanatory and inferential tendencies that provide fast and
efficient – but sometimes fallible – guidelines for making sense of complex
phenomena in the biological world. Prior NSF-funded work has shown how these
tendencies–for example, intuitive teleological, essentialist, and
anthropocentric modes of reasoning–emerge early and act as filters on the
learning of biological information at all ages. Sometimes these intuitions are
consistent with formal biological reasoning and can be leveraged in the
classroom to support learning, but sometimes they are not and lead to systematic
and entrenched biological misconceptions across development. Information about
COVID-19 is no exception. In this project, the researchers will: (1) investigate
intuitive reasoning about the causal mechanisms of COVID-19 transmission and
infection–along with reasoning about illness more generally–among teachers and
caregivers of 1st - 2nd grade students; (2) conduct parallel investigations with
the 1st - 2nd grade students themselves; and (3) rapidly design and pilot test a
cognitively-informed educational intervention on COVID-19, and related
illnesses, for elementary children, caregivers, and teachers based on the
evidence that will be gleaned from these investigations. In order to understand
the influence on children of adults’ reasoning about COVID-19–and disease more
generally–this project will develop child and adult versions of a survey
instrument consisting of: (a) an open-ended interview on the causality,
treatment, and prevention of COVID-19; (b) a risky behavior detection task to
assess knowledge and beliefs about the risks of common behaviors; (c) a causal
knowledge assessment that asks more generally about the mechanisms of illness
transmission and infection. These measures will be administered via online
research. Insights gained from these measures will be quickly used to develop a
pilot intervention that will use an animated narrative video to supported
children's and adults’ mechanistic understanding of COVID-19 and related disease
transmission and prevention. Pre- and post-testing will determine the
effectiveness of this pilot intervention and lay the foundation for future
research and intervention. This research will shed light on children’s and
adults’ understandings about COVID-19, and the degree to which children’s ideas
are shaped by intuitive explanatory tendencies and that misconceptions can be
exacerbated by specific misinformation from caregivers and teachers. It will
also illuminate cognitively-informed ways to educate adults about complex
biological phenomena as a way of addressing misconceptions in the children with
whom they interact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.