* 2028370
* RAPID: How People Learn Rapidly: COVID-19 as a Crisis of Socioscientific Understanding and Educational Equity
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Elizabeth Davis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,744.00

The primary objective of this study is to document how people learn the science
of the COVID-19 pandemic in real time, how they activate this scientific
knowledge towards informed decision making, and how these processes change over
time. This study is intended to produce additional insights on how such learning
is shaped by equity concerns and contextual factors. For example, researchers
will document how the ways in which people learn the science of COVID-19 are
mediated by the sources of information they have access to and leverage, as well
as what supports them in doing so. The research will further document how people
leverage their understandings of COVID-19, alongside other forms of knowledge
and concerns in their decision-making. This study may serve a crucial role in
aiding the public understanding of where structural points of informational
failure might occur. It may also reveal where and how the public engages or
resists community action strategies to mitigate spread and suffering through
when, how and why they gather, share, and make sense of scientific data. This
RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter related to the
COVID-19 pandemic. This award is made by the AISL and ECR programs in the
Division of Research on Learning, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will draw
upon a conceptual framework of consequential learning and a methodological
framework of narrative inquiry. Sixty participants in Lansing, Michigan and
Seattle, Washington will participate over the course of one year in cyclical
interviews, focus group conversations and experience sampling approaches.
Documents and resources named and used by the participants in their learning
will be collected and analyzed. Attention will be paid to science learning in
the following areas as the primary focus: a) the science of SARS-CoV-2 and the
relationship between virus and disease, b) viral transmission, and c)
origination, replication and spread. A key focus will also be how people use
scientific data and evidence-based explanations when developing understandings
and making decisions with respect to the pandemic. This research is urgent and
timely because the COVID-19 pandemic is projected to occur in multiple waves
over approximately 18 months. Insights may produce basic understanding about
rapid science learning, policy strategies, school-based practices and resources
for use within current and future waves. Socioscientific crises differentially
impact people, with effects felt more significantly by vulnerable people. Thus,
this study will address the urgent call for investigation into factors and
experiences of low-income individuals and families who are trying to educate
themselves on continually changing data during an international health
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.