* 2028501
* IRNC: Core Improvement: TransPAC5: Multilateral Partnerships to Accelerate International Research and Experimentation
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Bu Lee, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,793,624.00

TransPAC5: Multilateral Partnerships to Accelerate International Research and
Experimentation builds on more than twenty years of collaboration in the Asia-
Pacific region to provide network capacity and services in support of US-Asia
science collaborations. TransPAC5 includes multilateral agreements and expanded
networking partnerships with regional teams and NRENs associated with 33
countries. Relationships will continue with the Asia Pacific Advanced Network
(APAN), the Trans-Eurasia Information Network (TEIN), and the Asia-Pacific Ring
(APR) collaboration. TransPAC5 will augment both the available APR capacity and
the APR membership with partners the Korea Research Environment Open Network
(KREONET), the KOrea advanced REsearch Network (KOREN), the University of
Hawaii, Australia's Academic and Research Network (AARNet), and European Nordic
REN, NORDUnet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TransPAC5 will advance knowledge and
understanding across a broad set of international research collaborations
through its support of both network capacity and services. The project doubles
the current transoceanic high-speed offerings of the APR and leverages the
unused capacity to formally offer pragmatic networking resources to the advanced
network experiment community, enabling transformative approaches to be tested in
production settings, not just test beds. The project supports large scale
international R&amp;E collaborations including high energy physics, astronomy,
and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.