* 2028026
* RAPID: Using Popular Media to Educate Youth About the Biology of Viruses and the Current COVID-19 Pandemic
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Patricia Wonch Hill, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear
Colleague letter related to the COVID-19 pandemic. This award is made by the
AISL program in the Division of Research on Learning, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. The project will
develop and research an integrated package of high-quality, widely accessible
media and other outreach materials designed to engage middle school youth,
educators, and libraries in learning about viruses in relation to COVID-19.
There is an immediate need to provide youth with accurate, engaging, and
accessible materials to help them understand the basic biology underlying the
COVID-19 pandemic, including the routes of COVID-19 transmission and mechanisms
to prevent its spread. This is particularly important for those without science
backgrounds or interests so that the rumors, hearsay, and gossip circulating
among youth can be replaced with research-based information. Since 2007, the
project team and partners have focused on developing and studying new ways of
educating youth and the public about biology, virology, and infectious disease.
The project will develop a web-accessible package of customizable graphics,
illustrated stories, and essays—all of which can be easily incorporated into
free-choice and directed on-line learning as well standards-based lesson plans
for Grades 6-8. These resources will be disseminated broadly and at no cost to
youth and educators of all kinds, including schools, libraries, museums, and
other established networks for formal and informal science education. The
project web package will be linked to multiple websites that serve as important
educational resources on science and virology for youth, the general public, and
educators. A prominent university press will publish and promote the illustrated
stories and support distribution of 7,000 free copies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will conduct research examining how richly-illustrated science
narratives impact youth understanding of and curiosity about science. The
research will help develop the foundation for better understanding how to
educate youth about COVID-19 (and future pandemics) while generating new
knowledge about effective methods for public science outreach during a major
unanticipated natural event. For formative evaluation, the project will use an
innovative rapid response feedback method. Youth will be invited to provide
timely, specific comments on the serialized stories through a curated portal. As
new excerpts are related online, different questions will be posed to youth who
are selected because of specific characteristics (e.g., low or high initial
science interest). These data will guide story development in real time and
provide a mechanism to gauge the story appeal, comprehensibility, and initial
impacts. The project will address two research questions: “How effective are
illustrated stories in having positive impacts among participants on COVID-19
knowledge, science identity, attitudes, and interest in science careers?” and
“How do story lines and characters have differential impacts on virus knowledge,
epidemiology, and youth attitudes towards science and science careers?” To
conduct this research, the project will conduct online surveys using adapted
items from prior research conducted by the project team. Additional items will
assess COVID-19 knowledge, attitudes, personal experiences with the virus, well-
being, and exposure to public health messaging about the virus. Research
findings will be shared widely to inform the field about new ways delivering
science education content during the advent of rapidly evolving global and
educational challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.