* 2028012
* RAPID: Dynamic Interactions between Human and Information in Complex Online Environments Responding to SARS-COV-2
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Lisa Platt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 82,041.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project contributes to fundamental
knowledge of risk, crisis communication and behavioral contagion in online
environments during a large-scale pandemic outbreak (COVID-19) in the U.S. This
project advances knowledge of how health and response agencies can better ensure
credible information predominates in social media by quantitatively
demonstrating the complex roles of social media in information diffusion during
the U.S. COVID-19 pandemic response. Findings will aid in understanding how to
reduce the risk of inappropriate behaviors (i.e. not practicing physical
distancing) and preventable deaths due to mis- or disinformation and tools
developed will enable time-critical tracking of the spreading of accurate and
inaccurate information. These findings will support NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science and to advance national health and well-being, especially
during mission-critical circumstances of major health
crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project studies information and human
response dynamics in communicating COVID-19 in an online environment, i.e.
Twitter. The research identifies key influencers and misinformation sources and
examines co-evolution in different information categories over time. Results
will help population health agencies and stakeholders better understand how the
strategic leveraging of credible information suppresses misinformation and can
moderate its adverse consequences. Further, the project reveals how incongruous
information may undermine community response goals. The research disentangles
the interactive influences of communications between public health agencies,
other governmental stakeholders, and the public by examining their social media
activities, sentiments, and concerned topics in dynamic information flow
networks. Findings will inform future risk communication strategies of virus
transmission and prevention. The researchers use system dynamic modeling to
investigate reference modes of COVID-19 specific communication. These techniques
assess temporal trajectories of credible information and misinformation
regarding epidemic-control communication, which in turn, informs the strategic
coordination of future risk communication of complex mass casualty events and
catastrophic health events such as virulent epidemics and global
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.