* 2028738
* Rapid: Collaborative Research: Using Data to Understand the Effects of Transportation on the Spread of COVID-19 as a Propagator and a Control Mechanism
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Philip Pare, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 75,485.00

The spread of COVID-19 has broad implications both for human health and
economies around the world. This Smart and Connected Communities project will
monitor the spread of COVID-19 by collecting real-time information on active
COVID-19 cases, understand how transportation has driven the spread of the
virus, and quantify how travel restrictions have limited the spread of the
virus. The data collection will gather and store real-time information on the
spread of COVID-19 and a timeline of travel restrictions for three sets of
communities. This data will then be employed to model how the virus propagates
between communities via transportation using various network-dependent epidemic
models. Finally, using the collected data and the calibrated epidemic models,
analysis will be conducted to understand how effective the different
modifications of the transportation network structure, such as travel
restrictions in each set of communities, are at slowing the spread of COVID-19,
while factoring in the economic effects. Understanding how the transportation
network between communities acts as a propagator of the virus, and how control
actions taken by local and national governments to limit or block travel within
and between regions slow the spread of the virus will provide the framework for
the development of mitigation strategies for the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as
other possible outbreaks in the future. These strategies will limit the loss of
human life and reduce the economic impacts of the virus. The methods developed
as a result of this work will also be beneficial in the future for battling
subsequent outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply network
modeling techniques to understand how different control actions on the
transportation network influence the spread of the virus between communities.
The understanding gained herein will inform decision makers during this and
future outbreaks as to which transportation-related mitigation strategies are
best to use in different situations and at what point in the outbreak to use
them in order to minimize both the spread of virus as well as the economic
impact. The research will draw on and contribute to wide-ranging and fundamental
results in statistical data analysis, mathematical modeling and analysis of
epidemic processes, mathematical programming, network analysis, and control
theory. The resulting study of problems will contribute to advancement of
mathematical modeling and analysis of infectious diseases, and mitigation
optimization algorithms and heuristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.