* 2028318
* Computational Modeling of the Soot Size Distribution in Turbulent Reacting Flows: Leveraging Data Science Tools to Rapidly Accelerate Physics-Based Model Development and Validation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Michael Mueller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 344,254.00

Soot is an undesirable by-product of combustion formed during incomplete fuel-
rich combustion of hydrocarbon fuels and has adverse effects on human health and
the environment. These adverse effects vary with particle size, so controlling
the distribution of soot particle sizes emitted from practical combustion
systems is of increasing interest. Unfortunately, even the basic qualitative
features of the soot size distribution in turbulent combustion are unknown. As a
result, computational capabilities do not currently exist for efficiently
predicting the soot size distribution in turbulent combustion. This project will
develop fundamental understanding of the evolution of the soot size distribution
in turbulent combustion using detailed, full-fidelity computational simulations,
accelerated using deep learning. This knowledge will then be leveraged to
develop a new computationally efficient modeling framework for predicting the
evolution of the soot size distribution in turbulent combustion applicable to
practical combustion systems. The new modeling framework will include a novel
statistical model for the soot size distribution, a fundamentally new approach
to capture the relatively slow chemistry of gaseous soot precursors, and a new
turbulent transport model. The new modeling framework will be ultimately
validated against experimental measurements. The software implementation of the
new modeling framework will also be made publicly available for use by other
researchers and in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational approaches for
predicting the soot size distribution in turbulent reacting flows are extremely
limited, generally restricted to oversimplified and inaccurate soot models yet
still computationally very expensive. While some limited evidence has suggested
that the soot size distribution may sometimes be unimodal in turbulent flames
and may preferentially generate very large soot particles, the influence of
turbulence on the soot size distribution is fundamentally poorly understood.
This project will develop a computationally efficient modeling framework for
predicting the evolution of the soot size distribution in turbulent combustion.
An Adaptive Sectional-Moment (ASM) model will be developed that combines a
coarse sectional method in one internal coordinate with an advanced moment
method in two internal coordinates within each section. ASM will be used to
conduct Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS), accelerated using a combination of
deep learning and data-derived manifolds, to provide unprecedented insights into
the influence of turbulence on the soot size distribution. These databases will
be further used to address two key modeling challenges in Large Eddy Simulation
(LES) relevant to the soot size distribution. The slow chemistry of Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) will be captured in an accurate yet consistent
manner though a new partially non-equilibrium manifold model, and new models for
the small-scale turbulent transport of soot will be developed utilizing physics-
based and data-based approaches. Ultimately, the new LES modeling framework with
ASM will be validated against the DNS databases and experimental measurements of
the soot size distribution in turbulent flames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.