* 2028774
* RAPID: A Probability-Based, National-Representative Survey of Americans Before, During, and After the Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 197,815.00

This project examines the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on American society
through a survey of adults who will have been surveyed before, during, and after
the pandemic. The study measures pandemic-related health experiences including
knowledge, behaviors, and experiences (e.g. exposure, contagion, testing), the
economic impacts of the pandemic containment measures, and the social and
psychological changes related to stress, anxiety, and psychological well-being
that have occurred. It analyzes the degree to which the social and psychological
outcomes are related directly to the pandemic’s health impacts and to the extent
which these are affected through the pandemic’s disruption of the economy. Then,
in turn it studies how the levels of stress as well as social and psychological
well-being affect health-related behaviors and health outcomes. This knowledge
helps inform, and possibly improves, efforts to mitigate the disruptions of the
current pandemic and leads to the development of better programs and responses
to future pandemics.

These research goals are achieved through a longitudinal and comparative design
incorporating baseline measurements from both NORC studies during earlier
periods of national turmoil and disruption and from recent, more normal times
based on NORC’s General Social Survey. Using NORC’s probability-based AmeriSpeak
Panel®, a nationally representative sample of 2,000 adults are interviewed
immediately and then re-interviewed twice in following months. The comparative
analysis also determines how experiences and outcomes vary across areas in the
United States and how experiences in the US compare to those in other countries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.