* 2028811
* RAPID: Decision-Making Processes in STEM Students during and after the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Andrea Ofori-Boadu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 199,979.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
supports RAPID projects when there is a severe urgency with regard to
availability of, or access to, data, facilities or specialized equipment,
including quick-response research on natural or anthropogenic disasters and
similar unanticipated events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The project at
North Carolina A&amp;T State University seeks to develop theories that explain
and predict decision making processes in students studying in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields during and after
pandemics. These theories will inform and transform the adaptation and
resiliency of Institutions of Higher Education during future global disasters.
Improved institutional resiliency will minimize disruptions to STEM student
functioning and performance, reduce attrition, and strengthen progression into
the STEM workforce. Undergraduate students are involved as researchers in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantive theories will be constructed to
explain and predict cognitive improvisation decision making processes in
undergraduate STEM students during pandemics. A constructivist grounded theory
approach with critical incident and symbolic interactionist emphasis will allow
the use of iterative and inductive processes of data collection with
simultaneous analysis and interpretation. Methodological triangulation will
involve primary data obtained through interviews, surveys, and academic
transcripts from STEM students, faculty, and administrators in six institutions.
The comparative and iterative synthesis of emergent codes will provide insights
into interactions existing among student characteristics, lived experiences,
cognitive improvisation decisions, and STEM performance during the COVID-19
pandemic. Substantive theories will inform and transform the adaptation and
resiliency of institutions of higher education during future global disasters.
Improved institutional resiliency will minimize disruptions to STEM performance,
reduce STEM attrition, and strengthen student progression into the STEM
workforce. Theories will also advance research and practice related to cognitive
decision-making processes in other contexts, particularly other high risk
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program in the Division of Human
Resource Development, Directorate of Education and Human Resources, using funds
from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.