* 2028740
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning:S3-IoT: Design and Deployment of Scalable, Secure, and Smart Mission-Critical IoT Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Fanxin Kong, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The growing capabilities of sensing, computing and communication devices are
leading to an explosion of Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructures. In the
meantime, advances in technologies such as autonomous systems and artificial
intelligence promise enormous economic and societal benefits. Naturally, it is
desirable to deploy these technologies in IoT infrastructures. However, such
deployments present daunting changes for increasingly scaled-up IoT
infrastructures in mission-critical applications such as medical, energy,
transportation, and industrial-automation systems. These challenges stem from
several major aspects in terms of scalability. First, the number of edge devices
can be enormous, often in the order of billions, which makes centralized
management infeasible. Second, there are multiple layers of heterogeneity. An
IoT system can consist of heterogeneous computing subsystems; each subsystem can
have heterogeneous computing devices; and each single device can be composed of
different kinds of computing components. Third, mission-critical applications
have stringent requirements in correctness, resilience, timeliness, security and
safety. It is difficult for a large-scale IoT system to satisfy these
requirements due to increasing opportunities for adversarial
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle these challenges, this project aims to
develop a cross-layer and full hardware/software stack solution, referred to as
the S3-IoT framework, for the design and deployment of scalable, secure, and
smart mission-critical IoT systems. The S3-IoT framework will span three
different computation layers, including data centers, gateways/aggregators, and
edge devices, and cover four research foci, i.e., resource management, security
and privacy, computer architecture/systems, and algorithms. In this planning
project, an initial version of the S3-IoT framework will be developed. The
S3-IoT framework will (i) leverage a layered structure - data centers,
gateways/aggregators, and edge devices to accommodate the huge number of edge
devices; (ii) develop cross-layer techniques to deal with the heterogeneity
among these layers; and (iii) propose hardware and software co-design approaches
that embrace the heterogeneity among computing components to improve the
performance of all components within an individual layer. The S3-IoT framework
will be evaluated by developing simulators with the layered structure as well as
a small scale, comprehensive experimental testbed. The success of this planning
project will lead to a convincing path to effective deployment of mission-
critical IoT systems and infrastructures, particularly in terms of improving
resilience to environmental uncertainties, system internal errors and faults,
and malicious attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.