* 2028635
* Bioengineering in Microgravity Workshop; International Space Station US National Laboratory Virtual Symposium
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Marcello Giulianotti, Center for the Advancement of Science in Space, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 11/30/2021
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
bioengineering in Space. The International Space Station US National Laboratory
will host a Virtual Symposium to strategically partner with approximately 50
diverse scientists, engineers, and clinicians. This collaboration will leverage
their translational expertise to accelerate the understanding of fundamental
science that could lead to biomedical breakthroughs by studying biological
phenomena in Low Earth Orbit. The goals of the Symposium are: 1) to leverage
translational expertise from scientists, engineers, and clinicians to accelerate
our understanding of how biomedical breakthroughs can be developed or tested in
space (low earth orbit); 2) produce a written document detailing the results of
the discussions. Specifically, this document will identify research areas and
findings to propel thought leadership of the low earth orbit environment, and
how this work could ultimately lead to clinical translation. This is work for
the betterment of humankind and could have significant benefits to the US
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to perform research in a microgravity
environment provides unprecedented opportunities for fundamental research. Under
the umbrella of Regenerative Medicine, four focus areas for the Symposium have
been identified: Stem cells; Biofabrication and 3D bioprinting;
Organoids/microphysiological systems; Artificial intelligence (AI) and Robotics.
Removing the effects of gravity has contributed significantly to the collective
fundamental knowledge of cellular behavior, cell-cell interactions, tissue
development and regeneration, as well as the aggregate interactions in the
context of a whole organism. Pioneering bioengineering experiments on the
International Space Station coupled with ground-based studies have demonstrated
that microgravity enables the study of novel features not attainable under unit
gravity conditions. These include changes to stem cell proliferation rates and
differentiation. Printing biological tissues in microgravity also promises
advantages in the use of lower-viscosity biomaterials or bioinks and the ability
to fabricate diaphanous, intricate structures. These processes are heavily
reliant on biomechanical and mechanobiological cues that are affected by the
gravitational field. In this way, the International Space Station provides an
unprecedented opportunity to advance fundamental research in biomechanics and
mechanobiology. The participants of this interdisciplinary workshop will be
tasked with determining and then publicly disseminating the roadmap for future
advances in microgravity bioengineering. The results will be critical for
funders that currently sponsor bioengineering research which relies on reduced
microgravity environments. The results will enable these agencies and the
researchers they support to appropriately plan for future programs and
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.