* 2028091
* RAPID: Employer and Employee Behaviors, Experiences,  and Perceptions of the Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Shanthi Nataraj, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,591.00

This research project will collect a large, high-frequency, longitudinal data
set to investigate the effects of COVID-19 on labor market outcomes, financial
well-being, and mental health across the US. COVID-19 is rapidly devastating the
lives of Americans. The impacts are, and will continue to be uneven, affecting
financially and psychologically vulnerable individuals, working parents, and
service sector workers across space. The impacts extend beyond the direct
physical health effects; the consequences of school and work closures affect
labor supply and demand, financial health, mental health, and the global
economy. Yet, very little is known about how the pandemic is affecting people’s
financial as well as mental health. The researchers will use an existing
platform to collect large data sets at regular and short intervals to study the
effects of the pandemic on Americans. The results of this research project will
contribute to our understanding of how pandemics affect mental and financial
health of the vulnerable as well as provide inputs into policies to counter the
effects of the pandemic. This does not only help shorten the projected
recessions and improve the wellbeing of Americans but also establishes the
United States as the global leader in countering the effects of the
virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will attempt to trace the
effects of the coronavirus pandemic and the policy responses on labor market
outcomes, and enhance our understanding of the links between employment, working
conditions, financial well-being, and mental health. The PIs will collect
longitudinal survey data over short intervals using the RAND American Life Panel
(ALP) platform. The project will use the variation in the impact of the COVID-19
policy response by industry, occupation, and location to: measure the impact of
employment/income loss on individuals’ financial well-being and mental health,
investigate how working conditions mediate the effect of COVID-19 on financial
well-being and mental health, study the extent to which worker routines have
been disrupted, how these disruptions change over time, and examine how these
disruptions affect financial well-being and mental health. The data collection
of this project is superior to standard surveys which do not capture sufficient
information about employers and employee behavior. A longitudinal survey that
contemporaneously captures individuals’ changing labor market experiences and
perceptions during the pandemic is necessary for understanding the causal links
among COVDI-19 and labor market outcomes, financial wellbeing, and mental
health. The results of this project will contribute to our understanding of how
pandemics affect mental and financial health as well as provide inputs into
policies to counter the effects of the pandemic. This does not only help shorten
the projected recessions and improve the wellbeing of Americans but also
establishes the United States as the global leader in countering the effects of
the virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.