* 2028573
* RAPID: Effects of the Move to Online Teaching on the Rural HBCU Community due to the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Felicia Jefferson, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 154,923.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports RAPID projects when there is a severe urgency with regard to
availability of, or access to, data, facilities or specialized equipment,
including quick-response research on natural or anthropogenic disasters and
similar unanticipated events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The project at Fort
Valley State University seeks to investigate the adaptability and educational
outcomes of rural HBCU students, many of whom are members of underserved
populations, and faculty who are asked to adopt online course delivery as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The effects on student retention and learning,
and on faculty turnover will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal of this project is to study the best mechanism of suddenly introducing
rural, underserved, and underrepresented populations to online instruction
leading to successful academic outcomes. Many students and faculty from rural
HBCUs face unique challenges, including the availability of consistent internet
access, the availability of tools for online teaching, and readiness for an
online teaching environment. The project investigates the impacts of prompt or
forced online lecture and laboratory courses on undergraduate chemistry and
biology majors. Using Qualtrics, multivariate analysis, and constructivism
theory as the theoretical framework, the impacts of adaptability and educational
outcomes of rural HBCU students and faculty will be examined. In addition, the
project will study the relationship among the instructors who have no knowledge,
little knowledge and good knowledge in teaching online courses using
multivariate analysis. Pre and post questionnaires will compare the effects of
sudden online learning and teaching among the three groups of faculty and
students. The project will also provide assistance to faculty for best practices
for online teaching, particularly for laboratory
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.