* 2028642
* Collaborative Research: Early Career Geoscience Faculty Development Workshop: A partnership between NAGT and NSF
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Laabs, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 279,502.00

Early career science faculty commonly face significant challenges to establish
themselves in a new academic environment, prepare new courses, and begin new
research. Providing professional development and networking opportunities can
help new science faculty establish the framework for a successful career, which
in turn can help to improve undergraduate education and strengthen scientific
research and scholarship. The workshops supported by this grant are a
continuation of a well-established professional development series designed to
help early career faculty flourish in the primary duties of their work,
teaching, research, and mentoring. Through a partnership with the National
Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT), a team of experienced faculty leaders
in Earth, atmospheric, marine, and planetary sciences will host three annual
workshops at the University of Maryland for approximately seventy-five early
career faculty each summer. At each workshop, early career faculty will learn
about best practices in teaching, consider successful strategies for maintaining
an active research and scholarly practice, and become equipped with resources
and tools needed to establish a successful career. The workshop series will
emphasize the role of faculty in broadening participation and promoting
diversity, equity, and inclusivity in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
workshop will be nationally advertised to invite applicants from all colleges
and universities where early career faculty are tasked with teaching, research,
and mentoring. The project will provide support for faculty to attend the
workshop, especially faculty from two-year colleges. During workshop sessions,
the leadership team will model effective pedagogical practices such as active
learning techniques, small and large group discussions, problem-solving tasks,
and scheduled time for participants to reflect and develop their own action
plans. Leaders engage the participants through these sessions along with one-on-
one conversations, discipline-specific sessions, and by providing feedback on
teaching and research plans. Workshop activities will be evaluated annually and
will be modified according to the needs and interests of each cohort of early
career faculty. The project leaders will partner with NAGT to produce training
curriculum for workshop leaders in methods of promoting diversity, equity, and
inclusivity in science through teaching, research, and mentoring. These methods
will be infused in workshop sessions and participants will develop personal
strategic plans for improving diversity, equity, and inclusivity in science at
their home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.