* 2028429
* RAPID: THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC: PREDICTORS AND CONSEQUENCES OF COMPLIANCE WITH SOCIAL DISTANCING RECOMMENDATIONS
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Peggy Giordano, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The need for social distancing measures implemented in the wake of the novel
coronavirus pandemic is well established, but few studies have examined
variability in compliance with this public health recommendation. It is
particularly important to understand the social factors associated with this
variability. This project builds on an ongoing longitudinal study of the life
and relationship experiences of a large, diverse sample of young people
interviewed first as adolescents, and subsequently interviewed multiple times as
they have become adults. This provides an opportunity to interview these women
and men to understand the process of navigating the guidelines, including: a)
what factors predict more and less compliant responses to the social distancing
guidelines; and b) what are the consequences of social distancing for emotional
health, behavioral health, and relationship functioning. The findings of the
project will alert researchers and policymakers to the myriad of personal and
background characteristics that are associated with more or less compliance.
This information will allow for the crafting of more effective public policies
and messaging about social distancing, with the goal of promoting faster and
more complete compliance during future pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social
distancing is a vital tool in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic, but we know little
about who complies with guidelines and who does not. This project will draw on
six waves of previously collected survey data (n=1,321) from the Toledo
Adolescent Relationships Study (TARS) and a new COVID-19 online survey that will
be administered to all respondents. These longitudinal data provide a unique
opportunity to examine precursors and consequences of variations in response to
the current social distancing guidelines. The design also includes in-depth
phone interviews with a subset of respondents who were compliant (n=25) and
others who did not change behavior or failed to comply consistently (n=25). The
qualitative component will provide help to understand compliance as a process,
and develop insights about the role of social networks in either encouraging or
minimizing the need to comply. In addition to assessing the role of
sociodemographic characteristics, the project will analyze the effects of prior
adverse childhood and adolescent experiences, economic and social uncertainties,
and network embeddedness as influences on levels of compliance. The availability
of previous measures of social and behavioral health and prior relationship
circumstances will allow the project to determine effects of social distancing
and the experience of the pandemic, controlling for prior background. The
project will also examine whether consistent reports of depression at prior
waves exacerbate or dampen the effect of the recent experience of social
distancing. The emphasis on social determinants provides a counterpoint to
approaches that conceptualize compliance with health-promoting recommendations
as an individualistic, largely cognitive process, and more broadly, will
contribute to the emerging science of behavior change. Findings will inform
sociological theories regarding identity and symbolic interaction, as well as
theories of inequality, especially within the context of extreme
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.