* 2028797
* Security for Pervasive Edge Computing Ecosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Satyajayant Misra, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2022
* USD 56,638.00

Diverse, novel applications, such as autonomous driving, Industrial Internet of
Things (IIoT), Augmented and Virtual Reality (AR/VR), tele-medicine, and
distributed machine learning are driving the rapid growth in research and
development in edge computing deployed in the last mile of the network where
dynamic and resource constrained wireless communications dominate. These
applications require computation to happen close to the data source and be
coordinated across nearby devices, base stations, or access points as well as
with data services such as stored media download at the edge. They may also
require computation offloading to a data center located near the edge or
somewhere on the Internet for processes such as image annotation and machine
learning. Furthermore, these applications rely on ultra-low latency
communications, reliable computations, and security and privacy at the network
edge. This project aims to investigate the vision of a secure Pervasive Edge
Computing (PEC) environment where the abundant edge computing resources (e.g.
city infrastructure, individuals’ devices, and future wireless devices), can be
easily and securely marshaled, in a trusted manner, to make the participation of
any device in edge computing feasible. The particular research problem addressed
in this project is access control and authorization of devices and services at
the edge—essential for the broad adoption of PEC to meet the needs of future
applications in healthcare, transportation, smart cities, and the smart grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on investigating the access control
and authorization mechanisms in an information-centric PEC network. The
researchers will investigate mechanisms for delegating access control-as-a-
service (ACaaS) to the network edge; efficient revocation of access credentials
to data and services in a dynamic manner; and secure accounting of the access
control operations to verify access control claims of the service and also to
assess users’ usage. They will contrast their designs with competing designs in
the IP network to provide comprehensive comparative assessments of the efficacy
of proposed approaches. The results from this project will help increase the
security, adoptability, and trust in edge computing and speed up its adoption by
enabling more of the edge devices to become part of edge
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.