* 2028598
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Climate, heat and maternal and neonatal health in Africa
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeremy Hess, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 330,366.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to understand and quantify how extreme
heat impacts human health. Heat stress caused from exposure to extreme heat and
aridity are strongly associated with adverse health issues. Pregnant women have
unique vulnerabilities, particularly in low- and lower-middle income countries,
where pregnancy is often precarious, even in the absence of heat stress. Long-
term impacts of heat stress in pregnancy extend into adulthood, affecting health
and economic prospects. Maternal and neonatal health is a critical area of
health service delivery and there is a substantial need for evidence translation
and risk assessment in the current global health strategies. The project will
focus on sub-Saharan Africa where substantial warming and increased aridity is
occurring and expected to continue. It will assess the efficacy of various low-
cost interventions to reduce heat burden and provide critical knowledge to
national adaptation plans and climate services programs in Africa which rarely
prioritize health risks of extreme heat. The project will quantify impacts of
heat exposure by linking weather and climate data sets, and projections with
data from birth cohorts, clinical trials, birth registries and demographic study
sites. The results will benefit a broad range of local and national-level
stakeholders, including local communities, government, health service agencies,
and local and national decision-makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.