* 2028397
* SaTC: EDU: Transdisciplinary Cybersecurity Education for Law and Engineering Students
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Brian Ray, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,826.00

While cyberattacks and defenses are technical in nature, the legal and
regulatory environment shapes both the risks they pose and the responses
available. As a result, there is an urgent need to train future cybersecurity
professionals in the technical IT skills as well as the relevant legal and
policy issues. In addition, it is critical to have legal professionals with
sufficient technical knowledge to work with their cybersecurity counterparts.
This project will design and implement a cybersecurity education framework that
integrates law and engineering students in a single classroom and trains them to
assess and respond to real-life scenarios. The objective is to provide students
with a holistic view of cybersecurity issues across multiple dimensions and to
prepare them to develop new countermeasures, regulations, and policies. The
resulting curriculum will be made available so that other institutions can adapt
the approach and provide similar education and training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a scenario-based
cybersecurity course for both law and engineering students, with the effort
including (i) implementing the cybersecurity scenarios on a virtual machine
environment, (ii) developing modules on legal issues concerning security and
privacy regulations, jurisdiction over data, and data governance, and (iii)
developing transdisciplinary interaction sessions. The seven cybersecurity
scenarios will include cyberattacks at the level of software, hardware, data and
networks, and social engineering. These scenarios will also cover a wide range
of legal and policy issues including data breach notification laws, legal
analysis of when to disclose vulnerabilities, challenges in addressing low-level
cybercrime, limits of law enforcement, and legal and ethical issues in
compliance. The project team’s objective is to facilitate adoption of this
transdisciplinary approach by developing an open-source textbook, which will
include well-documented software-hardware platforms and cybersecurity
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.