* 2028247
* FSML:  Integrated Year-Round Laboratory and Housing Space
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory's (RMBL) ability to support year-round
research will be transformed by building its first year-round laboratory/housing
facility. RMBL has established itself as a leading institution for its unique
collection of long-term biological studies. Changing environmental conditions,
combined with rapid technological advancements, including in genomics, the
microbiome, and sensing, has significantly increased demand for RMBL facilities
outside summer. RMBL is intensively used; more than 175 scientists from 76
institutions have conducted research during the last 5 years. The facility will
further the national interest by enabling scientists to investigate important
biological processes, as well as applying the full range of genomic, microbiome,
and sensing tools available to understanding and predicting biological systems.
This project will also relieve housing pressure in the summer, which will
support our undergraduate research program, as well as the scientists' research
programs, leveraging large investments already made by the government in
research happening at RMBL. As part of training a scientifically literate
workforce, the facility will create unique opportunities for winter science
education activities, including local and national school programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is driven by a combination of increasing peak
demand for housing and laboratory space in summer, and growing demand for winter
facilities. Some of the growth is driven by opportunities to understand
biological responses to a changing climate as scientists track biological
processes that are starting earlier and ending later. Understanding the snowpack
and winter is a fundamental part of understanding biological drivers, including
the length of the growth season and hydrology. The facility will add 500 square
feet of simple, flexible laboratory space to be used for sample processing. The
research space will include heavy voltage outlets, high-speed
telecommunications, and lockable storage. This space will have a flexible
configuration, including the ability to accommodate up to 24 scientists or
students in seminar-style seating. The building will also include 6 housing
spots, with the downstairs apartment being universally accessible. The building
will have year-round water and indoor bathrooms and be located close to other
winter cabins to facilitate program integration. The stairs/entrances will be
located on the gable ends to facilitate use in winter when the snowpack up to 3
meters high. For more about Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory, visit
https://www.rmbl.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.