* 2028242
* RAPID: Distancing &amp; Digital Information in the Face of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kris Wernstedt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 98,285.00

The COVID-19 pandemic poses arguably the most formidable set of health and
broader societal challenges of the 21st century to people around the world. This
project studies the judgements, perceptions, and behaviors that result from
different types, quality, and amount of digital information and different social
distancing restrictions in a high-stress context of spatial distancing over a
prolonged period during the COVID-19 crisis. Such understanding can help us
develop better strategies—including shaping the content and timeliness of online
and offline communication of public policies—to respond more effectively to
future large-scale crises that also may impose restrictions on the day-to-day,
face-to-face human interactions that comprise the norm for modern
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As large numbers of people cut off spatial ties
and limit their mobility in the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand for digital media
has increased, not only to increase understanding of health and economic impacts
and to reduce anxiety and uncertainty, but also to compensate for the severance
of in person social interactions. This information comes from different sources,
changes over time, and varies in quality, credibility, and timeliness. The
research team hypothesizes that the nature of the information consumed and
intensity of immersion in the digital environment during the COVID-19 pandemic
can prompt different construals of the pandemic and thereby shape risk
preferences and behaviors. The team investigates these perceptions, preferences,
choices, and behavioral responses to spatial distancing public policies through
a multiple wave, online panel study of 400 residents of the Washington-
Arlington-Alexandria metropolitan area. The research uses construal level theory
by empirically distinguishing between the spatial and psycho-social dimensions
of the construct of psychological distancing and calibrating the psychological
impacts of immersion in online environments during a period of limited in-person
interactions. The team investigates how digital media and technology consumption
influence construal level and how the interaction of these two factors shape
individuals’ risk perceptions, attitudes, and behaviors over time. Our research
thus moves beyond simplistic explanations of the direct linkage between
psychological distance, construal level, and judgments and decisions to a more
nuanced understanding of interactions between construal mindsets and overload,
stress, and fear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.