* 2028409
* RAPID: The Roles of Organizational Contextual Factors in Worker Reactions to COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Chu-Hsiang Chang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 71,098.00

The outbreak of COVID-19 has caused great concerns worldwide. COVID-19 directly
affects the physical, financial, and psychological well-being of those who live
in close proximity to the outbreak areas. Because of its potential threat to
physical health, it has widespread effects on the thought processes and
behaviors of the global population. This project seeks to understand the impact
of COVID-19 by examining how it affects workers’ perceptions of the health-
related threat, their emotional and motivational reactions towards the threat,
and their downstream work-related behaviors. This project will analyze workers’
anxiety and desire to make a lasting and meaningful impact to their environment
as different reactions towards COVID-19. These reactions, in turn, can lead to
different levels of work performance, helping behaviors, and withdrawal from the
workplace. Importantly, the project will test if and how the organizational
context may play an important role in encouraging effective versus dysfunctional
coping among workers when facing threats related to COVID-19. Results from the
project will enhance understanding of how workers react to health-related threat
information, and how their productivity and well-being may be affected by the
information. Results will also equip organizations with knowledge to create a
context that will help employees adapt to the threat brought on by COVID-19 or
other similar life-threatening crises. More broadly, this project will clarify
how organizations and managers can transform negative crises and challenges into
opportunities to boost workforce morale and prosocial motivation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to understand the
impact of COVID-19 among working adults within the context of the pandemic. The
project conceptualizes COVID-19 as a salient mortality cue and will analyze
individual employees’ adaptive reflection and maladaptive anxiety as responses
to this cue. The project will also analyze how reflection may be related to
employees’ positive coping behaviors such as productivity and helping, whereas
anxiety as a maladaptive reaction may be associated with negative behaviors such
as withdrawal. Finally, the project will examine the organizational contextual
factors that may exacerbate or ameliorate workers’ reactions towards the threat
of COVID-19. The project will consider organizational health climate, ethical
leadership, and corporate social responsibility practices as critical factors
that may promote the adaptive reactions towards COVID-19. The project will use
time-lagged, three-wave surveys to collect data from working adults; structural
equation modeling and conditional indirect effect tests will be employed to
evaluate research questions. Findings from the project will inform
organizational theories related to those involving terror management and
generativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.