* 2028687
* RAPID: Computational Modeling of Contact Density and Outbreak Estimation for COVID-19 Using Large-scale Geolocation Data from Mobile Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Constantine Kontokosta, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2021
* USD 199,958.00

The outbreak of COVID-19 has highlighted both the growing global risk of
emerging pandemics and the urgent need for enhanced data-driven tools to
identify, contain, and mitigate their effects, particularly in dense urban
areas. There has been increasing attention given to locational data from
smartphones as a way to enhance epidemiological modeling and predict outbreak
progression, transmission, and exposure risk. When combined with artificial
intelligence or machine learning algorithms, these high resolution data have the
potential to vastly improve the granularity and precision of infection and
hospitalization estimates. However, the use of locational data raises serious
social, ethical, and technical challenges. Trade-offs between the potential
public health benefits and the impacts for privacy and civil liberties have
started to be debated in earnest within the context of the current pandemic,
especially in light of increasing use of these data by private companies to
promote targeted advertisements, evaluate retail consumer behavior, and model
travel demand, among other applications. Furthermore, the use of these data in
the public interest is undermined by an incomplete understanding of the
representativeness and bias embedded in these data, particularly in relation to
under-represented and vulnerable communities. What is not yet known is the
extent of this bias in locational data and how the public health benefits of
using these data diminish with spatial and temporal aggregation, which could
help to minimize privacy concerns in the collection and use of these data. To
address these questions, this project will develop computational models derived
from large-scale locational data to (1) estimate the exposure density across a
range of temporal (hourly, daily, etc.) and spatial (census block, neighborhood,
etc.) scales, which will enable officials and researchers to evaluate and
predict transmission rates in a particular area; (2) measure and evaluate the
extent and effectiveness of social (physical) distancing efforts over time and
comparatively within and across counties and cities, as well as understand the
disparate impacts on vulnerable communities and populations; and (3) measure the
extent of disease spread based on movement and travel patterns between
neighborhoods and communities, which will support predictions of the spatial-
temporal patterns of disease outbreak and identify “at-risk” locations based on
the aggregated mobility trajectories for areas were infections have been
identified or suspected.

The project team is particularly concerned with how shelter-in-place orders and
exposure risk disproportionately impact low-income and minority communities, and
the implications of potential bias in locational data in assessing socioeconomic
variations. The project will assess how the usefulness of these models for
epidemiologists and public health officials varies with spatial aggregation
(e.g. is neighborhood level data superior to county level data) and temporal
aggregation (e.g. is a near-real-time model superior to daily or weekly
timescales) and provide quantitative performance assessments that can be used
for collective decision-making on the trade-offs between health benefits and
privacy risk. Project outputs will be made open-source and publicly available as
appropriate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.