* 2028496
* RAPID: American Infrastructure and Service Work in the Era of COVID-19 Transmission
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Daniel Armanios, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 176,574.00

The spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) puts into stark relief the disparities
in our nation’s infrastructure system. All the social and economic benefits that
infrastructure provides--such as proximity to goods, services, and each other--
become liabilities in times of pandemics. The systems that enhance our physical
connectivity also make social distancing more difficult. The aim of this
proposal is to characterize how these infrastructure disparities influence the
spread of COVID-19 and who are made most vulnerable as a result. Prior studies
argue that density and close physical proximity are crucial to positive social
and economic outcomes. These studies also argue physical infrastructure is
important in health outcomes, namely quicker access to critical medical and
emergency services. However, the coronavirus makes closer physical proximity a
liability as it makes engaging in social distancing more difficult. The
contribution of this proposal is to understand and characterize this tension
that the coronavirus makes salient in our physical infrastructure systems. By
identifying “hot spots” of dense and proximate physical infrastructure, we can
better target our nation’s limited testing capacity around vulnerable areas in
the hopes of maintaining the benefits of physical infrastructure, while also
mitigating its observed downsides in the face of a pandemic. Prior studies
suggest that technology generates inequality due to the fact it is “skill-
biased”. However, the coronavirus pandemic reveals a different possible
mechanism. In this case, individuals may be similarly-skilled, but have
dissimilarities in terms of access to digital infrastructure. This proposal
seeks to assess this alternative mechanism in the hopes of targeting our limited
economic stimulus resources to ease the economic burden on the pandemic's most
vulnerable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage demographic,
economic, and infrastructure data and employ spatial diffusion and difference-
in-difference models. In particular, the work will aggregate COVID-19 and
healthcare utilization data from the CDC, federal, state and local health
agencies, and academic institutions such as Johns Hopkins and compare this to
data from the National Bridge Inventory, the FCC, Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages, National Historical Geographic Information System, and O*Net, by the
North Carolina Department of Commerce. This work pairs two types of
infrastructure—physical and digital—to examine how the construction and
availability of this infrastructure affects cities, both in terms of health and
individual economic prosperity. The work is novel in that it problematizes
physical infrastructure as being both a contributor to the spread of disease as
well as a mechanism for combating it, and that it will assess how pandemics can
generate wage inequality due to unequal access to digital infrastructure, even
between individuals with similar skills. The research provides a relatively
quick way to leverage variation in physical and digital infrastructure to a)
identify those communities that are most in need of currently available, and
highly limited funds and b) craft a rapid response and deployment strategy to
help the nation to slow the transmission and economic impacts of the virus in
the future. The work will have impacts across all of society, but is
particularly targeted at underserved populations and those in lower wage
industries that may not be able to easily take advantage of digital
infrastructure. All of the data utilized are publicly available and the PI will
make available the code on the CMU website. Furthermore, this project will also
educate a group of engineers who can combine both their technical training with
social science research methods and training to ensure our technical systems are
robust and resilient to health crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.