* 2028421
* EAGER: An On-ice GNSS Research Experimental Network for Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Robert Hawley, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 258,525.00

In understanding the large-scale changes of the Greenland Ice Sheet, wide
coverage is needed. While aircraft and satellites produce extensive elevation-
change datasets, and regional climate models predict snowfall at high
resolution, both systems require calibration and validation by on-the-ice means.
Hence, there is a need for extensive on-ice elevation survey data in Greenland,
typically collected using the Global Positioning System (GPS). Ground-based
traverses have been highly successful in collecting such on-ice information.
Similarly, on-ice static GPS stations have been installed for short-term
glaciology projects. Both approaches, however, suffer significant drawbacks. The
first is cost. Ground traverses are logistically complex and expensive. For
traditional static stations, the high cost is associated with the hardware and
the transport of large numbers of batteries due to the power required to run
these stations through the dark winter. The second is limitations in spatial and
temporal coverage. Traverses offer excellent spatial coverage, but temporally
only a single snapshot in time over the traverse route. Conversely, static
stations offer excellent temporal resolution, but operate at a fixed point and
thus limited spatial resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
a dense network of static on-ice GPS stations in Greenland. New GPS technology
allows for a reduction in costs by leveraging the newest generation of chipsets,
which offer extremely low power consumption. While currently unproven for
collecting science data on ice sheets, these chipsets are now integrated in the
current generation of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and, when operated using
Real Time Kinematic (RTK) corrections in these situations, claim centimeter-
scale positioning accuracy. Over three phases, the project will 1) install a
network of stations in the study area; 2) develop a standalone GNSS receiver
station for deployment outside the original network; and 3) deploy a wider
network of stations on the Greenland Ice Sheet. This project will also integrate
research and education by supporting a graduate student who will be actively
involved in all aspects of the project, and by partnering with the Women in
Science Project to train a first-year female undergraduate student during a
20-week internship in each year of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.