* 2028521
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Transforming passive protective face masks toward active capture and inactivation of coronavirus with nano-assisted surfactant modification
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Navid Saleh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2022
* USD 92,402.00

Novel coronavirus disease is caused by SARS-CoV-2, an extremely virulent strain
of coronavirus that is responsible for an increasing number of illnesses and
deaths, globally. According to the World Health Organization, “SARS-CoV-2 is
transmitted via droplets and fomites during close unprotected contact between an
infector and an infectee”. A recent study has shown that these virions can be
airborne for at least 30 minutes and be active on the aerosol droplets up to
three hours. Non-pharmaceutical protection is essential to stunt the spread of
this virus. As of March 19, 2020, the Center for Disease Control’s official
guidelines include non-optimal reuse of surgical masks for extended periods of
time. Then, on March 27, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a critical
emergency on personal protection equipment. The reuse of masks puts healthcare
workers, first line responders, patients, and the community at risk. The aim of
this research project between the University of Texas-Austin and the University
of Florida Health Shands Hospital is to develop and implement a rapid protocol
for extended use of surgical and N95 masks. The researchers will develop a fast,
simple procedure for turning passive masks into active protective
gear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses a critical need to improve
personal protection equipment during the coronavirus crisis. A new extended use
protocol for masks will render immediate benefits to the healthcare community.
An enhanced mechanistic understanding of virion capture and inactivation at
nano-bio interfaces will have wide applicability in the design of personal
protective equipment. This research project has the following objectives: (i)
obtain masks from the Shands hospital, treat them with surfactants,
ultraviolet-C ray, and steam, and then characterize the efficacy of each
treatment using viability tests, (ii) modify mask surfaces with surfactant-
modified (sodium lauryl sulfate, butadines, or stearoyl lactylate) carbon
particles (activated carbon, carbon quantum dots, or nano-diamond) at different
ratios and moisture content and then test their efficacy in attaching and
inactivating coronaviruses, (iii) understand the mechanisms of virus attachment
and inactivation, and (iv) implement a rapid extended mask-use program. The
outcomes from this project should have critical and widespread scientific and
public health impacts. The modified masks could provide needed support to the
depleted mask-inventory of health care providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.