* 2028283
* EAGER: Optimization of proximity labeling approach to understand composition and regulation of the plant ubiquitin ligases interactome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Nitzan Shabek, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,979.00

The goal of this project is to use a novel technology to identify proteins that
interact with a component of the cellular protein degradation machinery. The
protein degradation machine best known as the Ubiquitin Proteasome System (UPS)
has emerged to be at the center of virtually every biological process. UPS-
mediated protein degradation is a highly regulated process and failure to
degrade specific proteins in a timely fashion will have a deleterious effect on
the organism. In plants, UPS control numerous processes including growth and
development, hormone signaling, and responses to biotic and abiotic stress.
Plants are known to adapt the UPS to facilitate cellular changes required to
respond to and tolerate adverse environmental conditions. Since the mechanisms
underlying fundamental biological processes such as responses to environmental
changes are often conserved in plants, our findings from this project will be
broadly applicable across different plant species. Furthermore, the project will
impact science and education beyond the immediate goals by: (1) providing
mentorship, research experiences, and novel platform for undergraduate students
and senior researchers, (2) propagating the importance of plant sciences in the
larger community, and (3) by advancing the knowledge in cutting edge approaches
of the emerging plant functional proteomic field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
the advances made in the field of proteolytic regulation in plants, little is
known about the composition and regulation of plant ubiquitin (Ub) ligase
enzymes, in particular under diverse environmental conditions. While increasing
number of genomic studies implicate the critical role for Ub ligase in
regulating biotic and abiotic stress signaling, comprehensive studies at the
protein levels remain unmapped. A full understanding of UPS processes in plants
demands the identification of Ub system targets and other regulators (e.g.,
deubiquitinating enzymes, ubiquitin-like and ubiquitin associated proteins).
Thus far, only very limited attempts at the protein levels have been made to
characterize Ub ligases from plant cells because of technical challenges in
capturing dynamic Ub ligase complexes. Therefore, in this EAGER project, we will
specifically: (1) Develop and optimize proximity labeling tools to isolate
Cullin-RINGs (CRLs) Ub ligases and their interactors in planta and, (2) Use
optimized methods and materials to isolate specific Ub ligase interactomes under
normal growth conditions. In addition, we will use the MAX2 F-box protein as a
test case to demonstrate the utility of the proximity labeling approach in
capturing interactors of MAX2 in response to strigolactone hormone
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.