* 2028825
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Towards an Integrated, Full-stack System for Memory-centric Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Peng Jiang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 12/31/2022
* USD 64,525.00

As the volume of data being processed by today’s systems continues to increase,
the traditional organization of memory systems is shifting to accommodate that
accelerating growth. Data-centric applications such as irregular graph-mining
algorithms, distributed machine learning, and genome sequencing require a large
amount of data to compute and store, and generate massive amounts of
intermediate data to move around the compute resources. Memory-centric computing
is a potential solution to overcome the performance bottleneck of current
systems. Near or in-memory computing can mitigate the bandwidth limitations with
fewer data movements between the memory and host processing units; a remote
memory pool with a fast interconnect shared by all processing units can overcome
the current capacity constraints. Both solutions are promising for breaking down
the memory wall. However, it is challenging to release the power of both
solutions with direct integration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators propose an integrated, full-stack system to enable memory-centric
computing (SMC2). The system will incorporate the emerging near-memory data
processors (NDP) and an extensible remote memory pool to minimize the
performance impact of memory accesses in graph-mining applications. The research
tasks include optimizations in architecture, the software/hardware interface,
programming models/compilers, and performance models/optimization. First, the
architecture is revisited to utilize the NDP hardware to build an active memory
system that supports intelligent data prefetch and speculative data push. Next,
the system software is redesigned to support NDP function calls, data-push
operations, and virtualization. Then, with new system abstractions, a new
programming model is proposed to allow programmers to specify which tasks can
run on the NDP resources, and to support efficient NDP-to-NDP communication.
Lastly, a new system performance model and optimization framework are
incorporated. By putting the four pieces together, the proposed system support
can maximize the performance of memory-centric computing with new system
abstractions and theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.