* 2028997
* EAGER: SARE: Physically disordered nanostructures for lightweight and secure authentication on CMOS platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gururaj Naik, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Authentication is one of the fundamental primitives to establish security in
ubiquitous systems. The current best practice for authentication relies upon
cryptography and secure keys. Such an approach can hardly be scaled to emerging
applications due to its high-power consumption and vulnerabilities to physical
and cryptographic attacks. Strong Physically Unclonable Function (SPUF) promises
a lightweight and secure authentication method based on physical disorders. So
far, SPUFs with the desired security properties has only been demonstrated with
optics or biology. But it is not practical to integrate them with electronics in
mobile and ubiquitous systems. This project explores technologies to enable
secure and practical SPUFs on silicon chips, which addresses the needs for
security solutions in emerging ubiquitous electronics. The project also includes
training and teaching graduate and undergraduate students on hardware
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to emulate the proven optically
disordered SPUF system with an electrical percolation system built on CMOS
platforms for authentication. The inter-disciplinary project will be carried out
with three objectives: CMOS-compatible electrical percolation nanostructures;
CMOS readout circuits and alternative integration strategies; system design and
assessment of proof-of-principle SPUFs. The project includes analysis and
optimization of the cross-layer design space involving the degree of
uncorrelation for nanostructures, the measurement resolution of circuits, and
the complexity of encoding schemes. Overall, the project can potentially create
a radically different and complete solution to the challenge of authenticating
ubiquitous hardware devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.