* 2028458
* Collaborative Research: Determining the role of ER stress in the evolution of large bodies and long lifespans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Vincent Lynch, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 311,218.00

A major goal of biology is to understand the diversity of life on earth. Body
size and longevity are two traits that vary tremendously across animals. Some
species weigh less than a gram or live only several weeks, while others weigh
thousands of kilograms or live for several hundred years. What could cause such
remarkable variation in body size and lifespan? Turtles are a promising group to
study this question because some species are extremely small, while others, like
Galapagos tortoises, are gigantic and long-lived. Previous research suggests
that Galapagos tortoises, along with some other large, long-lived animals like
elephants, are particularly good at removing old or damaged cells from their
bodies before they harm the individual – a process called “apoptosis”. In this
project, the genomes of many turtle species will be compared to identify genes
that may be responsible for the unique behavior of Galapagos tortoise cells. The
effects of these genes will then be disrupted in Galapagos tortoise cells to see
if it makes them behave more like other turtle cells. The goal is to
characterize genes that can help explain the extraordinary diversity in body
size and lifespan among animals. The results can also have important biomedical
implications, since the same genes related to longevity may also be involved in
aging related diseases and cancer. The project has a large outreach component
including bioinformatics boot camps for high school students, freely available
classroom case studies about the biology of longevity, and educational panels at
zoos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Body size and longevity vary tremendously across
animals, but the mechanisms underlying this variation are not well understood.
At one extreme, certain species such as Galapagos and Aldabra giant tortoises
have evolved remarkably large body sizes and long lifespans, despite the
increased genotoxic and cytotoxic stress that comes with living longer and
having more cells. Giant tortoises live approximately 3-5 times longer and weigh
50-100 times more than their closest relatives. Recent evidence suggests that
Galapagos tortoises respond differently to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, a
set of events leading to the deregulation of protein homeostasis and one of the
hallmarks of aging and reduced lifespan. Galapagos tortoises rapidly induce
apoptosis in response to ER stress compared to cells from smaller, shorter-lived
turtle species. In this project, comparative genomics will be used to identify
ER stress-related genes that have been positively selected or duplicated/lost in
large, long-lived tortoises versus their smaller, shorter-lived relatives.
Genome editing will be used to knock down and characterize the cellular
functions of ER stress candidate genes in turtle cell lines. The immediate aim
is to identify the processes through which large, long-lived turtles have dealt
with physiological constraints on body size and lifespan. The overarching goal
is to discover the mechanisms underlying the extraordinary diversity in animal
body size and longevity observed in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.