* 2028427
* PPoSS: Planning: CP2: Towards Systems Correctness Checkability and Performance Predictability at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Shan Lu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2022
* USD 247,993.00

As a critical backend for many of today's applications and services, large-scale
distributed systems must be highly reliable. In the last couple of years the
field witnessed a phenomenal scale of deployment; Google is known to run
clusters with thousands of machines each, Apple deploys over 100,000 database
machines, and Netflix runs tens of database clusters with 500 nodes each. This
new era of cloud-scale distributed systems has given birth to a new class of
faults, scalability faults---faults whose symptoms surface in large-scale
deployments but not necessarily in small/medium-scale deployments. The CP2
project is proposed to solve the problem of correctness checkability and
performance predictability of systems at extreme scale. Specifically the project
will analyze over 500 real-world scalability faults in over a dozen large-scale
systems, develop a single-machine scale-checking framework that allows
developers to test large distributed code on one or a few machines, and provide
groundwork for compute- and I/O-performance predictability of large-scale jobs
on both existing and future architectures. These tasks will advance debugging,
testing, learning, and prediction methods both on traditional hardware platforms
and emerging ones and ultimately lead to correct-by-construction development
methods. The CP2 project will have impact in multiple disciplines including
systems (cloud/datacenter systems reliability), programming languages/compilers
(new static/dynamic analysis techniques), architecture (compute/storage
prediction for heterogeneous hardware), algorithms (the use of learning
methods), and high-performance computing (benchmarking of HPC
systems/applications).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of societal benefits, the
CP2 project addresses paramount issues mentioned in the NSF Strategic Plan for
2018-2022. More specifically, society increasingly depends on complicated
systems that are products of human ingenuity, including ecosystems of large and
complex software with millions of lines of code running on thousands of
machines. CP2 will address the challenges of understanding and predicting the
behavior of such systems. Furthermore, as societyâ€™s reliance on complex systems
grows, learning about their robustness and understanding how to strengthen them
are of increasing importance. In terms of education, the CP2 project gives
unique hands-on research and education with cutting-edge systems technology in
which students will be trained to operate software on a large number of machines
and analyze their performance and correctness. The results of the CP2 project
will be released through the classic medium of publication, through the
development of numerous software artifacts which will be open-sourced, and
finally through collaboration with various industry partners to help shape the
next generation of large-scale systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.