* 2028009
* RAPID: Tracking Urban Mobility and Occupancy under Social Distancing Policy
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Wendy Ju, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 10/31/2020
* USD 49,705.00

This project promotes the progress of science and public health by using
information technology to collect information about how people move through
cities and use public spaces when they are supposed to be social distancing.
Social distancing policy is intended to slow the spread of infectious diseases
such as COVID-19. The effectiveness of social distancing in preventing disease
depends on whether and how people follow these orders. By collecting video of
city sidewalks and public spaces, we can understand how people are interpreting
and responding to social distance orders, and, later, we can show how these
behaviors affect health outcomes neighborhood by neighborhood. As the
coronavirus spreads to other locales, evidence about how specific behaviors
correlate with disease spread will encourage public compliance. For example, it
is believed that it is safe to exercise outdoors, as long as people are not
running too close with one another. Running and hiking are permitted; however,
using parks to play pickup games of basketball is not. The data collected in
this project will aid in establishing clearer, evidence-backed guidance for what
safe and dangerous activities might be. The data will be also useful in future
human robot interaction research. It will help autonomous systems, such as
autonomous cars, delivery robots, and emergency service vehicles, to
automatically recognize what people are doing, so that they can respond
appropriately. This can be applied to a variety of purposes: It can help
emergency response teams to quickly locate people that need help. It can help
cars and robots to better understand different kinds of human activities, so
that they might wait for momentary situations to pass, or steer around
activities that will be longer in duration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will gather data on outdoor pedestrian and light vehicle (bicycle, scooter,
skateboard) activity in New York from a) dashcam footage from vehicles driving
through the city, b) video streams gathered from public web cameras, and c)
mobile phone geo-location data volunteered by local citizens, to form a map of
urban mobility and space occupancy under social distancing policy. This data
will enable researchers to infer the activities, contexts, origins and
destinations of the people in public spaces. This information can reveal where
and, in turn, why stay at home orders are and are not being followed. It can
also help to identify areas where essential services or activities are not
distributed or designed optimally to decrease unnecessary interaction. This data
can also be used in post-hoc analysis of policy directives and infection
patterns, so as to better inform policy and social distancing design. It
advances our understanding of how public policy translates to behaviors and
activities on the ground, and how the emergence of individual behaviors and
social interactions influence social health outcomes. This work demonstrates the
application of current-day computer recognition and mobile technology to capture
human behavior, will improve and validate models for infectious disease
prevention, and also will inform public policy. In addition, it will augment the
robotic community's ability to recognize human activities in urban spaces. By
modelling social distancing behaviors, we can better design socially appropriate
human robot interaction for public urban spaces in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.