* 2028762
* Collaborative Research: Aerodynamic Shape Optimization of Tall Buildings using Automated Cyber-Physical Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Brian Phillips, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 530,917.00

This award will focus on the optimal design of a tall building’s shape to meet
competing performance objectives from multiple stakeholders, including its
performance under wind loads. A building’s shape is one of the earliest design
decisions and has a decisive impact on the building’s underlying structural
system, performance under service and extreme loads, life-cycle costs, and
architectural appeal. In current practice, design is often based on shapes that
have historically provided good performance. Trial-and-error approaches are used
with a few tests carried out in a wind tunnel, leaving significant portions of
the search space unexplored, and therefore, design favors conventional shapes
over innovative solutions. To address these shortcomings, this award will
develop an automated approach that brings together numerical search algorithms,
experimental wind tunnel testing, and advanced manufacturing for a systematic
and exhaustive search of the design space. This research will help drive the
future of engineering design as it trends toward optimization and automation
while also addressing fundamental research questions in wind engineering. The
collaboration in this project between a research-intensive university and a
Hispanic-serving institution/primarily undergraduate institution will provide a
unique opportunity to engage students from underrepresented minority groups in
cutting-edge research, thus increasing the diversity of professionals in the
field and producing globally competitive engineering graduates to match the
demand for skilled STEM professionals. Project data will be archived and made
publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org). This award
will contribute to NSF's role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program
(NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will bring together traditional
wind tunnel experimental methods and automated design techniques to test three
fundamental hypotheses on the design of tall buildings for wind loading: (i)
intelligent computing, cyber-physical testing, and hybrid manufacturing can be
leveraged to efficiently explore the geometric design space, (ii) the geometric
design space can be explored as a continuum to fundamentally change the
optimization outcomes, and (iii) the formulation of the optimization problem
will have a significant impact on the optimal shape. This research will leverage
hybrid manufacturing to create and precisely modify wind tunnel specimens,
enabling a close integration of shape optimization and wind tunnel testing.
Testing will be done using the NSF-supported NHERI boundary layer wind tunnel at
the University of Florida. New knowledge will be generated, including: (i)
heuristic optimization algorithms that are suitable for exploring optimal
structural shapes, (ii) surrogate models that can reduce the number of wind
tunnel experiments, (iii) hybrid manufacturing systems that combine additive and
subtractive machining to efficiently and cost-effectively modify building
models, and (iv) parameterization methods that allow for discovery of non-
intuitive aerodynamic features to reduce along-wind and across-wind structural
responses. This research will enable the intelligent experimental exploration of
candidate designs and, therefore, has the potential to discover new and
innovative solutions to deliver taller, lighter, and more sustainable
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.