* 2028005
* Improving Transfer Student Outcomes Through Linked Learning Communities in Math and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Kathryn Weber, Contra Costa Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2026
* USD 649,936.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with verified
financial need at a large California community college, Diablo Valley College.
The transfer rate of Diablo Valley College students into four-year universities
is 67% higher than the national average. Even so, low-income STEM students at
the College struggle to balance their financial challenges with their
educational commitments. This project will address this need by giving
scholarships to 30 different students who are pursuing Associate degrees in
Civil, Electrical &amp; Computer, or Mechanical Engineering, Natural Science,
Mathematics, Biology, and Physics. The Scholars will enter in cohorts of 10
students and receive up to three years of scholarship support, beginning with
their entry into a STEM pathway at the College and extending to their transfer
to a four-year program. In addition to scholarships, the project will support
Scholars through a linked learning community. This learning community will
include their math and science instructors, a student retention specialist, and
faculty mentors. It is expected that this support will foster community among
the Scholars and the College staff, while providing professional resources to
meet Scholars’ individual needs. The project team predicts that this model of
support will lead to increased student motivation and preparation for successful
transfer. Community colleges are a frequent entry point into higher education
for low-income and underrepresented students. Thus, by addressing common points
of attrition that occur early in STEM curriculum pathways, this project can
contribute to a more diverse and representative STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project will study how a comprehensive cohort
model and course-pairing method of instruction may address a student’s
integration experiences across academic, social, professional, and institutional
domains. The project will investigate how these different integration
experiences impact community college students' foundational STEM course success,
persistence, graduation, and transfer, with particular attention to students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The hypothesis is that the
cohesion of the student cohort with each other and with mentoring faculty
partners will provide more meaningful early integration experiences that, in
turn, increase student success in early foundational STEM coursework. This
increased success will then translate to enhanced persistence and transfer
rates. The project will explore the impacts of the financial and social benefits
of the support model through results from student journaling, focus groups, and
student outcome data. Through its mixed-methods approach, the project plans to
generate rich qualitative data that can advance understanding of factors that
increase student retention and persistence at two-year colleges. The project
leadership team will disseminate critical findings, methods, and tools locally
through professional development activities as well as at state and national
conferences. Project evaluation activities will assess the effectiveness of the
linked learning model in improving student outcomes, persistence, and transfer
rates, the College’s effectiveness in implementing the learning community model,
and the extent to which knowledge generation and dissemination efforts were used
to transfer knowledge. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.