* 2028929
* PPoSS: Planning: Cross-Layer Design for Cost-Effective HPC in the Cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* George Kesidis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Many high-performance computing (HPC) applications of national importance (e.g.,
nuclear simulations, climate modeling, drug discovery, epidemiology, and
finance) process enormous datasets and have significant resource demands and
strict performance/accuracy/power constraints. Ever-changing hardware elements
(e.g., emerging new compute elements) and systems software (continuous fixes to
operating systems, compilers and runtime systems) make hosting such HPC
applications in locally-managed compute platforms increasingly less attractive.
A promising alternate approach is to host these applications in the cloud.
However, making legacy HPC applications cloud-ready and identifying the best
blend of cloud services for a given application are significant challenges that
need to be addressed. In this project, a holistic, cross-layer approach is taken
to address the problem of securely mounting such HPC applications in the cloud
with high efficiency, low cost, and good performance. A key distinguishing
aspect of this project is that it combines both compile-time and run-time
innovations and makes contributions to both client and cloud-provider sides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project spans the following five complementary
thrusts, all of which are made challenging by the increasing complexity and
scale of the HPC applications of interest, and by the complexity of cloud
service offerings and application service-level objectives: (i) characterizing
HPC application behavior on myriad cloud infrastructural options; (ii) compiler
support for HPC application cloudization; (iii) novel programming language
support -- Object-as-a-Service (OaaS); (iv) workload placement and scheduling
support; and (v) systems software support for PaaS/SaaS on heterogeneous
hardware. The ultimate goal of this project is to devise systematic
methodologies for mapping HPC applications to different types of services
(spanning IaaS, SaaS, FaaS, OaaS) in multi/hybrid-cloud. This research
facilitates improvements in the costs of running HPC applications. This project
also enables easy transitioning of HPC applications from one cloud to another
and provides data for cloud architecture designers to tune their systems better
for current and future HPC workloads. In addition to its technical
contributions, this project involves various educational and outreach activities
as well. In particular, a new graduate curriculum for cloud computing focusing
on HPC applications is created and freely disseminated. Finally, the code being
developed and experimental results collected are documented and open-
sourced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.