* 2028604
* RAPID: Development of an Interactive Web-based Dashboard to Track COVID-19 in Real-time
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Lauren Gardner, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;p&gt;This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will be used to support the
management and development of the COVID-19 online interactive dashboard hosted
by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins
University. The dashboard was first released publicly on January 22, 2020 to
visualize and track the COVID-19 outbreak in real-time, and has since served as
the prominent centralized source of COVID-19 epidemiological data throughout the
COVID-19 outbreak to date. The dashboard illustrates the location and number of
confirmed cases, deaths and recoveries for all affected countries, with
additional features added over time. Further, all the data collected and
displayed is made freely available to researchers, public health authorities and
the general public in a GitHub repository, along with the feature layers of the
dashboard. The availability of this data at the initial stages of the outbreak
enabled the public health and research community to implement modeling tools,
specifically the calibration of parameters for estimating transmission and
spread at the earliest stages of the outbreak, when more formal situation
reports were lagging, and thus gain a better understanding of the disease
characteristics early on, which allowed for evidenced based decision making.
Further, members of the public health community, including national and local
level governmental organizations and public health offices around the world,
continue to rely on the dashboard for informing, planning, and decision making
regarding public safety, such as clinical staffing and resource
allocation.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;p&gt;Given the popularity and
impact of the dashboard to date, there is a need to continue to maintain it, and
further build out its capabilities. Specifically, this includes the collection
and curation process to capture data from a broader set of sources, enabling an
increase in the spatial resolution (ideally to the city level) of the reporting.
Introduction of additional features, including health-related context and
confidence measures for the data and information presented, will increase the
dashboard's utility in supporting awareness and decision-making. Additional
model and analytic research and development will enhance detection and
classification, and more broadly, relative risk determination of events of
concern from all sourced health related data. Longer term, systems engineering
activities associated with this development will ensure an enduring capability
established, vetted, and well-used prior to the next potential pandemic. Thus,
the research efforts are critical to provide an early-warning system for future
public health events, and help inform control measures in the current and future
outbreaks.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/p&gt;