* 2028710
* RAPID: Modeling the Coupled Social and Epidemiological Networks that Determine the Success of Behavioral Interventions on Limiting Spread of COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* R Alexander Bentley, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2022
* USD 198,932.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ideas and viruses can spread in human populations through
different forms of interaction. Social distancing is an idea that, when enacted,
can lower disease transmission risk and slow the spread of infection in a
population. In the case of the current COVID-19 outbreak, in the absence of
ready vaccines and medical treatments, social distancing is our best line of
defense. The prevalence of social distancing behaviors can depend, however, on
the mix of social and geographic communities and their social norms, influencing
spread dynamics in schools, social media, work environments, and among friends
and family. Members of some social communities (e.g. social media friend groups)
may share values and beliefs together without necessarily being in close
geographic proximity. Alternatively, people can come into physical proximity—at
work, shops, beaches, sporting events— without sharing strongly-held beliefs.
Sometimes, even strangers may copy certain visible behaviors, such as wearing
protective masks at the grocery store. A pandemic is both a biological and
social phenomenon. This work will develop practical tools (models) that predict
the interaction between collective behavior and the spatiotemporal dynamics of
disease spread. This will enable more accurate predictions of medical resources
the population will need over time. Public health measures can target not only
individual behavior but also collective behavior, which may require different
incentives and nudges, such that public health messaging can be maximally
beneficial. Results from the project will also be shared through a public
webinar on the role of mathematics in pandemic
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work to address these gaps will involve
two different types of mathematical modeling efforts. The first type will rely
on designing a system ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to capture both
disease dynamics and social influence. This ODE model will assume that mass
action average rates of transition between both disease and belief states are
sufficient to gain insight, producing quantitative characterizations to describe
how belief dynamics interact with disease prevalence in a community as both
progress over time. The second type will rely on designing coupled multi-layer
networks in which one layer captures social influence and the other captures
physical contact and disease transmission. This model will explore dynamic
connections among individuals within each layer, where the strength of contact
can shift based on the state and neighbors of the same individual in the other
layer. This second model, by focusing on particular network structures will
complement the insights about average behaviors gained by the ODE model and
provide insight into the different roles individuals may play in shifting
community perception and/or spreading infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.