* 2028162
* EAGER: Evaluating the feasibility of a transmissible vaccine within bat populations.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2020,12/31/2021
* James Bull, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2021
* USD 56,420.00

Emerging infectious diseases like COVID-19 can arise when a virus normally
circulating within a population of wild animals jumps into the human population.
Unfortunately, as we have seen very clearly with COVID-19, once this jump into
the human population occurs, it may be too late to stop the infectious disease
from spreading rapidly. A novel solution to this problem is to extinguish high-
risk pathogens circulating within animal populations before they can jump into
the human population. One way this can be accomplished is by developing a
vaccine for the animal population that is capable of transmitting itself from
one animal to the next, vaccinating each animal against the pathogen as it
spreads. Recent advances in genetic engineering have made the development of
this sort of self-disseminating vaccine possible. What we do not yet know,
however, is if such a vaccine would be an effective tool for eliminating
coronaviruses (like the virus that causes COVID-19) from the wild bat
populations within which they normally circulate. This research will use
mathematical and computational models to evaluate the feasibility of this
approach and lay the groundwork for developing new types of vaccines that reduce
the risk of emerging infectious disease. This research project will also support
the training of a first generation female graduate student at the interface of
mathematics and infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
develop mathematical and computational models evaluating the feasibility of
using a transmissible vaccine to reduce the prevalence of SARS-like
coronaviruses within wild Rhinolophus bat populations. These models will be
parameterized using published data on coronavirus prevalence and seroprevalence
within wild bat populations and data on bat population structure, demography,
and ranging behavior. Parameterized models will predict the outcome of
interventions employing vaccine vectors with different degrees of
transmissibility and thus set boundaries on the vectors that could be used to
engineer an effective transmissible vaccine. In addition to advancing our
ability to reduce the threat of emerging infectious disease, the proposed work
will provide training at the interface of mathematics and infectious disease for
a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.