* 2028500
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Historic Economic Intergroup Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Francois Richard, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 15,245.00

This project examines how the spread of agriculture and pastoralism impacted the
economic and governance practices of hunter-gatherer communities. Previous
scholarship has generally described this process in two ways, assuming that
hunter-gatherer communities survived through either: 1.) Isolation from farmers
and herders across frontier boundaries; or 2.) Symbiosis with neighboring food-
producing communities as ritual specialists and producers of wild resources. In
the latter scenario, it is assumed that close relationships between these groups
often led to the gradual assimilation of hunter-gatherers and the loss of
generalized hunting and gathering of diverse resources as a viable way of life
as governance and economic systems became more dependent on specialized
production. Archaeology is well placed to provide new information about long-
term relationships between hunter-gatherers, farmers, and herders in order to
address the project’s key questions: What led to the survival of hunting and
gathering groups into the present? What role does the use and exchange of
natural resources play in the formation of political and economic systems
capable of withstanding changing social and environmental conditions? This
research is relevant to contemporary challenges, such as the nature of resilient
economic systems or concerns about flexible responses to food security.
Collaborations with local governmental and educational institutions will promote
scientific literacy, increase training opportunities for students and officials,
and add tangible value to cultural heritage sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project rests on materials recovered through prior fieldwork. These materials
offer critical evidence about human interactions over a period when agriculture
and pastoralism entered into the region and became dominant. Analytical methods
have included systematic surface and subsurface sampling, selective surveys of
rockshelters, and excavations at open-air sites and rockshelters. The research
will generate high-resolution, informed reconstructions of the region’s history
while also contributing to global, comparative studies of hunter-gatherer
diversity and history. This project will include radiocarbon dating and chemical
analysis of diagnostic artifact assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.