* 2028361
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Towards Computational Exploration of Large-Scale Neuro-Morphological Datasets
* BIO,DBI
* 02/27/2020,06/30/2021
* Shuiwang Ji, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 146,452.00

Analyzing single neuron's property is a fundamental task to understand the
nervous system and brain working mechanism. Investigating neuron morphology is
an effective way to analyze neurons, since it plays a major role in determining
neurons' properties. Recently, the ever-increasing neuron databases have greatly
facilitated the research of neuron morphology. However, the sheer volume and
complexity of these data pose significant challenges for computational analysis,
preventing the realization of the full potential of such data. This
interdisciplinary project will seek for new avenue to assemble the massive
neuron morphologies and provide a unified framework for neuroscientists to
explore and analyze different types of neurons. The research is able to tackle
many challenges in neuroscience which are hard to solve with previous methods,
including fine-grained neuron identification, latent pattern discovery and
exploration, etc. The large-scale methods being developed will be particularly
beneficial in the future of neuroscience, since more and more neurons are
reconstructed and added to the databases. The computational methods and tools
developed are very likely to be applicable for solving other bioinformatics
problems, especially those dealing with large-scale datasets. The broader impact
of this project not only includes educational support for undergraduate
researchers and high school students, particularly women and those
underrepresented groups, but also contributes to the research of neuroscience
and other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project
is to develop effective computational methods and tools for neuroscientists to
interactively explore large-scale neuron databases with ultra-fine-grained
accuracy, in real-time. This research has a strong multidisciplinary component
that involves a nexus ideas from machine learning, information retrieval, and
neuroinformatics. Particularly, novel ideas will be implemented in three inter-
related components through the whole framework. The first one addresses the
accurate and efficient neuron reconstruction and tracing based on deep learning
models. The second addresses the efficient discovery of relevant instances among
large-size neuron databases via multi-modal and online binary coding methods.
The third part addresses intelligent visualization and interaction schemes for
knowledge discovery and mining, equipped with interactive coding that can
incorporate domain experts' feedback to enhance the query algorithms for fine-
tuned results. Compared with previous methods and systems, this project will
open a new avenue to assist neuroscientists analyzing and exploring large-scale
neuron databases with high efficiency, accuracy, and robustness. The performance
of proposed methods will be validated using public neuro-morphological databases
(e.g., NeuroMorpho, BigNeuron) and compared with several benchmarks. The
effectiveness of the tools to be developed will be evaluated by neuroscientists
on domain-specific hypothesis-driven applications. The outcome of the project
will be made available at the following websites:
http://webpages.uncc.edu/~szhang16/ and https://github.com/divelab/.