* 2028909
* RAPID: Rapid Assay for RNA Extraction and Concentration for COVID-19 Molecular Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Ryan Langlois, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Access to coronavirus testing is integral to the effort to curb and control the
spread of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19). COVID-19 diagnostic tests
currently implement a technique called reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). This technique requires two reagent kits. The first is used
to extract the genetic material, ribonucleic acid (RNA), from the coronavirus,
and the second is used to amplify the RNA to enable its detection with RT-PCR.
The current diagnostic crisis is due, in part, to shortages of the RNA
extraction kits and the time required to extract the RNA using the kits.
Increasing both the availability and time-efficiency of these kits is vital to
improve testing accessibility and enhance the reliability of clinical
diagnostics. In this project, a novel process for producing porous sorbent
materials will be used to develop an alternative extraction kit for efficient
and rapid extraction of nucleic acids from patient samples. The performance will
be further optimized by studying the molecular mechanisms governing nucleic acid
capture and release by the sorbents and applying this fundamental knowledge. The
development and clinical validation of a novel extraction kit will be followed
by mass production, addressing the current shortage and improving access to
COVID-19 testing. The close collaboration between engineers developing the
diagnostic technologies and clinicians implementing the prototypes, as enabled
by this project, will streamline the transition of scientific knowledge into
solutions that benefit the health and well-being of society. The project will
also provide workforce development opportunities through training researchers in
novel diagnostic techniques for coronaviruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop a novel, scalable approach to nucleic acid separation
and concentration and mass-produce prototype kits for immediate implementation
in clinical settings. The concept relies on the use of sorbent materials instead
of the current filter- and silica column-based approach. Unlike filters that use
pore size to physically separate the target (here nucleic acids) from the media,
sorbents are a porous material that captures the target by chemical affinity and
interactions. As a result, the use of a sorbent enables larger water flow rates,
enhanced nucleic acid capture efficiency, and faster sample processing, and
overcomes the need for multiple buffers or extraction steps. Functionalization
of conventional filters with a combination of metal oxide nanoparticles and
organosiloxane polymers will be used to produce the nucleic acid sorbent. The
functionalization will be achieved by a new method for supported synthesis of
nanoparticles by thermolysis and polymer conjugation. The efficiency of the
sorbent will be assessed by the extraction and detection of nucleic acid using
quantitative RT-PCR. Validation of the alternative sorbent kit will assess the
effectiveness of the rapid separation and concentration of the novel coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) RNA. The project will also explore the fundamentals of nucleic acid
dynamics in porous sorbents as it relates to nucleic acid size, sorbent
chemistry, porosity and pore size, and the effect of transport phenomena in
porous media. Enhanced understanding of the factors that affect the retention,
release, and transport of nucleic acids in porous media is critical to producing
reliable and efficient nucleic acid extraction and detection kits and the
development of other bio-separation processes. Training of postdoctoral
researchers and graduate and undergraduate students will focus on how the
combination of transdisciplinary collaboration and a clear understanding of the
fundamental aspects can lead to disruptive
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.