* 2028649
* Collaborative Resarch: EAGER: Mapping small molecules in the root meristem
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Alexandra Dickinson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

It is well appreciated that plants have roots which serve many essential
functions, such as structurally supporting the plant and taking up nutrients
from the soil to promote the growth of the plant. But what is not clear is the
chemical composition of different root compartments and how these chemicals are
used to signal the growth of the plant. The research team hopes to discover the
identity and function of these chemical compounds by making a chemical map of
where these chemical compounds are located in the root structure. They will do
that by directing a stream of tiny droplets onto a cut section of the root and
letting the resulting droplet splash enter a mass spectrometer, a device that
can determine the identity and the amount of each compound dissolved in the
scattered droplets. By mounting the root section on a slide that be moved right
and left as well as up and down, a two-dimensional map will be recorded of the
compounds present in the root. They believe this approach will provide new
information related to how roots of plants
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolite and lipid signaling molecules are
critical for proper regulation of development in multicellular organisms. The
chemical properties of these small molecules enable them to cross cell
membranes, function as highly specific ligands to protein receptors, and
dynamically convert between different molecular species on short time scales.
These abilities facilitate rapid communication of developmental cues across
tissues. Defects in the biosynthesis, perception, or metabolism of these
compounds can lead to aberrant tissue formation and disease. Despite the
critical importance of small molecules, most of our understanding of their
function is derived from indirect measurements of these compounds. The
investigators will utilize desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
imaging (DESI-MSI) to directly measure small molecules in distinct developmental
regions of root tissue. The root meristem is an excellent model for this work
because cells are organized along a longitudinal developmental gradient, with
pluripotent stem cells located at the tip of the root, and differentiated cells
localized towards the direction of the shoot. This approach is yielding the
identification of novel small molecule regulators of development. Combining
DESI-MSI with traditional molecular biology approaches will enable
characterization of new roles of metabolite and lipid signaling compounds in
stem cell decisions, with implications in both plant and human
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.