* 2028376
* Unraveling Hidden Physics in Multiphase Combustion: Preferential Vaporization at Elevated Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tanvir Farouk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,952.00

Transportation liquid fuels, such as gasoline, jet, and diesel fuels, contain
hundreds of molecules with wide variations in their sizes and chemical
structures. Consequently, the combustion of liquid fuels involves complex
coupling between chemical reaction rates dictated by various molecules in the
fuel and spray size distribution. The principal aim of this project is to
establish fundamental knowledge of the fuel vaporization process, particularly
at high-pressure conditions relevant to the applications of internal combustion
engines. The outcomes of the project will provide a fundamental foundation for
developing next-generation advanced combustion engines, allowing the reduction
in emission as well as increase overall efficiency. The project will also
encompass significant educational activities, including both graduate and
undergraduate research programs and an outreach program geared towards local
high school students and teachers to fulfill the mission of the NSF. The project
will allow nurturing of the next generation of U.S. innovators in energy and
engineering sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is
to establish fundamental knowledge of preferential vaporization impacts by
designing and performing well-defined experiments at elevated pressure
conditions, which will be used for validating and evaluating the fidelity of the
sub-model of preferential vaporization. The project will perform three
experimental tasks and one modeling task: 1) Experimental characterization of
isolated single droplet vaporization for multi-component fuels; 2) Experimental
investigation of isolated single droplet interaction with flames; 3) Experiments
on near-limit combustion behaviors by controlling the extent of fuel
vaporization with well-defined multi-component fuel mixtures; 4) Development and
validation of spray sub-model capable of describing preferential vaporization
characteristics. The results of this project are expected to provide insightful
guidance to the development of alternative fuels and their synthetic
methodologies and a fundamental foundation to develop advanced fuel
specification protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.