* 2028365
* EAGER: CDS&amp;E: Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) for Enhancing the Speed and Energy Efficiency of Quantum Chemistry Simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bryan Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,347.00

Professor Bryan M. Wong of the University of California-Riverside is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry to utilize new computational hardware, known as
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). The goal of this research project is to
enhance the speed and energy efficiency of quantum chemistry calculations.
Modern quantum chemistry calculations depend critically on massively
parallelized computational hardware to enable their predictions. Massively
parallel is the term for using a large number of separate computers (or computer
processors) to perform a set of coordinated computations simultaneously.
Quantitatively accurate predictions from such calculations impact several
chemical technologies including combustion, catalysis, process modeling, and
chemical production industries. However, the supercomputing centers used to run
these predictive calculations consume enormous amounts of energy and resources.
Also many such calculations do not scale well as the studied chemical systems
grow larger. To address these important issues, FPGAs are being harnessed to
enhance the computational speed, as well as to maintain the delicate balance
between performance and energy efficiency for large-scale quantum calculations.
In addition to addressing these scientific and technological needs, this project
is carried out at the University of California-Riverside, which is an accredited
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). As such, Professor Wong's institution is an
ideal place to attract researchers who might otherwise not be aware of the
employment opportunities in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An
FPGA consists of an array of thousands of connection and logic blocks seamlessly
connected with each other to create extremely re-configurable programming units.
Like Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), FPGAs are ideal for parallelization, but
with the added advantage of having reprogrammable circuitry at the hardware
level to enable even further parallelization and significant energy gains. This
EAGER project is sub-divided into two main (but highly connected) thrusts.
Thrust 1 will extend the use of FPGAs to accelerate Fock-matrix builds and
Hamiltonian diagonalization for ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) and linear-
response time-dependent density functional theory calculations, respectively.
Thrust 2 will subsequently assess and demonstrate the immense energy efficiency
(compared to CPUs/GPUs) of FPGAs for these quantum calculations. The field of
quantum chemistry has yet to utilize FPGAs for production-level calculations of
any kind, creating an exciting opportunity for transformative leadership in this
area. Together these thrusts address basic (yet practical) parallelization
issues in quantum chemistry with non-conventional computing approaches, and
introduce a new computational capability to perform these quantum chemistry
calculations in an energy-efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.