* 2028968
* RAPID: Health, Housing, and Hazards: COVID-19, Subjective Resilience, Vulnerabilities, and Policy Evolution in Hurricane Prone Counties
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Alka Sapat, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 175,848.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is a rapidly evolving global crisis that has multiple
ramifications and impacts, particularly for those who are most vulnerable, and
for those who are still recovering from past disasters. Individuals and
households are facing multiple challenges, including health risks, precarious
housing conditions, and exposure to weather and climate hazards, within the
context of rapidly evolving policy mandates and short-term measures (such as
moratoriums on evictions) to address the uncertainties stemming from the
COVID-19 pandemic. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project seeks to capture
ephemeral and time-bound data on the subjective perceptions of resilience of
individuals and households, including their capacities to cope and adapt in
response to these challenges. This serves the national interest and advances
national health, prosperity and welfare by improving our understandings of
several topics, including: (i) the factors influencing individual and household
coping and adaptive capacities and their subjective perceptions of risk and
resilience; and, (ii) the impacts of policy fragmentation and ambiguity in
addressing inter-sectional and cumulative vulnerabilities related to health,
housing, and hazards. The findings have practical applications for pandemic
preparedness and disaster management, specifically for socially vulnerable
populations with respect to housing, sheltering and evacuation in hazard-prone
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study areas include counties in south and
central Florida and the Panhandle, which are still recovering from Hurricanes
Michael and Irma, and which saw an influx of displaced persons from Puerto Rico
after Hurricane Maria. As the 2020 hurricane season looms, the potential impact
of storms will further exacerbate the inter-sectional and cumulative
vulnerabilities of renters and others living in precarious housing conditions.
Data to achieve the research objectives includes repeated cross-sectional
population surveys conducted in both English and Spanish via the Internet and
landlines. Three waves of the survey are conducted to capture the immediate
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the perceptions of resilience and coping and
adaptive capacities of individuals and households over a few months: (i) early
June 2020 to align with the beginning of the hurricane season and by which time
there will be policies being implemented to address the fallout of the pandemic;
(ii) October 2020 by which time the pandemic may abate or earlier if there is a
major hurricane event in Florida; and (iii) March 2021, which is approximately a
year after policy responses to the pandemic began. Secondary data are collected
and analyzed from media sources and policy documents on the rapidly evolving
policy measures adopted to combat the pandemic during the time periods
immediately preceding the survey work. Given the study area, the research team
is also interested in the immediate effects of temporary federal, state, and
local-level policies dealing with evacuation, sheltering, and housing because of
the pandemic and potential storms. Multivariate statistical models are used to
examine the dynamic relationships between perceptions of resilience, risk
perceptions, inter-sectional vulnerabilities related to health, housing, and
hazards, and policies adopted to address the pandemic and its
ramifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.