* 2028351
* Interparticle Metal-Metal Interactions in Electrocatalytic Carbon Dioxide Reduction Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Hailiang Wang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2023
* USD 444,739.00

A major challenge in the transition to clean energy is reducing emissions of
carbon dioxide from fuel combustion. Using renewable electricity to convert
carbon dioxide to value-added fuels and chemical products is a promising way of
turning carbon emissions into a resource. Palladium is a unique metal that can
catalyze the electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide to formate ion
(HCOO-). Formate is a building-block compound that can be used to produce
industrially important chemicals such as formaldehyde and methanol. The
catalytic performance of palladium, however, is severely limited by rapid
deactivation of the catalyst active site, and it is difficult to design improved
systems without further understanding of both the reaction and deactivation
mechanisms. This research project will study novel catalysts composed of
palladium and a secondary metal. The aim is to stabilize the catalyst active
site and thereby develop catalysts can perform the sustained, efficient
conversion of carbon dioxide into formate. This research project also will
foster new teaching and learning opportunities for a large and diverse body of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project is to
investigate how nanoscale interparticle metal-metal interactions influence the
catalytic mechanisms of carbon dioxide electroreduction on palladium. The goals
are to limit catalyst deactivation during the production of formate and to
enable the synthesis of new products such as formaldehyde or methanol. Metal
nanoparticles will be used as “electronic ligands” and modify the binding
strength of palladium with reaction intermediates. The nanoparticles also can
act as “collaborative ligands” that directly participate in catalysis by
providing a secondary type of surface site. The electronic and collaborative
interactions between palladium and a variety of other metals will be studied.
Additionally, experiments will be performed to learn how these interactions
change the binding energetics of palladium with the reaction intermediates and
the potential-dependent reduction reaction pathways. Ultimately, the knowledge
gained from these studies will be used to develop electrocatalysts that are
stable for efficient conversion of carbon dioxide to formate and then on to more
complex products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.