* 2028758
* RAPID: A Lung Mucus Strategy for COVID-19 Viral Protection
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Vulnerability to COVID-19 arises from multiple risk factors, but two are
particularly prominent: lack of antibodies (Ab) to the novel coronavirus; and
structural properties of lung mucus. This project addresses both risk factors
through focused experiments and data from two labs in an active feedback loop
with mathematical modeling, simulations, and theory. The mathematical effort
will provide a platform, starting from a baseline model and simulation of
exposure to inhaled COVID-19 without Ab protection. The baseline model will
distinguish clearance of the inhaled viral load versus onset and propagation of
respiratory infection. Two experimental interventions will be simulated on top
of the baseline model at progressive stages of infection: inhaled doses of
COVID-19-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAb) and of structure-targeted
mucolytics. Both labs will leverage mathematical predictions to accelerate and
optimize their strategies to mitigate COVID-19 disease. Likewise, experimental
results and data will be leveraged to validate models and learn hidden factors
critical to the predictive accuracy of the models. The potential broader impact
of this project is to predict optimal, mAb-based and mucolytic-based treatments
for specific sub-populations at various stages of COVID-19 lung
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical modeling platform will explore
the delicate interplay among: inhaled loads of COVID-19, their diffusion within,
and potentially through, the mucus-coated respiratory tract; infectivity onset
as COVID-19 reaches and invades epithelial cells, produces daughters that invade
new cells and propagate the infection; how long after exposure to COVID-19
either natural antibodies or engineered mAb are introduced into the mucus layer;
and, the rate of clearance of the mucus layer from the lung. The latter
clearance rate is known to depend, often dramatically, on structural properties
of mucus in vulnerable sub-populations to COVID-19. The experimental team will
test outcomes of existing mAb on non-infectious COVID-19 nanoparticles. A multi-
species stochastic model will simulate diffusion and propagation of COVID-19,
interrupted by mAb-crosslinks between COVID-19 and mucins. Some reaction-
diffusion parameters are measured while others will be learned from experimental
data using hidden Markov methods. A polymer-physics-based molecular dynamics
model of mucus will simulate structure properties of mucus based on the chemical
structure and concentrations of mucin polymers known for specific sub-
populations. With this modeling platform, the goals are to: optimize mAb design;
characterize efficiency of given mAb affinities to COVID-19 and mucus; and
quantify the inhaled mAb dose required to arrest COVID-19 infection at various
stages of progression, specific to mucus structure
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.