* 2028008
* SBIR Phase I:  Accelerating Understanding of COVID-19 Biology and Treatment Via Scaled Medical Record and Biosimulation Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2020
* Guha Jayachandran, Onai Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2020
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to address information needs of the COVID-19 crisis
by rapidly integrating research findings describing the chemistry of the virus
and its treatment. The proposed project will deploy advanced computational
methods at participating medical institutions to make patient records
immediately available for study while maintaining institutional and patient
privacy. While the initial focus is on ameliorating COVID-19, the proposed
solution can be applied more generally to accelerate epidemiological studies,
improving scientific knowledge and public health with faster timelines and
lowered costs for personnel, computing capabilities, and data storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to rapidly expand and
accelerate the accessibility of clinical and computational data to improve
understanding of COVID-19. The proposed innovation will use cryptographic
techniques, notably multiparty computation, to facilitate privacy-preserving
cross-institutional querying of COVID-19 medical records. Improved access to
petabytes of computational (simulation and model) data will speed research by
allowing researchers around the world to probe the data. The effort will adapt
and deploy decentralized computation techniques to enable distributed storage of
many petabytes of virus molecular dynamics simulation data across computers
around the world, in a verifiable manner that enables data analysis at the data
location. The proposed dashboard will allow for secure queries of a combined
dataset of participating institutions to quickly yield insight about the effect
of various pre-existing conditions and medications on COVID-19. The effort will
include verification and validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.