* 2028671
* Workshop on Next Generation Humic Isolates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Diane McKnight, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 105,000.00

This grant will support costs for a workshop to be held as part of the
International Humic Substances Society (IHSS) biannual meeting. The goal of the
workshop is to discuss future needs for maintaining the current reference
samples of natural organic matter (NOM) of the IHSS and to consider approaches
for collecting new reference NOM samples. NOM is important for several reasons.
The NOM in soil is also known as soil humus. NOM is also present in oceans and
in all lakes and streams. Not only does NOM play an important role in the global
carbon cycle, but NOM also reacts with nutrients needed by plants and controls
the fate of many toxic chemicals. Since the mid-1980’s, the IHSS has provided
reference samples of NOM to scientists worldwide to use for research. The
availability of these reference NOM samples has made it possible to compare
results from many different studies. The scientists attending the workshop will
summarize their recommendations and will prepare a report describing recent
advances in understanding NOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
support costs for a workshop to be held as part of the International Humic
Substances Society (IHSS) biannual meeting. The goal of the workshop is to
discuss future needs for maintaining the current reference samples of natural
organic matter (NOM) of the IHSS and to consider approaches for collecting new
reference NOM samples. Natural organic matter (NOM) represents an important
reservoir in the global carbon budget and participates in many important
biogeochemical and environmental reactions ranging from supporting heterotrophic
microbial activity to attenuating the transport of trace metal and persistent
organic contaminants. Since the early 1980’s, the IHSS, the scientific community
that studies NOM, has worked to develop an integrated understanding of NOM
chemistry. In addition, the IHSS has distributed standard and reference NOM,
humic and fulvic acids from terrestrial and aquatic environments, representing
diverse sources from a biogeochemical and global perspective. The group
attending the workshop will develop recommendations for sustaining the
availability of current reference and standard humic substances for years to
come. The group will also prepare a synthesis paper reviewing recent advances in
understanding of NOM chemistry and reactivity and highlighting the ways in which
the progress was advanced by using standard and reference samples from the IHSS.
This workshop will advance understanding of NOM by maintaining the availability
of these reference humic substances to the broad research community spanning
environmental engineering and science, soil science, chemistry, limnology, and
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.