* 2028311
* RAPID:COVID-19: A Low-Cost Disposable Wearable for Real-Time Tracking of the  Risk of and Recovery to COVID-19, Influenza, and other Viral Infections
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Patrick Mercier, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The world is currently vastly underprepared to deal with viral pandemics such as
COVID-19. Testing kits around the world are in short supply, and since symptoms
are so similar to other common infections such as influenza and the common cold,
short testing supplies means doctors will only administer tests to patients who
fit very specific symptoms – leaving others in the dark as to whether they are
infected. This causes an unknown number of people – many who may be infected, to
potentially spread the virus to others. The world desperately needs a way to
quantitatively triage individuals who are at high risk of carrying COVID-19
based on more than just their self-reported symptoms. In addition, those who are
infected and are quarantining at home have no way of knowing how they are
progressing in their recovery and/or if their symptoms are sufficient to warrant
hospitalization (before it may be too late). All of this is true not just for
COVID-19, but for any future viral infection that may take the world by storm.
Thus, even if COVID-19 tests eventually become available in large quantities,
the technology developed in this program will still be useful to help self-
triage and self-monitor subjects in future viral outbreaks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this RAPID project is to research and
develop wearable platform technology that can be used to monitor patients, in
real time, to determine their likelihood of currently being infected, and if
they are infected, how their recovery process is coming along. This will be
accomplished via a hybrid wearable device that simultaneously monitors body
temperature for fever detection, and respiration function for coughing and
shortness of breath measures. Importantly, the technology to be researched and
developed herein will be engineered from the ground up to be extremely low
power, such that the device can be powered via energy harvesting means without a
battery. Implemented with a small integrated circuit, a small sensor array, and
ultra-efficient magnetic human body communication technology, the entire
platform will be disposable and last for weeks. Recorded data will be wirelessly
delivered to a smartphone/smartwatch app, which can collect data across a large
and diverse user space for population health analysis. At scale, the device is
expected to cost &lt;$0.10 USD, and thus could be used not only in the United
States, but across the developing world. By aggregating volunteered data in an
anonymous format from many users, the developed app will have epidemiologic
applications, and help to illustrate likely infection rates across local,
national, and international geographies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.