* 2028103
* I-Corps: Software Platform for Constructing Mission-critical Autonomous Distributed Systems
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wide range of autonomous distributed systems, including cloud
services, internet of things (IoT) and edge-computing capable factory systems,
and autonomous distributed robotics. Heavy use of cloud services, proliferation
of IoT (more than 30B devices and $1.5 trillion in spending by the end of 2020)
and a developing need for complex autonomous devices (e.g., drone swarms)
increases the demand for concurrent and distributed software solutions and their
capabilities. While standard practices of software development meet demands in a
portion of these areas, due to novel requirements of complex software there is a
constant rise of the burden for software developers and domain experts. There is
a need to shorten the time to deploy new systems but also enable more complex
systems, fortified by guarantees in crucial aspects such as security, privacy,
and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a general platform for constructing mission-critical autonomous
distributed systems. The hypothesis is that these types of systems effectively
require new models and tools for software development and ultimately user
interfaces. The approach focuses on fundamental difficulties of distributed
software construction and hides them from the concerns of the domain-expert
(potentially non-programmer) end-user. It enables not just rapid prototyping and
easier development but also construction of systems that perform a more complex
sets of tasks, while producing optimal correct-by-construction systems. The goal
is to empower domain-specific non-programmer experts, allowing them to focus on
conceptual domain-specific tasks, while eliminating the burden of low-level
distribution implementation details. The system is designed to provide a missing
piece for enabling complex tasks on interconnected devices, especially the those
operating under restricted environments, like autonomous drone swarms, opening
new possibilities with such autonomy, such as advanced drone swarm
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.