* 2028564
* RAPID: COVID-19â€™s Impact on the Urban Environment, Behavior, and Wellbeing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Arvind Varsani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,998.00

SARS CoV2, the coronavirus responsible for the global severe acute respiratory
syndrome pandemic (COVID-19) represents a major threat to the health and welfare
of the public. Currently the US death toll is nearing 30,000 and estimates
exceeding a hundred thousand fatalities if the spread of the virus continues
unchecked. Public health interventions including strict shelter in place rules
have been put in place across the US and globally to limit the spread of the
virus through communities. This has had a dramatic impact on the economy, with
millions of people becoming unemployed in the immediate aftermath of the
interventions. The goal of this RAPID project is to develop the science for
rapid assessment of how public health interventions in response to the COVID-19
pandemic are impacting the environment, human behavior, and the wellbeing of the
public. This goal will be achieved through detailed characterization of various
biomarkers of environmental health and wellbeing in wastewater collected in the
service area of people living in Tempe, Arizona. The information collected will
be available to city officials, other community stakeholders, and the public
using an online platform for emergency response. The resources developed in this
project will inform the Nation of the impacts of shelter in place and assist
crisis management and decision makers in managing these
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to employ
detailed high-resolution analysis of wastewater together with geospatial
modeling to develop a rapid assessment of environmental health at the community
level during the mandated health interventions in response to the global
COVID-19 pandemic. The study will take place in Tempe, Arizona, a city of
185,000 people. Baseline data on environmental quality and human behavior and
health have been collected by the research team for the past two years leading
up to the pandemic. A transdisciplinary team consisting of an environmental
engineer, a virologist, and a bioinformatician will study environmental and
human health impacts associated with the global pandemic and the public health
interventions implemented in the city in response to the outbreak using this
unique data resource. Urban wastewater will be sampled daily during the shelter
in place intervention for analysis of a broad spectrum of compounds and
biomarkers using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Analyses
include the types and quantities of air pollutants, medications taken as a
result of fever and viral infections (e.g., ibuprofen), allergy suppressants,
stimulants and depressants (such as nicotine and alcohol), drugs of abuse,
dietary markers (indicating potential food shortages), and general biomarkers
suggestive of human wellbeing and health status (e.g., antidepressants). US
census data will enable an interpretation of study findings using demographics
and population-size data relevant for crisis management and evidence-based
decision making by scientists, city planners, mayors, health agencies,
healthcare providers, and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.