* 2028224
* RAPID: Measuring the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on STEM Student Engagement and Learning in Online Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Steven Van Dessel, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,943.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a sudden and unprecedented shift of
undergraduate education to online learning. Instructors and students, many of
whom have limited experience teaching and learning online, have suddenly been
immersed in an exclusively virtual learning experience. This shift has been
accompanied by drastic limitations in students’ daily activities, social
interactions, and job opportunities. Given that the current disruption in the
system is transient in nature, it is urgent to collect and analyze the data
needed to understand the impact of the pandemic on undergraduate students. To
this end, this project will examine the immediate and long-term impacts of the
pandemic on undergraduate students’ emotional well-being, day-to-day
functioning, and learning. The study aims to provide insights on how disruptions
can affect learners’ stress, engagement, and learning outcomes both during the
online learning experience and during the return to learning conditions that are
similar to those prior to the disruption. Results from this project will help
inform higher-education institutions and policymakers as they develop strategies
to mitigate the effects on student learning resulting from the current pandemic
and to plan responses for future disruptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to understand the longitudinal and dynamic impact of the
pandemic on undergraduate STEM students’ emotional states (such as stress,
anxiety, depressive symptoms, and frustration), day-to-day life (such as social
isolation, sedentariness, access to outdoor environments, and proximity to
outbreak hotspots), and learning engagement and outcomes. Fluctuations in
students’ day-to-day functions and emotional states will be evaluated during and
after the pandemic, using information from psychological surveys, interviews,
computer vision-based analytics, and wearable sensors. Learning outcomes will be
assessed using grades and self-evaluation of learning. Quantitative and
qualitative analysis of the resulting data will be used to understand the
effects of the disruptions in daily life on students’ emotional states and
learning outcomes. This project aims to advance the STEM education community’s
understanding of the relationship between disruptions in the education system
and student learning, and potentially reveal characteristics that promote
resilience of students during and following the acute stages of a crisis. This
RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program in the
Division of Undergraduate Education (Education and Human Resources Directorate),
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.