* 2028076
* Design and Development: Solving Community Problems with Engineering (SCoPE)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Shawn Stevens, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2023
* USD 342,993.00

Engineering participation in rural communities is a critical need to bolster
economic opportunity and meet workforce needs. Students enrolled in rural
schools across the United States face barriers to accessing high-quality
engineering education, such as lack of resources, lack of attention from
reformers, researchers, and legislation, and lack of awareness of the diversity
of engineering careers. Given the rapid growth of available engineering jobs,
the shortage of talent to fill these roles, and the 9 million students enrolled
in rural public schools, it is prudent to create a curriculum that can engage
rural students in personally-relevant engineering problems that can spark
interest in further engineering pursuits. Yet, many public schools lack
engineering courses. There is an immense opportunity to use place-based learning
to not only integrate engineering into science courses, but also increase
students’ understanding of the relevance of engineering to their everyday lives
and societal change. WGBH Educational Foundation (GBH)—a major producer of
educational STEM media—will develop Solving Community Problems with Engineering
(SCoPE), a three-week, seventh-grade capstone project that will empower middle
school students in rural and agricultural communities to integrate design
thinking in engineering with their existing understanding of science concepts to
solve problems that are relevant and meaningful within their community. Students
will plan and test their own engineering solutions for alleviating the impact of
nutrient pollution on the local ecosystem by addressing point sources of
nutrients. Over the course of the design process, they will use models and a
simulation to conceptualize relationships among variables in a complex system,
predict potential benefits of their engineering interventions over time, and
test their solutions. Throughout the project, we will collect data through
interviews, surveys, and classroom observations. A pilot study at the conclusion
of resource development will utilize pre-post content knowledge and engineering
interest and attitude assessments, data embedded in the digital tools, and
student artifacts to evaluate the potential impact of the project on students’
science and engineering knowledge and interests. SCoPE aims to: (1) create
instructional materials that support rural students in developing a deep
understanding of engineering ideas and how they relate to what they learn in
science; (2) increase students’ interest in engineering, and their understanding
of how engineering practices can be applied to relevant problems in their daily
lives; and (3) build our understanding to further develop resources and best
practices for implementing engineering pedagogy that is contextualized in local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study poses three research questions: (1)
How can a school, nonprofit, and community organization work together to create
relevant engineering curricula for students? (2) How do students’ perceptions of
and interest in engineering change after participating in SCoPE? (3) What
aspects of SCoPE have the greatest potential to support students in developing a
deep understanding of core engineering skills and processes? The project will be
conducted in partnership with a regional middle school and the Pleasant Bay
Community Boating Marine Science Education Center in Cape Cod, Massachusetts. We
will leverage GBH’s extensive national networks and existing platforms to ensure
that the resources and findings from SCoPE will reach classrooms across the
country. As an organization and as a research and outreach team, we are deeply
connected to local and state school systems and can host materials, freely
accessible, on PBS LearningMedia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.