* 2028431
* RAPID:COVID-19: RT-LAMP-based electrical detection of SARS-CoV-2
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Rashid Bashir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Since the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2, the virus
that causes the coronavirus-associated acute respiratory disease COVID-19)
jumped from an animal reservoir to humans in December 2019, it has rapidly
spread across the world, bringing death, illness, disruption to daily life, and
economic losses to businesses and individuals. The rapid development of the
COVID-19 pandemic highlights the shortcomings in the existing laboratory-based
testing paradigm for viral diagnostics that features a widespread lack of test
kits, extended time delays to obtain test results, and a high rate of false
negative tests. The shortcomings of the existing laboratory-based infrastructure
are contributing to uncertainty surrounding quarantine failure, confusion among
health authorities, and also to a general public anxiety. To address this
critical and timely need, in this work, development of point-of-care device is
proposed for detecting the presence of SARS-CoV-2 from nasal fluid samples and
in 10 minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental limitations of current
assays for viral pathogens stem from their reliance upon polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) analysis, which requires complex, labor-intensive, laboratory-
based protocols for viral isolation, lysis, and removal of inhibiting materials.
Importantly, PCR requires a large number of time-consuming and precise thermal
cycles to enzymatically amplify specific RNA sequences. In this work development
of an electrical, label-free and surface modification-free point-of-care device
for detecting the presence of SARS-CoV-2 (1-3 copy/mL) from nasal fluid samples
and in &lt; 10 min. The proposed work will combine Bst polymerase in an
isothermal RT-LAMP (reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal
amplification) reaction, with target-specific primers and crumpled graphene
field-effect transistors (gFET) to electrically detect the amplification event
by sensing the consumption of primers. These reactions offer the possibility of
rapidly detecting SARS-CoV-2 using a simple, inexpensive and portable
potentiostat and avoiding the necessity of RNA extraction. In order to develop
the proposed detection technology, this proposal will first validate twelve sets
of RT-LAMP primers specific to SARS-CoV-2. Importantly, No RT-LAMP primers
specific to SARS-CoV-2 are available commercially, neither in the literature.
Then, the proposal will demonstrate the feasibility of the RT-LAMP-based
electrical approach to detect SARS-CoV-2. Likewise, the proposal will
demonstrate the approach as a global health technology to contribute to
providing low-cost diagnostics around the world using portable and inexpensive
heating block and potentiostat for virus detection and
quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.