* 2028872
* EAGER: SARE: Collaborative Research: Exploring and Mitigating Attacks of Millimeter-wave Radar Sensors in Autonomous Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Chunming Qiao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 170,000.00

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) have significant potentials to improve road safety,
travel experience and transportation footprint, as well as the mobility and
accessibility for all. However, the safety and security of AVs themselves have
raised many concerns in recent years. As AVs use a plethora of sensors,
including cameras and radars to detect, classify and track objects and obstacles
on the road, their reliability and resilience have significant impacts on AV
safety. Although risks from malicious attacks targeted at cameras and other
sensors in AV systems have been studied, there is a lack of in-depth
understanding of the vulnerability of millimeter-wave radar sensors in AVs. This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to explore
insights to improve the security and resilience of AVs by investigating advanced
attack and defense methods for millimeter-wave radar sensor-based systems. Since
these radars are used exclusively today for adaptive cruise control, blind-spot
detection, and collision avoidance, this project will benefit many safety-
critical applications. The PIs plan to expand research opportunities for K-12
and underrepresented students, and integrate diversity in broadening
participation in engineering through the educational programs of National Summer
Transportation Institute (NSTI), Institute for Sustainable Transportation and
Logistics (ISTL) and Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) at
the University at Buffalo. The PIs will disseminate the results of the project
through publications, talks, and demos, and integrate research materials into
specific courses and education curricula. All newly developed research and
teaching materials will be publicly accessible on the project website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will first demonstrate that the millimeter-
wave radar sensors can be spoofed and jammed while AVs are on the road through a
non-cooperative over-the-air synchronization method. It can accurately identify
the frequency band, modulation scheme and waveform patterns of victim radars to
launch stealthy attacks. The team will conduct a proof-of-concept demo to attack
real-world AV radars with fast-chirp signals. Second, the project will explore
both hardware and software/algorithm-based defense mechanisms for avoiding such
attacks, including beam feature based physical layer capacity estimation,
machine learning physical identification, non-cooperative passive front-end
architectures and band-limited coherent noise radars. The innovation of the
project comes from not only the use of adaptive finite state machine based
approaches that combine inter- and intra-chirp-sequence synchronization, but
also data modeling techniques to efficiently adjust the attacker’s waveform
parameters. Moreover, the project is among the first to explore the use of
unique radiometrics, noise radars and passive radars as effective defense
mechanisms against the attacks to AVs. Research thrusts in this project will
significantly advance the state-of-the-art knowledge of the security of
millimeter-wave sensors, and provide insights on developing more undeceivable,
disclosure-resistant and robust AV radar solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.