* 2028893
* EAGER: SARE: Real-Time Learning and Countering of Side-Channel Emissions to Enable Secure RF and Analog Microelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jian-Gang Zhu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Rapid growth of sensors and Internet of Things (IoT) has the potential to
transform the society, economy, and improve the quality of life. Many IoT
devices at the extreme cloud edge collect and transmit sensitive information
wirelessly for remote computing. However, the sensitive information can be
leaked through side channels, including power consumption and electromagnetic
(EM) emissions. The vulnerability of those wireless devices to hacking or
exploitation has emerged as a major public concern over IoT security and safety.
Nevertheless, existing state-of-the-art cybersecurity approaches are mainly
focused on software and digital modules. Security measures have not been
integrated in the radio frequency (RF) and analog domains to verify signal and
power sources or to suppress the side-channel emissions. To bridge the gap, this
project will develop a holistic self-testing approach incorporating nanoscale
electromagnetic sensing devices, reconfigurable RF circuits, and machine-
learning algorithms to detect threats and counter malicious attacks directly at
the RF and analog front-end. Combing emerging material, device, circuit, and
system concepts, this project aims to develop a built-in threat-detection-and-
reaction approach in the RF/analog domain without degrading the performance
while achieving good energy efficiency. The results from this work have the
potential to make a significant impact on the secure electronics and
telecommunication industry. The minimal usage of energy and space can allow the
energy-constrained wireless devices to have an on-chip detection-and-reaction
system to rapidly predict and counter malicious attacks in the front line. In
addition, the project will provide a unique opportunity for students of
different levels (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate) and the general public to
learn the security vulnerability of wireless devices and its
countermeasures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enhance
security in wireless devices at the RF/analog front-end through
interdisciplinary research. Low-power and low-voltage on-chip sensors will be
developed to collect data for analysis of power and EM signal behaviors. To
sense small changes of magnetic fields and inform the machine-learning circuits,
a nanoscale heterostructure will be developed to monolithically integrate CMOS
circuits with novel spin-torque devices that can be utilized as robust high-
fidelity EM sensors and embedded into interconnects. A sensing circuit will be
developed to achieve high-accuracy EM measurement while eliminating any response
to the external stray field disturbance. Low-power charge-sharing analog-to-
digital converters will be investigated to perform machine-learning algorithms.
In order to rapidly predict and detect the potential attacks, machine-learning
circuits will be trained to learn the normal behavior of the system with
different operation schemes so that this built-in detection system can enable
accurate predictions of a variety of adversaries in real time. Learning
algorithms and reconfigurable architectures will be developed to form a closed-
loop fast threat-detection-and-reaction system. Boosting approaches for
ensembles of linear classifiers will be exploited to enhance the detection
accuracy with minimal hardware costs. Programmable nanoscale oscillators with
emerging materials for frequency hopping and various switching schemes will be
exploited to increase resistance and resilience to tampering side-channel
attacks. When a threat is detected, the suppression mechanism will be activated
to mitigate the damage immediately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.