* 2028301
* RAPID: Harnessing the power of multiple models for outbreak management
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

For many of the most damaging or worrying pathogens, such as the SARS-CoV-2
virus that causes COVID-19, multiple scientific groups develop quantitative
models to forecast disease dynamics and assess possible interventions. These
models often differ significantly in their projections and recommendations,
reflecting different policy assumptions, as well as scientific, logistical, and
other uncertainty about biological and management processes. Such uncertainty
can be challenging for policymakers, hindering intervention planning and
response. Policymakers may thus choose to rely on single trusted sources of
advice, or on consensus where it appears, without confidence that decisions will
be the best possible. However, less-than-optimal decisions mean more lives may
be lost or more resources used than needed. In the face of biological,
epidemiological, and operational uncertainties, systematic strategies to
formalize the process of using multiple models to develop policy can improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of policy responses to outbreaks. The COVID-19
pandemic outbreak is a major health issue for most countries in the world. This
work is intended to directly address this current problem in real time. The work
will also provide a framework for future outbreak response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many models to address the COVID-19 pandemic are in
development, or recently published. This project will develop multiple-model
elicitation protocols, embedded in a strong framework for decision making, that
formally acknowledges our uncertainty about this novel pathogen, and avoids
known sources of bias. A full acknowledgment and accounting of uncertainty is
critical both for decision making and for public communication. Nationally
relevant objectives (e.g., minimizing deaths) and interventions (e.g., social
distancing) will be assessed during this process. The project will merge formal
expert elicitation methods (usually used to elicit opinions from individual
experts) with modeling analyses from multiple research groups to enhance
decision making for outbreak management. Groups will project disease dynamics
under different interventions, and the ensemble of outputs will be analyzed
using decision analysis to provide an evaluation of interventions against the
policy makers’ objectives. The project will conduct this exercise to address key
policy decision-making needs in the face of uncertainty during the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.