* 2028713
* RAPID: Coronavirus: Understanding aerosol transmission and potential control measures in indoor environments
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Donghyun Rim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 108,775.00

COVID-19 is a worldwide pandemic caused by the Coronovirus SARS-CoV2. COVID-19
is reported to be transmitted through direct surface exposure and through close
personal contact within a short distance. Recent studies demonstrate that the
virus can survive in small airborne particles (less than 5 micrometers) for
hours and accumulate indoors. This result suggests a strong possibility for
airborne transmission of COVID-19 in occupied spaces. However, there is a
present lack of science-based information on how the virus-laden particles
disperse in indoor environments. This RAPID proposal responds to the urgent need
to better understand the airborne transmission and potential SARS-CoV2 control
measures in indoor environments. The goal of this project is to investigate the
transport mechanisms of the virus particle transport around the human body and
reveal how the concentrations of virus particles are affected by human coughing
and breathing, as well as ventilation rates and indoor airflow patterns. This
information will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of control measures such
as ventilation, filtration, and zone partitioning on aerosol transmission in
densely occupied environments. Results will be used to help protect vulnerable
population groups in clinical settings and senior living facilities. Successful
completion of this research will more broadly inform medical health
professionals, scientists, engineers, and policymakers to make decisions
regarding the types of ventilation strategies and personal protective equipment
that can be used to prevent aerosol transmission
indoors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic is a health emergency of
global scale. Emerging science suggests a high potential for airborne exposure
to SARS-CoV2 (the virus responsible for COVID-19) as a significant exposure
pathway. However, there are major gaps in our understanding that prevent
efficient use of control strategies for indoor environments. The overall
objectives of this research project are to address this knowledge gap by: (1)
developing a mechanistic understanding of SARS-CoV2 aerosol transport in indoor
environments due to coughing, talking, normal breathing, and breathing with a
mask under various ventilation rates and air mixing conditions; (2) assessing
airborne infection risk using inhalation intake of SARS-CoV2 aerosols released
from an infector assuming steady-state, well-mixed air conditions; and (3)
evaluating the effectiveness of ventilation, filtration, and zone partitioning
for controlling aerosol transmission in densely occupied environments. This will
be achieved using a mathematical infection risk model coupled with computational
fluid dynamics simulations of aerosol transport to provide new information
critical to our understanding of virus aerosol transport and associated airborne
infection risk in indoor environments. The analysis will fill a critical
information gap in our understanding of the transport mechanisms of infectious
aerosols in the human breathing zone. Key parameters to be assessed include the
emission mode of the infector (i.e. coughing, talking, breathing); the
infectious aerosol mass and diameter; and the ventilation strategy and indoor
air mixing rate. Parametric analysis of the effectiveness of infection control
measures will inform guidelines for building system design and operations for
the protection of human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.