* 2028051
* RAPID: Early Detection of Disease Outbreaks using Self-Organizing Patterns – COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Alessandro Negro, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project will advance national health through the development of a robust,
predictive model to graphically represent the spread of COVID-19 through an
innovative integration of public health information and social media data. This
project develops a predictive modeling tool to visually represent the spread of
COVID-19 or other potential pandemics utilizing artificial intelligence
techniques to support data gathering, analysis and representation of the
outcomes. The societal benefit is significant if the researchers are successful
in developing a model that utilizes traditional public health data integrated
with social media data to expeditiously create a reliable prediction of disease
spread. This project will contribute towards building an open source database
that can be accessed anywhere across the globe while providing early warning
detection and signals to government agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
project develops a large-scale pandemic model to enable data sharing, using AI-
based approaches, and predictive modeling. Specifically, the project proposes a
model for rapid and early disease detection, by combining three novel
intellectual approaches to outbreak detection. These three approaches include 1)
Self-organizing systems theory to detect nascent pattern formation; 2)
Leveraging topical proximity in research communications over geospatial
proximity of infected individuals; and 3) Loss of complexity in topical networks
as an indicator of an “unhealthy” system with an impending outbreak. This
integrated approach has not been previously attempted in efforts to track
disease outbreak. The proposed methodology is expected to produce a working
model within the 2nd quarter of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.