* 2029651
* RAPID: Collaborative: A Privacy Risk Assessment Framework for Person-Level Data Sharing During Pandemics
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Bradley Malin, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 04/30/2021
* USD 99,999.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated that sharing data is critical to building
better statistical epidemiological models, enabling policy decisions (in the
public and private sector), and assuring the health of the public. Moreover, the
situation has evolved quickly, indicating that data sharing needs to take place
repeatedly and in a timely manner. To date, much of the data sharing that has
taken place has focused on aggregate statistics (e.g., counts of events), yet
some of the most important data is at the person-level, which is critical to
providing intuition into how comorbidities influence health outcomes and model
the trajectory of the disease in a temporal-spatial perspective. This data is
captured by a large number of service providers who wish to support these
endeavors, but are concerned that doing so will infringe upon the privacy rights
of the corresponding individuals, particularly their anonymity. To enable
timely, useful and privacy-preserving releases of patient specific COVID-19
data, this project aims to develop and disseminate novel privacy-risk assessment
techniques, implemented in working software, to assist data managers, as well as
public health officials, to reason about the tradeoffs between privacy risks
(with a focus on re-identification, according to current law) and public data
utility. The project will provide the best practices and tools needed for
sharing patient-specific data about individuals diagnosed with, or suspected of,
COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel, and dynamic
privacy risk assessment models for disclosing data in support of epidemiological
investigations (and particularly pandemics) by considering evolving privacy
risks and data utility. In doing so, the proposed models will be tailored to
enable the disclosure of geographic-, demographic-, and clinically-relevant
phenomena (e.g., health indications based on pharmaceutical prescriptions or
purchases) by modeling a much richer data attribute space, specifically one that
is important for modeling epidemiologic risk factors associated with biological
agents, such as COVID-19. To model evolving privacy risks, privacy risk
estimation models that consider multiple types of potential re-identification
attacks and data redactions used to release multiple versions of the same data
will be developed. Furthermore, the proposed models will be oriented to support
utility functions that are specific to bio-surveillance efforts, including those
which have emerged for COVID-19 modeling and response. Finally, to ensure that
the proposed approach is accessible and reusable widely, an open source software
tool, that enables data custodians, and particularly public health authorities,
to make informed decisions appropriately balancing public health goals with
personal privacy when sharing data, will be released.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.