* 2029936
* RAPID: Linking institutional logics and data sharing to research outputs before and after SARS-CoV-2 peak infection
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Eric Welch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,775.00

The ability of scientists to access and share data relevant for COVID-19
research (e.g., genomics data, sequences and strains, surveillance data, protein
structures) is critical for understanding the virus and ultimately developing
therapeutics and vaccines. Access to and sharing of data will have a significant
effect on the amount of knowledge produced and the speed of discovery, both of
which impact public health in the US. Early reports attest to record-breaking
scientific collaboration and data sharing, but in the long run data access and
sharing will greatly depend on the confluence of scientists’ values, beliefs and
practices, as well as the governance and management of the repositories curating
the data. This research investigates how scientists’ data access and sharing
preferences and behaviors change over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, as
research moves from early crisis response to concrete opportunities for
visibility, reputation, and innovation. Early in the crisis, we expect that the
research community will use repositories with governance models that maximize
open sharing of data. But as knowledge builds, general understanding of the
virus increases, and the number of cases plateaus, we expect to see a shift,
with researchers becoming more selective in how, when, and where they share
their data. This project investigates how and why these change occur in order to
design data governance solutions that maximize the community response to public
crises, minimize delays in global collaboration and data sharing, and ultimately
lead to research production and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
takes advantage of the unique opportunity window offered by the COVID-19 crisis
to understand how and why institutional determinants of data access and sharing
evolve over the course of a public health crisis and how data repositories can
act as facilitators (or barriers) for rapid research response to societal
challenges. We ask: How do researchers perceive and integrate different, often
conflicting, rationales for data sharing when faced with public emergencies? How
do researchers adjust their actions and decisions as the crisis evolves? How do
data repositories react to global challenges by adjusting, integrating, or
disrupting conflicting institutional logics regarding data sharing? Why do
researchers converge around certain data repositories but not others? What
governance models are more successful in integrating conflicting logics in a way
that maximize researchers’ response to public crises? To frame the inquiry, we
integrate institutional work and open community theories to link 1) individual-
level decisions and actions regarding data access, exchange, and use with 2)
collective governance systems of data repositories. The study undertakes a
mixed-method research design that uses interviews and survey data to understand
the decisions, actions, and outputs of researchers before and after peak
infection levels. Findings will contribute practical insights to funding
agencies, data repository management teams, universities, and research
communities by showing how researchers and data repositories respond to the need
for rapid research and data sharing at a global level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.