* 2029570
* RAPID – Impacts of COVID-19 on the Geoscience Enterprise:  How Permanent Will Academic Program and Workforce Changes Be?
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Christopher Keane, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 397,977.00

The rapid onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the sudden dramatic actions taken
by society to protect public health have led to significant economic and social
disruption of indeterminant duration. This one-year project by the American
Geological Institute seeks to capture the nature and extent of the impact of
COVID-19 responses on the geoscience workforce and geoscience academic programs.
It will also track those changes through the period when businesses, educational
institutions, and citizens resume in-person interactions. This longitudinal
study aims to understand how geoscience employers and educational institutions
are changing their workplace and instructional environments. It will also seek
to discover which of the implemented changes to normal operations will be remain
in place once institutions and companies resume pre-COVID-19 operations. Broader
impacts of the work will help academic institutions, employers, and decision
makers in geoscience-related fields move forward effectively in the potentially
changed post-COVID environment. It will also help improve response- and
recovery-planning for future crises. Although focusing on a single scientific
and economic sector, additional broader impacts of the project will be an
increased understanding of the short and long-term impacts of crises to the
workforce and on education and the private sector, as well as economic impacts
for supply chains and workforce/educational institution resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study conducted by the American Geophysical Institute
(AGI) will establish a baseline of pre- and post- COVID-19 workplace
environments and an understanding of the types, magnitude and permanency of
changes to geoscience academic programs and departments, employers, and the
workforce. The project’s results will be useful for informing future areas of
research as well as those related to human-technology interfaces and new
approaches in learning and teaching within digital environments. To conduct the
project, the investigators will collect and follow, over a 52-week period, both
publicly available workforce and economic data. This information will be
combined with survey results for five cohorts: (1) geoscience employers, (2)
geoscience workers (as of start of the crisis), (3) academic faculty, (4)
geoscience college and university students, and (5) recent geoscience graduates
who graduated between 2014 and 2019. These cohorts will be established by
sending invitations to over 800 U.S. degree-granting and community-college
geoscience programs, to AGI's member societies membership networks, and to AGI’s
contact network of over 124,000 geoscience professionals. AGI will survey each
participant at least every other week to assess employment status and/or status
of employees, work environment, work activities, and challenges faced. In
addition, AGI will utilize the publicly available economic and workforce data to
provide a broader context to the macroeconomic dynamics of the survey results.
Weekly data briefs will be published on the AGI website to report on the ongoing
state of the geosciences and new insights from the federal and/or survey data.
It will also publish a synthesis report that details the changes each of the
considered cohorts experienced, including the duration and permanency of changes
to the work environment and cohort work status. Reports will examine survey
results in the light of reported geoscience employment and economic indicators
from federal agencies and assess any lags between federal data and survey
responses. The report will be available in hard copy and freely available in
digital format on AGI’s website. Digital copies will be sent to all geoscience
university and college programs. Summary results of the final report will also
be published online, used in conference presentations, and if appropriate,
published in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.