* 2029121
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling extracellular microRNA communication
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Leonidas Bleris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 623,679.00

The long-term goal of this project is to better understand how cells communicate
with each other. This project focuses on the relatively unexplored process of
cell-cell communication via microRNAs. A major roadblock to understanding
microRNA-mediated cell-cell communication has been the inability to distinguish
microRNAs produced by donor and recipient cells. This project will employ an
innovative approach to get around this roadblock. The successful completion of
this work will lead to a better understanding of microRNA-mediated cell-cell
communication and a new set of resources and tools for investigating cell-cell
interactions in a variety of organisms, including humans. The project will
provide opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to be exposed to
an integrated research environment, combining theory and experiments at the
intersection of biology and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs with significant regulatory roles in all
physiological processes. miRNAs were thought to be stable only inside cells and
rapidly degraded by enzymes when outside the cell. Recent work has demonstrated
that this is not the case: cells can export miRNAs through multiple mechanisms,
affecting other cells either next door or at great distances away. Past work has
typically focused on one miRNA at a time because it is impossible to distinguish
miRNA molecules made by one cell from those made by another. Major questions
remain unanswered: Which miRNAs are transferred? What mechanisms do cells use to
transfer them? To overcome hurdles and answer these questions, expertise in
miRNA biology, synthetic biology and genome editing will be leveraged. Two
features of non-mammalian systems will be adopted: a protozoan enzyme to label
RNA, and CRISPR/Cas to engineer custom genetic circuits and introduce genome
modifications. Combining cells engineered to label RNA with those that do not
label RNA will enable the identification of miRNA species that are transferred
between cells. Implementation and stable integration of custom synthetic biology
circuits in human cells will permit the reliable monitoring of miRNA levels.
Selective pharmacological blocking of inter-cellular communication mechanisms
will facilitate the determination of how such transfer occurs. Genome editing
will allow pinpointing which genes involved in specific transfer mechanisms are
the critical determinants of miRNA exchange between cells. The long-term goal is
to address questions about how cells communicate with each other. Successful
completion of the proposed work will identify miRNAs that mediate cell-cell
communication and generate a new set of resources and tools for investigating
the relationship between cells in many different models of human
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.