* 2029540
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Confined Interfaces: Beyond Linear Analysis and Towards Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ivan Christov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,724.00

From the acrobatics of fluids that respond to magnetic fields, to the extraction
of oil from the Earth, to electrode operation in consumer device batteries, the
motion of interfaces must be modeled, analyzed and controlled towards achieving
a desired flow pattern, improving the efficiency of energy recovery, or assuring
safety. This award will support fundamental scientific research that will
contribute new knowledge and understanding of the dynamics of interfaces between
fluids. The outcomes of this research program could become the building blocks
for new approaches towards the precise manipulation of spreading and confined
layers of fluids, which is needed to advance additive manufacturing (also called
3D printing) processes, as well as lab-on-a-chip devices that use motion of
droplets (closed fluid-fluid interfaces) to perform chemical diagnostics.
Therefore, this award will promote both the progress of a scientific field, as
well as potentially contribute to the science behind new technologies that
benefit the U.S. economy and society, thus advancing national prosperity.
Furthermore, the research will engage undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
researchers within the PI's established culture of mentorship and diversity
efforts, towards championing scientific excellence and broadening participation
in this research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid interfaces do not always move
and deform in an orderly fashion. They can be unstable, and their shapes can be
unpredictable from the inputs to the system. The current research on such
instabilities has focused on the initiation stage of the unpredictable behavior,
which is called the linear regime. At the same time, the dynamics are influenced
by multiple physical effects, whose coupled influence remains relatively
unexplored. To address these knowledge gaps, the fundamental research will
derive mathematical models and construct numerical methods to understand the
late stage (termed nonlinear) time evolution of interfaces, eventually yielding
methods to manipulate instability. Specifically, the research team will: (i)
derive sharp-interface mathematical models of the dynamics of immiscible fluid-
fluid interfaces confined in nonstandard Hele-Shaw geometries, including
multiphysics interactions due to domain boundary motion and non-invasive forcing
via magnetic fields; (ii) construct efficient numerical methods for Lagrangian
sharp-interface tracking, based on the vortex sheet method, to enable analysis
of the nonlinear evolution of interfaces, including their ability to sustain
permanent traveling excitations (solitons); and (iii) harness (i) and (ii), in
conjunction with optimization and control strategies from dynamical systems
theory, to update the external forcing of the confined system on-the-fly and,
thus, achieve pre-determined interfacial shapes and
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.