* 2029543
* RAPID: Prediction of coronavirus infections and complications at the individual and the population levels from genomic, proteomic, clinical and behavioral data sources
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Judith Klein, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 116,000.00

As of mid-April 2020, two million people are infected worldwide with the novel
coronavirus that first appeared in Wuhan, China in December of 2019. Now, the
USA is at the epicenter of this pandemic, where it has already killed 20,000
people. Approaches to slow the progression are urgently needed. This requires a
better fundamental understanding of the factors affecting not only virus spread,
but also who develops complications and ultimately dies from the infection. It
is becoming clear that many factors are at play, including molecular,
physiological, lifestyle, behavioral, demographic and socio-economic ones. In
particular, co-morbidities such as diabetes and high blood pressure are known
risk factors for COVID-19 complications and death but are likely only the tip of
the iceberg. Molecular data indicates that as many as 100 co-morbidities exist.
Given this complexity, statistical approaches are needed to integrate and
account for all of these factors when predicting and assessing the health risks
arising from coronavirus spread and infection. This project will create
computational tools that will help individuals and healthcare professionals make
decisions related to coronavirus, helping target human and material resources
where they are most needed. To decrease the numbers of people suffering from
this pandemic, these tools are needed urgently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating
large numbers of risk factors through machine-learning approaches allows the
building of statistical models that take all evidence into account. COVID-19
infections will be predicted at the individual and population levels. At the
individual level, two binary (yes/no) classifiers will be built, (1) if an
individual is likely infected with coronavirus, and if yes, (2) will the patient
develop complications. As with all predictions, they cannot replace real data,
but they can help prioritize who gets tested, who gets quarantined, who gets
more closely monitored for signs of complications, and who gets personalized
recommendations. Existing approaches include symptom-tracker apps, such as the
coronavirus self-checker apps offered by the CDC, many healthcare providers and
local government authorities and the National Early Warning Score (NEWS) and
Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS), which determine the degree of illness of a
patient. None of these approaches account for co-morbidities, and they lack the
use of machine learning for data integration needed to predict individual
outcomes. At the population level, possible routes of infection will be analyzed
using graph analysis, through analysis of proximity, social interactions, and
materials transport, taking the individual-level information into account where
available. The project will be highly interdisciplinary, integrating
biochemistry and computer science with ongoing input and feedback from
healthcare professionals. This will ensure that the work will be relevant to the
current crisis and easier to adopt by healthcare providers. Students and
postdocs who participate in this research will be trained in interdisciplinary
research and will be exposed directly to frontline workers in the pandemic. A
publicly available, free app and a web interface will disseminate the
predictions made in this project broadly in the hope it will find many
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the goal of this research is to
understand how SARS-CoV-2 virus and host genomes interact to determine the full
spectrum of disease outcomes, with the goals of identifying the cellular basis
for host range and pathology, predicting morbidit,; and developing effective
medical interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.