* 2029181
* Robots Teaching Robots: Real-time Optimal Control of Complex Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2024
* David Braun, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 479,868.00

This project introduces learner-helper robot pairs to enable the learner robot
to use physical experimentation to improve its performance on repetitive task,
without accurate analytical or numerical models. The specific challenge is that
these tasks -- for example walking on two legs or riding a bicycle -- require a
minimal necessary level of performance, below which the robot is unable to
function. In the examples, this minimal level of ability corresponds to not
falling over. The helper satisfies these minimal requirements while the learner
uses repeated trials to improve its performance. For example, the helper might
suspend the two-legged walker from a traveling harness or move alongside the
bicycle robot providing an additional point of support. As the learner-helper
team masters the task, the amount of assistance that the helper can apply is
gradually reduced, until the learner is performing at a high level on its own.
An analogy is a child learning to ride a bike with the help of an adult moving
alongside. The new control technique will enable robots to teach robots in
training lines of future factories similar to robots currently used in assembly
lines of manufacturing companies. Therefore, the results of this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research also involves several
disciplines including mechanical, electrical, computer, and control engineering.
The multi-disciplinary approach is expected to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimal control is a branch of control theory
that has the potential to revolutionize the creation of intelligent engineering
systems, industrial robots, surgical robots, and assistive robots that can
improve by repeated experience, somewhat similar to humans. There are many
optimal control techniques to control engineering systems. However, almost all
currently available techniques require high-fidelity models or a large amount of
measured data to mitigate the so-called simulation-reality gap; the gap between
the optimal performance predicted by computer simulations and the non-optimal
performance observed in real engineering applications. This award supports
fundamental research to close the simulation-reality gap when optimal control is
applied to engineering systems. Model-based optimal control techniques enable
efficient computation but they are subject to conservative control performance.
Data-driven optimal control techniques mitigate the detrimental effect of
uncertain models, but to do so, they require a large amount of training data.
Therefore, scientific barriers must be overcome to realize the full application
potential of optimal control techniques. This research will address the
knowledge gap that limits the potential and theoretical promise of optimal
control theory when applied to complex engineering systems. The new technique
promotes optimization of system performance via real-time experiments guided by
dedicated teacher robots, instead of optimizing system performance guided only
by uncertain model-based predictions and measured data. The technique delivers a
transformative approach to control the class of complex, underactuated, and
unstable robots, for which obtaining high-fidelity models is challenging, while
gathering training data is time-consuming. The research outcomes could
potentially provide mainstream paradigms in creating next-generation intelligent
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.