* 2029812
* I-Corps:  A cloud-based searchable catalog to link geographically and population diverse patient genomic, phenotypic and clinical data
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Julian Whitelegge, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
cloud-based, searchable catalog to provide access to global patient data that
can be used to provide improved treatments for patients. Currently, there are
many questions that require the ability to link and analyze patient data. The
problem is that the majority of patient data currently used comes from the same
few institutions in Northern Europe that lack geographic or population
diversity. The result is that the patient data has limited use for questions
related to populations that do not derive from Northern Europe. The patient
dataset under development will allow academic and commercial institutions to ask
questions that link patient data from around the world to get answers that are
applicable to all patient populations. The data will be available to physicians
treating patients to ensure more precise treatments and prescription of drugs.
The data also will allow research institutions and commercial enterprises to
develop drugs and speed their delivery to market by shortening clinical trials.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a single cloud-based,
searchable data catalog containing patient genomic, phenotypic and clinical data
from geographically diverse populations and a research environment within which
the data can be analyzed. The ability to use patient data from geographically
diverse patient populations will allow for the ability to determine patient-
specific treatments with a high degree of precision, not just for those with a
Northern European background, but patients everywhere. Academic and commercial
institutions will be able to improve their research and expedite results by
analyzing patients' data from geographically diverse regions to answer questions
in a few hours or days that currently takes years. It will allow commercial
institutions to expedite therapeutic research and streamline clinical trials.
The result will be more drugs making it through clinical trials for more
diseases in a shorter time for less money. The patient data set also will allow
commercial institutions to find patients with rare diseases using genetic
analysis from different geographies, instead of the current practice of
extrapolating based on a doctor-determined prognosis. The goal is to improve
medical research and patient treatment where patient data is used.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.