* 2029032
* RAPID: A mixed-method investigation of the role of faculty mindset beliefs during the transition to online education as compelled by the COVID-19 pandemic
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Christopher Hulleman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 04/30/2022
* USD 196,563.00

The transition to online instruction necessitated by the COVID pandemic has
created significant uncertainty for the nation’s college faculty, many of whom
have not previously taught online. This research would examine how faculty
mindsets about themselves and their students, as well as faculty perceptions of
their university/college system’s messages about the transition, relate to their
responses to the challenge of rapidly transitioning their teaching online, the
quality of instruction they deliver, and, as a result, students’ attitudes and
learning outcomes in STEM courses during the Spring 2020 COVID-19 pandemic.
Given the high levels of stress caused by the disruption to daily life brought
by COVID-19, faculty attitudes and beliefs may be critical in determining the
pattern of faculty responses, and in particular, whether and how they adapt and
transition their courses online. Faculty responses may reflect deep-seated
beliefs about (a) the nature of STEM content (as relatively fixed and
unchanging); (b) the view of themselves as simply deliverers of that relatively
fixed content, and (c) students’ abilities to learn STEM material. Understanding
how faculty mindsets influence the teaching practices that STEM faculty adopt as
they move their teaching online – and how these practices influence students’
motivation, learning, and performance – can help faculty become more adaptable
in the future by developing professional development in advance. This award is
made by the EHR Core Research program in the Division of Human Resource
Development, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will build on an existing
partnership between the Motivate Lab, based at the University of Virginia, and
the University System of Georgia, which includes 26 four-year colleges and
universities throughout Georgia. The 26 institutions in Georgia are divided
roughly equally into four sectors: Research-intensive, Masters-comprehensive,
State university, and State college. This variation in institution type will be
important to consider as attitudes towards teaching (vs. research) and the type
of students vary significantly across the system, with the more research-focused
institutions being more selective in their admissions policies. Participants
will include 900 faculty across the University System of Georgia and the
students enrolled in their courses. Retooled surveys, course artifacts, learning
management system data, and administrative data will capture how faculty
mindsets about themselves and their students, as well as faculty perceptions of
their system’s messages about the transition, relate to their responses to the
challenge of rapidly transitioning their teaching online, the quality of
instruction they deliver, and students’ attitudes and learning outcomes in STEM
courses during the Spring 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. Supplementary student data
will assess student perceptions about the changes that faculty made to their
instructional practices during the move to online, and the changes to the
quality of the learning experience. Although prior research demonstrates that
faculty mindsets shape teaching practices even under normal circumstances, this
research will test hypotheses about whether mindset beliefs will especially
matter during periods of rapidly changing circumstances. Learning how faculty
mindsets matter will significantly advance theory and understanding of the role
of faculty mindsets in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.