* 2029972
* SBIR Phase I:  SAAS-based Mass Spectrometry Data Processing for Antibody Therapeutics for COVID-19 and Other Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Robert Smith, Prime Labs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the increased likelihood of effective
and affordable new antibody therapy development for COVID-19 and other diseases.
Current software is time-intensive to advance antibody therapy development. The
proposed software will provide rapid, accurate information about the function
and safety of putative therapies, enabling faster deployment. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will develop novel algorithms and
interfaces for enhancing antibody analysis via mass spectrometry. The research
will expand capacity and accuracy for detecting, characterizing, and quantifying
antibody glycans, disulfide bonds, and impurities by capturing information from
experimental metadata, sample preparation, instrument parameters, and instrument
output and creating models for prediction of possible structures supported by
the data. The proposed project aims to increase the quantity of antibody
subunits that can be accurately detected and quantified. This process will take
tenfold less time than current methods through the use of novel algorithms,
customizable automatable processes, and integrated reporting
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.