* 2029839
* RAPID: Funerary Practices, Pandemic Confinement, and the Implications for COVID-19 Transmission
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Sarah Wagner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 97,509.00

In April 2020, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identified
funerals as high-risk sites for COVID-19 transmission. Funerals are vital to the
social health of a community. They allow people to grieve together and remember
their deceased, but when the bereaved are not permitted to gather physically,
communal mourning becomes more complicated. Therefore, understanding forms of
adapted, and accepted, virtual (online) rituals and memorials and their role in
preventing infection spread is paramount for addressing future surges of
COVID-19 across the United States, as well as for future epidemics. Preliminary
research with religious leaders and funeral home directors suggests that social
distancing mandates that interrupt funeral, burial, and memorial practices have
met with confusion and even resistance. This study will provide key information
for the development of public health programs and guidelines that address the
risks facing communities that continue to conduct in-person rituals. Given the
social importance of funerals and the central role of mourning in the pandemic,
communities urgently need to promote practices that preserve the cultural and
religious significance of such rites but do not exacerbate viral transmission.
The project also provides training for graduate and undergraduate students in
methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The study comes at a time when the rate of COVID-19 infections is at
risk of rising exponentially and funeral capacity is being overwhelmed. The
investigators thus seek to identify factors that enable or inhibit people’s
ability to follow social distancing guidelines that interrupt or run counter to
obligations of care for the dead. As research on the Ebola crisis demonstrated,
anthropologists’ focus on the local perspectives of grieving communities
provided crucial insights into the factors that reduced or heightened the risk
of infection, and thus played an important role in public health interventions.
In collaboration with diverse religious communities, funeral practitioners, and
representatives from the National Funeral Directors Association, the study will
assess how religious tradition (or lack thereof) influences the adaptation of
funeral rites, and how COVID-19-related constraints on funeral care shift the
burden of organizing collective mourning onto the family and into virtual
spaces. The project incorporates a range of methodological approaches aimed at
capturing in real time these adaptive processes, including virtual participant
observation (e.g., synchronous religious rites, and funeral and memorial
services), initial and follow-up semi-structured interviews, discourse analysis
of digital media, and survey instruments. The researchers will pay special
attention to variations in access to virtual media. Because rituals reflect the
capacity for communities, whether religious or secular, to marshal material and
symbolic resources, they illuminate how structural inequalities create
disparities across communities and generations. The study thus contributes
foundational knowledge to the social analysis of death marked in virtual space,
broadening our understanding of the interconnected roles of media, technology,
and religion and during times of crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.