* 2029611
* Spatiotemporal Variability in Cold Pool Properties and Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Susan van den Heever, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 692,356.00

Cold pools are regions of cool, dense, gusty air that are produced at the
earth’s surface by thunderstorms and are important to many aspects of the earth
system. For example, cold pools can initiate new thunderstorms, enhance the
intensity and lifetime of thunderstorms, loft dust and pollen, and impact
aircraft operations. The objective of this project is to examine the variability
in cold pool properties and physical processes. In particular, the research
focuses on the turbulent characteristics of cold pools and how cold pools are
impacted by spatial variations in land surface properties such as the amount of
water in the soil or the type of vegetation present. The project results will
inform weather and forecast models’ simulations of cold pools and their impacts
on new storm formation, intensity, and longevity. The results could also be used
to improve climate model representations of cold pools and land-atmosphere
interactions. A graduate student thesis will be supported by the project, and
the research findings will be incorporated into graduate-level courses and
education and outreach activities to underrepresented groups in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this research is to
investigate the spatiotemporal variability in midlatitude deep convective cold
pool properties and processes, particularly their turbulent characteristics and
their interactions with heterogeneities in the land surface and the boundary
layer. The research will fill a critical knowledge gap regarding dominant
spatial and temporal scales of variability in cold pools and their interactions
with land surface heterogeneities, which may play important roles in cold pool
impacts such as convective initiation and structure, and localized heavy
rainfall and surface winds. The project will include a characterization of
spatiotemporal variability in midlatitude cold pool properties using
observations collected during the CSU Convective CLoud Outflows and UpDrafts
Experiment (C3LOUD-Ex). Additionally, idealized and case study simulations will
be used to explore how heterogeneities in land surface characteristics impact
cold pool variability both directly (through variations in surface fluxes) and
indirectly (through impacts on boundary layer circulations) at a physical
process level. Better knowledge of these physical processes will improve the
understanding and predictions of convective initiation and behavior, storm
organization and longevity, land-atmosphere interactions, and the role of cold
pools in changing climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.