* 2029007
* EAGER: SARE: Multiferroic Shields for Smart Analog Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Markondeya Raj Pulugurtha, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 289,467.00

Multiferroic materials allow for dielectric and magnetic property control
through active biasing. Leveraging these features, this project will introduce
new types of adaptable and reconfigurable electromagnetic structures.
Specifically, the project will develop multiferroic substrates, tunable biasing
networks, and electromagnetic structures for packaging and integration on a
common platform. Research will also focus on synthesis of multiferroic
substrates compatible for such integration. The goal is to attain active control
and reconfigurability of bulk substrate properties to provide an adaptable RF
shielding of wireless communication systems. Overall, the project aims to
increase security to RF systems through mitigation of wireless interferences,
concurrently allowing secure data-channels. Focus will be on achieving selective
blocking or transmission of radio waves, and reconfigurability of frequency and
transmitting direction. This multidisciplinary project will bridge the gap
between broadly applicable fields of multiferroics and electromagnetics. The
project leverages two active NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
sites at Florida International University to improve outreach and training of
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will introduce
new architectures and external magnetic-field biasing to control the dielectric
properties of bulk substrates. Material integration will be pursued for tunable
reflecting antenna arrays, transmitting antenna arrays, frequency selective
surfaces (FSS) and antennas and thus exploit the properties of multiferroic
substrates towards tunability. The project has three broad research components:
(1) synthesis of multiferroic substrates by embedding core-shell nanoparticles
formed by cobalt ferrite cores and barium strontium titanate (BST) shells; (2)
integration of frequency selective surfaces and antenna structures, co-designed
with tunable multiferroic substrates for dynamic passbands; (3) development of
active biasing networks to control multiferroic media properties while
concurrently being neutral to the FSS and antenna performance. Beyond these, the
project will focus on reducing power levels of active networks for efficient
performances. This will be achieved by using nanomagnetic field amplifying
agents and multiferroic nanocomposites. Research will also focus on effective
packaging of the biasing architectures, electromagnetic structures and
multiferroic substrates to achieve 3D excitation and tuning. These solutions
will be experimentally demonstrated for tunable shielding applications and
subsequently tested with wireless communication systems to demonstrate the
project outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.