* 2029883
* Preparing College Students who Enter from High School or Transfer from Community Colleges for STEM Careers and Graduate School
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Lee Phillips, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 999,791.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. The project is led by the University of North Carolina Greensboro, a
Minority Serving Institution. Over its five year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 40 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in Biology, Chemistry and Biochemistry, Computer Science, Geography
(Earth Science and GIS tracks only), Mathematics and Statistics, and Physics and
Astronomy. Twenty students will be selected in Year 1, with ten First Time in
College (FTIC) and ten Community College transfer (CCT) students; a similar set
of twenty students will be selected in Year 2. FTIC students entering in year
one will be eligible for up to eight semesters of funding and CCT students will
be eligible for up to six semesters of funding. In addition to providing
scholarship support, the project will support Scholars' success through cohort
development, undergraduate research opportunities, peer and faculty mentors,
early advising, and virtual and onsite visits to research labs. To increase
knowledge about how to best support the college success of low income STEM
students, the project will examine how being in a STEM cohort affects CCT
students’ sense of belonging, self-efficacy, and science identity. This research
study will compare FTIC and CCT students to understand the similarities and
differences between the two groups. Results of this research will help other
universities develop cohort activities to increase the persistence and
graduation of well-qualified FTIC or CCT in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. In addition to providing financial assistance to STEM students
with financial need, the project aims to increase retention rates by creating a
self-sustaining student success environment that will serve as a model for
similar institutions. Additionally, the project will study the impact of project
activities and student support to determine if the impact of these project
elements differ by FTIC or CCT status. New activities and support mechanisms
will be added to existing supports to target the unique challenges that CCT
students face as they transition to a mid-size, urban university with a highly
diverse and rapidly growing transfer student population. Using Tinto’s and
Packard’s research on sense of belonging, this project will investigate the
effectiveness of essential elements of the project and examine similarities and
differences of Scholars' experiences. The project will measure self-efficacy,
science identity, sense of belonging, professional skill development, mental
health/well-being, and persistence in STEM to determine the impacts of
individual project activities and combined effects on CCT and FTIC students.
Anticipated outcomes include increased knowledge about the similarities and
difference between FTIC and CCT students and facilitating Scholars’ career
pathways. Project evaluation will use a mixed methods approach to identify
themes that emerge from the collected data. Project resources and outcomes will
be disseminated through the project website and expanded to include other social
media platforms. Project staff will partner with other University personnel and
offices to create regional and statewide S-STEM events. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.