* 2029124
* RAPID: Conserved Regions of the SARS-CoV-2 virus (COVID-19) RNA-RNA Interactions that Mediate Genome Dimerization and/or Progression Through the Viral Life Cycle
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Jeffrey Evanseck, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The genome of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
the virus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), is encoded in RNA.
This award funds studies by Drs. Mihaela-Rita Mihailescu and Jeffrey D. Evanseck
at Duquesne University in to determine the structures and signals in the RNA
that control the progression of the virus through various stages of its life
cycle. Drs. Mihailescu and Evanseck use biophysical and computational methods to
determine how structures of distantly separated parts of the RNA interact to
switch from early stage protein production to late stage virus production. In
addition, the project studies how conserved structures bring two separate RNAs
together to allow parts to swap between genomes through a process called
recombination. This recombination process provides an understanding for how the
SARS-CoV-2 genome may have arisen from the exchange of genetic material among
RNAs from viruses that infect different mammalian species. The impact of the
project on society is to identify potential inhibitors against RNA-RNA
interactions, which further provides leads for the development of therapeutic
interventions against the SARS-CoV-2 virus and, correspondingly, stem the
COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this study is to elucidate
the molecular mechanisms controlling the progression of SARS-CoV-2 through
essential steps of its life cycle and unravel a new, unexplored mechanism of RNA
genomic dimerization that might facilitate its recombination. This research
guides future development of new antivirals that target the genomic RNA of SARS-
CoV-2 and potentially other similar RNA viruses. Bioinformatics and biophysical
methods, including fluorescence spectroscopy, will be applied to elucidate the
function of a highly conserved s2m RNA motif and to probe the long-range RNA-RNA
interactions between the conserved sequences in the 5’- and 3’-untranslated
regions (UTRs) of viral genes. The s2m RNA motif is proposed to form a “kissing
complex” intermediate that mediates dimerization of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome,
thereby facilitating recombination events in coronaviruses and other additional
viral families that share this motif. The UTRs are proposed to form "kissing
interactions" that mediate the genome circularization, molecular switch that
controls the transition between the translation and replication viral life cycle
steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.