* 2029680
* RAPID: World Wide Access to COVID-19 Information
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Hrishikesh Bhattacharya, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2022
* USD 147,665.00

Response to a worldwide crisis, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic, requires
extensive communication involving different groups (governments, scientists,
healthcare providers, common people). The Internet does provide an effective
means of communication – but rumor, non-validated theories or outright
propaganda also propagate to wide audiences over the Internet, and have the
potential to cause significant harm. It is tempting to conclude that strong
Internet controls are necessary in times of crisis to limit the spread of
malcontent. On the other hand, more free flow of information is also beneficial.
It can enable rapid yet nuanced deployment of resources to critical needs in
times of such a crisis. It is therefore an open question whether open or strict
information control policies work better in a pandemic situation. In this
project, researchers study Internet censorship policies in several countries –
ranging from those employ very strict controls (e.g. China, Russia) through
moderate (e.g. South Korea, India) to very open (e.g. USA, Germany, Japan) – and
characterize how they control access to information, specifically related to
COVID-19, during the course of the pandemic. This study would help decide best
practice in Internet communications and thereby help to protect national
health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study collects data regarding read and write
access to COVID-19 related information on the Internet, from vantage points in a
range of countries. Chosen countries are well-connected to the Internet,
geographically diverse, and different in their approaches to Internet
censorship: some strict censors, some semi-free, and some known for free speech
(as reported in the Internet Freedom Study, by Freedom House). Further, as
access controls may vary within a country, multiple vantage points are used –
ideally, one in the "customer cone" of each major AS in the country. From these
vantage points, four measures are checked twice a month: (1) Whether users can
access sources considered authoritative by the Johns Hopkins University's Center
for Systems Science and Engineering Coronavirus Dashboard, Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, World Health Organization, and peer-reviewed journals
such as Science, Nature, NEJM etc. (2) Whether users can access non-
authoritative sources, such as websites identified as spreading misinformation
(identified by researchers following social networks). (3) What social media
sites users can access, and whether these are known to be censored (e.g. can
users in country A reach Twitter, Facebook etc., or only local sites like qq?
Are these sites strictly filtered?) (4) If a user sends an HTTP query with a
manually-constructed trigger phrase (say, "coronavirus bioweapon"), is the query
blocked? The data collected in this study is correlated against trusted measures
of pandemic impact (time-to-peak and mortality), and can help identify the
Internet control strategies associated with success in containing and recovering
from the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.