* 2029058
* RAPID: Hydrated Graphene Oxide Elastomeric Composites for Sterilizable and Reusable N95 Masks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has led to a shortage of critical medical
equipment, including N95 masks. In order to conserve resources and maintain some
level of protection against COVID-19, medical workers have begun reusing masks.
While ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI), a widely used sterilization
technique in medical settings, has been shown to be effective at disinfecting
mask filters, it is not recommended by mask manufacturers due to deterioration
of elastomeric components such as the nose foam and head straps that prevents an
effective fit following sterilization. UVGI utilizes radiation in the deep-UV
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum due to its strong absorption by
microbial nucleic acids, which leads to their degradation. However, currently
used elastomeric materials are similarly compromised at these deep-UV
wavelengths. Therefore, it is of high urgency to develop elastomeric materials
that are resistant to UVGI irradiation to enable decontamination and reuse of
N95 masks. It would be of even greater interest if the same UV-resistant
elastomeric materials also possessed intrinsic antimicrobial properties to
further minimize the spread of COVID-19. Hydrated graphene oxide is known to
possess both of these desirable attributes concurrently – namely, strong optical
absorption at deep-UV wavelengths and proven antimicrobial properties. This
project thus aims to rapidly develop elastomeric composites based on hydrated
graphene oxide in order to enable the sterilization and reuse of N95 masks.
Importantly, the outcomes of this research not only address the current COVID-19
crisis, but are applicable for general medical use including future
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is synthesizing elastomeric
composites based on hydrated graphene oxide (hGO) to enable N95 mask
sterilization and reuse during COVID-19 and future pandemics. Not only does hGO
provide resistance to ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (UVGI) irradiation, it
also imparts antimicrobial properties. UVGI resistance results from the fact
that polymeric additives that absorb UV light provide UV resistance to the
composite. In this case, like all graphene materials, hGO is highly absorbing at
deep-UV wavelengths due to the conjugated portions of the hGO structure. In
addition, the high radical content of hGO is known to induce lipid peroxidation,
destroying the integrity of lipid membranes and hence imparting nearly
ubiquitous antimicrobial properties. Since enveloped viruses like COVID-19 also
possesses lipid membranes, hGO is expected to be effective as an antiviral agent
in this context. To assess the effect of UVGI on elastomeric mechanical
properties, the hGO composites are subjected to tensile and cyclic fatigue
testing following deep-UV exposure for stress/strain measurements and lifetime
durability. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy on control and deep-UV
irradiated samples further quantify the radical content imparted by hGO, thus
providing insight into how deep-UV exposure affects radical production and
antimicrobial efficiency. By varying the amount of hGO and/or related chemically
functionalized graphene materials, a durable elastomeric composite is being
realized in which the UV resistance, mechanical properties, and antimicrobial
activity are optimized for N95 mask sterilization and
reuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.