* 2029420
* RAPID: Automated Extraction and Validation of the Gist of Social Media Messages about COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Valerie Reyna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 206,375.00

While the novel coronavirus sweeps the globe, democratic societies face a
quandary, namely, how to encourage sacrifices to reduce risk, even when the
threat is invisible and seems to be receding. When risk is high, individuals may
need to engage in extreme forms of social distancing for long periods, but this
choice comes with economic and personal costs. Not engaging in these risk-
reduction activities, however, could cause millions of deaths. It is therefore
crucial for public health communicators to understand rationales for refusing
these actions and to base risk communication on empirically supported
principles, including the need to convey the gist (bottom-line meaning) of these
actions to individuals making these challenging
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three studies, each with
two samples at different time points, with the ultimate goal in subsequent
studies of converting the gists of social media messages into effective risk-
communication interventions. The approach is motivated by Fuzzy Trace Theory–an
evidence-based account of health decision making under risk–which posits that
decisions are based on qualitative gist representations of stimuli that encode
basic meaning in context. The scholars test time-sensitive hypotheses using
bottom-up unsupervised machine-learning algorithms to characterize the topics in
social media messages about COVID-19 and top-down human judgments about
theoretically predictable mental representations of the gist of perceived risks
and benefits of risk-reduction behaviors. Study 1 quantifies the prevalence of
gists pertaining to social distancing and other risk-reduction behaviors (e.g.,
hand washing) by extracting millions of social media messages from Twitter and
public Facebook posts. This involves automatic coding an ongoing corpus of
millions of social media messages using probabilistic topic models. Study 2
provides a systematic approach with human judges to interpreting the topics
extracted by a topic model at different time points. Study 3 involves a
different group of human judges assessing topics for their consistency with a
targeted set of gist representations of risks and benefits, along with gist
principles that express values. The researchers adapt items used successfully in
prior research. Similar gist representations have predicted self-reported risk-
reduction behaviors for numerous health conditions. Thus, for Study 3, the
researchers validate topic gists by fielding a theoretically motivated survey
analyzed for reliability and construct validity. The focus is on perceptions of
the gist of risks and benefits, especially gists that can promote the health of
individuals and society. Overall, this project introduces novel techniques for
eliciting gists from social media that can be used to generate meaningful public
health communications. The project directly informs existing attempts by public
health communicators to express the risks, benefits, and actions that members of
the population should take to mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
measures are validated against human users, enabling the team to achieve both
accuracy and scale. This project serves as the basis for a larger effort that
can increase the extent to which gist elicitation may be automated, helping
public health communicators to quickly understand which gists should be
communicated to which communities during outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.