* 2029157
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Origami-Based Extremely-Packed Multistable Pop-Up Design for Medical Masks
* ENG,EFMA
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Intellectual Merits:&lt;br/&gt;The research project aims to develop fundamental
understanding of novel twisting-enabled pop-up origami structures with multi-
stability. Practical applications of origami pop-up structures require a canopy
and connected multiple origami rings to form a functional continuous face, which
limits the accessibility of folding paths. This research will study how
interactions among origami rings will affect folding and unfolding and provide
understanding and identify the rules to design folding paths to overcome
constraints imposed by these interactions. The research will yield knowledge
about the energy landscape of origami rings and the stability of different
states. Such understanding will facilitate the design of novel twisting-enabled
pop-up and self-assembled structures with multi-stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This research project could
enable a new class of origami structures with great potential for future
applications. The proposed Origami design with rapid pop-up and self-assembly
could greatly increase transportation efficiency of masks during the fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, the proposed origami concept can be
readily applied to design other personal protection equipment such as eyewear,
gowns, etc. It could also lead to new origami structures that are highly
desirable in many demanding applications such as national security and human
health. The research will increase the public scientific literacy and public
engagement with science and technology and encourage the participation of women
and underrepresented minorities in STEM through integration of the research with
carefully designed educational tasks and by integrating the advanced material
research from the project into course development in existing undergraduate and
high-level graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.