* 2029397
* EFRI E3P: Sustainable and Circular Engineering for the Elimination of End-of-life Plastics: A Framework for Assessment, Design, and Innovation
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Engineering the Elimination of End-of-life Plastics (E3P) requires technological
advances to maximize recycling and recovery, behavioral understanding to
influence consumer attitudes, and economic approaches to incentivize extension
of product life. Each alternative involves trade-offs in its social
acceptability, economic feasibility, environmental sustainability, and
circularity. For example, biodegradable plastics may seem to be most desirable
if they decompose to become biological nutrients. However, if these materials
have a large life cycle environmental impact, their adoption will not eliminate
the end-of-life, but simply shift the environmental burden along the life cycle.
Solutions for E3P need to be sustainable by being environmentally benign,
economically feasible, and socially desirable. The overall goal of this project
is to develop holistic and systematic methods and tools for assessment, design,
and innovation toward Sustainable and Circular E3P (SCE3P).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct synergistic research in
polymer chemistry, reaction engineering, and molecular simulation to determine
properties of depolymerization and valorization processes under practical
conditions of contamination; process design to model the cost and physical flows
of current and emerging technologies; supply network modeling to determine the
effects on the wider chemical industry; behavioral studies to discern and
influence the role of consumers; and life cycle and circularity assessment to
estimate environmental effects across global value chains. The resulting
framework will consider the entire plastics life cycle, including thousands of
combinations of alternatives at each step to select the "best" pathway. This
framework will be able to assess existing products, design new products and
pathways, and encourage innovation toward SCE3P. The framework will be useful
for all types of plastics, but the project's experimental focus will be on
polystyrene (PS) and poly(ethylene terepthalate) (PET) due to their large
market. The SCE3P framework will be applied in the project to plastic products
in the food service industry, with case studies done in collaboration with
industry consortia and other stakeholders. The project is formulated to
contribute to the convergence of chemical engineering, sustainable engineering,
and behavioral science, for assessment, design, and innovation toward a
sustainable and circular economy of plastics. A target is to develop new
knowledge about the chemistry and engineering of various depolymerization and
valorization approaches for PS and PET products. The research team will also
bring together knowledge about steps in the plastics life cycle to contribute to
an innovation roadmap for SCE3P. A spatial model of the U.S. chemical industry
will be extended by including the plastics industry and emerging technologies
for SCE3P. Behavioral studies will improve the understanding of spillover
effects of other decisions on choice of plastic products and their responsible
disposal. New data and methods will be developed for assessing and designing
circular systems, evaluating their resilience, and identifying hotspots to focus
innovation. Application to food services will guide progress toward goals of
zero waste and carbon neutrality. The outcome of this project is to be a
software prototype of the SCE3P framework, which will be disseminated widely via
a university-based website, webinars to industry and other stakeholders, and
university courses. Collaborators will provide access to over a hundred
companies across the world. The team will develop teaching modules related to
the research for inclusion in university courses and high school engineering
curricula through the Engineer Your World program which reaches over 10,000
diverse high school students across the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.