* 2029373
* RAPID: Assessing and preventing detrimental impacts on literacy acquisition during COVID-19-related school closures
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Kenneth Pugh, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,448.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to shelter-in-place and school closure in the
majority of states across the U.S. Most schools are expected to be closed
throughout the remaining school year, which will result in students not
receiving in-person academic instruction continuously for approximately 6
months. This unprecedented closure will have profound impacts on the development
of basic reading skills in the early grades, especially for those children in
special education or at-risk for learning disorders where remote/online learning
is more challenging. Indeed, extended periods without direct instruction, even
in a typical 3-month summer vacation period can result in students losing the
equivalent of one month of academic performance. A failure to support learning
over the twice as long, COVID-19 closures could have dramatic educational
implications. Thus, it is crucial to ask 1) Can remote-learning tools based in
current research on reading strengthen key reading-related skills in the
youngest learners? 2) What aspects of learning to read are amenable to remote
technology? 3) Can digital technology that incorporates cutting-edge reading
research in a game-based format overcome the decline in reading skills over the
unprecedented length of the COVID-19 school closures?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
hundred educators across the U.S. and 2000 of their K-2 students, all prevented
from in-person instruction as a result of COVID-19, will be enrolled in the
project. Teachers will incorporate a research-supported, affordable, and
technology-based reading instructional program that can be administered in the
home to support the development of essential phonological and letter-sound
decoding skills with instructional content identical to evidence-based reading
instruction in the classroom. Children will be encouraged to play the games at
home for 20 minutes per day, 5 days per week, for 12 weeks, proctored by
teachers during instructional time. Standardized online reading tests will also
be administered several times during the COVID-19 school closures. The research
will examine critical factors that moderate reading gains with training,
including onset of the training (relative to school closing), duration/intensity
of practice, and individual differences in component skills at onset of the
study. The research will also assess whether educational technology can serve to
prevent closure-related deterioration in reading development by comparing pre-
and post-testing for these children with comparable populations not enrolled in
the study. Results from this investigation will allow researchers to assess
factors that lead to successful learning through educational technology with
minimal in-person guidance, which may guide future development and refinement of
these remote learning tools. Further, the study is significant as it will not
only assess the detrimental impact of COVID-19 school closures on learning to
read but also provide direct means to potentially support educators and students
who are in dire need of evidence-based remote instructional tools. Such
knowledge can be helpful in possible future closures and can provide evidence-
based guidance on how to teach students in remote areas within the U.S. where
trained reading specialists are not readily available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.