* 2029183
* RAPID: Using Structured Introspection and Expert Perspective Taking to Increase Societal Considerations During the Coronavirus Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Leaf Van Boven, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 198,997.00

The Covid-19 pandemic is an unprecedented opportunity to examine behavioral
interventions that increase prosocial behavior during a global health and
economic crisis. There are many and varied messages in media, risk
communication, and policy recommendations communicated from many sources. How
does the public perceive and respond to these messages? When deciding whether to
adhere to social distancing and shelter-in-place policies, how do people balance
their personal health risks, which might be low, against broader public health
risks? This RAPID research examines these questions in the context of the
coronavirus. The pandemic is a unique opportunity to test the robustness and
relevance of social-behavioral science to improve public response to the
Covid-19 pandemic. Specifically, this work examines whether encouraging people
to reflect on their personal values about prosocial considerations and good
citizenship will encourage them to behave less selfishly. This work will also
examine whether encouraging people to think like an unbiased policy analyst will
increase their support for social distancing policies when evaluating policy
proposals. These questions will be examined over six months of national surveys
in the United States. The same questions will be examined across four other
countries in two international surveys. These different countries have had
varied experiences with the Covid-19 pandemic and with policy responses to the
pandemic. Helping the broader public to be less selfish and to think more
clearly amidst an unfolding international crisis has tremendous societal value.
Implementation and communication of this work will directly impact public
adherence to necessary social distancing recommendations and improves civic
engagement with policy evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unfolding COVID-19
pandemic is unprecedented and provides an urgent opportunity to test the
effectiveness of interventions that increase prosocial behavior during a global
crisis. We examine whether structured introspection and adopting the perspective
of expert policy analysts increases prosocial considerations during the
pandemic. Structured introspection is a procedure that identifies relevant
attributes such as prosocial considerations and civic values, asking people to
report how much those considerations should influence their judgments,
decisions, and behaviors. Structured introspection is expected to increase
intentions and practicing of social distancing. Expert perspective taking is a
procedure in which people are asked to take the perspective of an unbiased
expert policy analyst, hypothesized to increase appreciation of health risks
associated with COVID-19. Over 6 months, the researchers deploy longitudinal
studies with staggered experimental treatments with large, diverse national
samples in the United States and cross-sectional interventions in four other
nations. Accompanying these experiments, we track media coverage and policy
changes among major media outlets in the relevant countries and public health
organizations. We test these hypotheses in a naturalistic environment with
highly dynamic social-informational ecosystems, demonstrating the robustness of
theory and implications beyond the narrow confines of tightly controlled
laboratory settings. This RAPID project provides two key theoretical advances.
First, it replicates and extends emerging research on structured introspection
and expert perspective taking as procedures to reduce weighting bias in judgment
and decision making. Second, the project tests these hypotheses in a
naturalistic environment in highly dynamic, cross-national social-informational
ecosystem. The project demonstrates the robustness of the underlying theory and
implications applied during a global crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.