* 2029196
* RAPID: Evaluation of Science Advice in a Pandemic Emergency (EScAPE)
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 01/31/2022
* USD 155,349.00

Scientific knowledge and expertise are increasingly important in support of
effective decision making. In recent decades, the United States and other
nations around the world have designed and put into place institutional
mechanisms to better secure science advice. The Coronavirus pandemic has put
these institutions to the test, offering a rare opportunity to assess their
performance in the context of a global crisis. This project performs a
comparative, international evaluation of mechanisms of science advice in the
pandemic emergency. As the pandemic continues, the results of this research will
be of potential immediate relevance to institutions that are addressing the
continuing need for science advice. More broadly, this research has great
potential to contribute to the continued improvement of scientific advisory
practices, which will only become more important in confronting challenges of
the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project performs an
international comparative analysis of the role(s) of science advice in national
pandemic response. The project partners with the International Network for
Government Science Advice (INGSA), which includes in its membership science
advice scholars and practitioners from over 90 countries. The results of this
research have considerable intellectual merit, as the evolving response to the
pandemic offers a true “policy laboratory” to explore and understand the
provision of science advice to decisions makers. Specifically, this project
commissions a set of national case studies on diverse models and applications of
science advice in shaping policies and decision-making in response to the
Covid-19 pandemic, supporting the collection of perishable, contemporary data on
the real-time uses (along with non-use, misuse) of scientific evidence in
decision making, with a focus on formal mechanisms of science advice. The
results of our evaluation will inform science advisory mechanisms around the
world, which face urgent challenges as the pandemic continues. The initial and
ongoing results of this work will be immediately shared with relevant decision
makers in national settings, based on the network already in place via INGSA,
this maximizing the potential for the lessons learned via the case studies to
have a positive role in shaping science advisory processes in the COVID-19
epidemic. Project materials will also be made more generally available via a
readily-accessible project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.