* 2029363
* RAPID: Educational Interventions for Undergraduate Students and Informal Learners for Robust Learning of COVID-19 Knowledge
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Raphael Isokpehi, Bethune-Cookman University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports RAPID projects when there is a severe urgency with regard to
availability of, or access to, data, facilities or specialized equipment,
including quick-response research on natural or anthropogenic disasters and
similar unanticipated events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The project at
Bethune Cookman University seeks to investigate the effects of two educational
interventions on the robust learning measures of long-term retention or desire
for future learning of COVID-19 knowledge. It will produce designers of
effective, efficient, and engaging distance learning while equipping
undergraduate students and informal learners with relevant skills and
competencies to contribute transdisciplinary solutions to the current COVID-19
and future disease outbreaks. Undergraduate students are involved as researchers
in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand
how to optimize the successful learning of knowledge content types such as
procedures for data associated problem solving activities, especially in the
circumstances of mandatory remote education. The abundance of data resources
resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic presents unique conditions suitable to
design and develop educational technology interventions for learning procedures
to solve data challenges in areas of data flow, data curation, and data
analytics. The research is guided by the Knowledge-Learning-Instruction
theoretical framework for producing robust student learning. Two online
educational technology interventions will be developed and investigated among
cohorts of designers of learning experiences on generating knowledge from
complex data resources on COVID-19 pandemic, and among informal learners of the
genomics and environmental survival of coronaviruses. An “in vivo”
experimentation approach will be implemented that combines causal principles and
real online instructional events with or without an ecological control group.
The transactions and artifacts of learning events will be analyzed to detect
features that predict robust learning and the performance of complex cognitive
activities. Post-educational intervention assessments will capture academic and
professional success measures including satisfaction with the learning process,
self-confidence to work effectively with complex datasets, desire to pursue data
careers, and involvement in developing data-driven solutions to COVID-19
pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program in the Division of Human
Resource Development, Directorate of Education and Human Resources, using funds
from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.