* 2029313
* RAPID: Failure to Predict Infection Risk and its Impact on the Spread of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Joydeep Bhattacharya, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 17,996.00

The speed with which pandemics spread is surprising, yet some in society fail to
abide by guidelines such as hygiene and social distancing that are designed to
decrease the spread of such epidemics. People may fail to adhere to these
guidelines either because they fail to accurately predict the chance that they
will be infected, or they accurately perceive the chance of infection but do not
take appropriate precaution. These sources of individual variation have
important implications for policy effectiveness in reducing the spread of
epidemics, such as COVID-19. This research project will use experimental methods
to investigate whether failure to follow guidelines is due to failure to
accurately predict the chance of an infection and if so, what policy
interventions are likely to succeed in improving people’s prediction of the
probability of an infection. The major hypothesis is that people make prediction
errors because they believe that the virus will grow at a linear rate while the
infection grows at exponential rate, thus leading to systematic prediction
errors. The results of this research project therefore provide important inputs
into designing policies to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in particular and
infectious diseases generally. The results of this research project will also
help to establish the US as a global leader in the analysis of, and the design
of policies to reduce infectious diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People tend to
underestimate the speed at which exponential processes (such as, those involving
compound interest) unfolds. This is especially relevant in the early stages of
an infectious disease outbreak when few positive cases can explode into a
widespread pandemic if the disease is sufficiently transmittable. This proposal
uses an incentivized, survey instrument to study an exponential-growth
prediction bias (EGPB) in the context of COVID-19. Prediction bias is defined as
the systematic error arising from under or over -prediction of the number of
COVID-19 positive detections x-weeks hence when presented with y-weeks of prior,
actual data on the same. Those who suffer from EGPB will greatly underestimate
how quickly a disease spreads, fail to perceive their own onrushing risk, and
hence, show low compliance with safety measures. This research project aims to
test these hypotheses and to see if simple, behavioral nudges can help reduce
EGPB. The hypotheses get to the heart of the behavioral aspects of virus
transmission missed in epidemiological models that underplay rational choice in
disease prevention. The research is relevant for public health efforts to
“flatten the curve” which critically rely on compliance with self-protection
guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.