* 2029649
* Collaborative Research: Are Amazonian and Andean ecosystems close to a tipping point?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 05/31/2024
* USD 389,950.00

Amazonian rainforests are famous for the immense biological and cultural
diversity they support. These forests are also a vital part of global recycling
of freshwater, and their loss has implications for food security for millions of
people as well as global climate dynamics. Climate change is threatening these
systems and there are concerns that as temperatures rise and rainfall becomes
less reliable, these forests might be replaced by low-diversity grasslands.
However, it is unclear what level of climate change might trigger a forest-to-
grassland transition. Paleoecology can provide information about biological
diversity in the past, and how biodiversity patterns changed during past warming
events. This research project will investigate two periods of climate warming,
one that lasted from about 8000 to 5000 years ago, and another even warmer time
that lasted from 128,000 to 120,000 years ago. Ancient lakes build up sediments
through time, and by taking a drill-core down through the sediment the history
of the region can be captured in the lake mud. The researchers will analyze the
fossil and chemical content of lake sediment cores from seven locations in the
Amazon and Andes to establish how much the climate changed in the past, and
whether those changes were enough to induce a shift from forest to grassland. By
looking at a range of locations that vary in moisture, from very wet to quite
dry, and degree of warming, the researchers will estimate how close the modern
rainforest is to a forest-to-grassland transition. Additionally, new
interactions between the collaborating research groups will include a co-taught
paleoecology/paleoclimatology course, a sponsored category in a local film
festival, and training of at least 10 undergraduates, two doctoral students, and
one postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address a
number of hypotheses relating to climate-vegetation responses such as
flickering, teleconnections, ecosystem buffering, and tipping points. By using
organic geochemical data to estimate paleotemperature, leaf wax isotopes to
estimate precipitation, sediment chemistry to characterize droughts, fossil
pollen to reconstruct vegetation, and charcoal to reconstruct fire frequency,
the researchers will investigate ecosystem change under conditions as much as 2
degrees C (4 degrees F) warmer than the present. The Last Interglacial will
provide an index of scale of change in traits, fire prevalence and community
composition in a climate 1-2 degrees C warmer than modern. In the directly-dated
Holocene, the data will assess sub-decadal variance in ecosystem indicators, and
allow rates of change to be investigated. Currently, no high-resolution records
of Amazonian temperature exist, so the novel approach of separating climatic
change from that of ecological proxies will be transformational for quantitative
neotropical paleoecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.