* 2029082
* Supporting Student Mental Health, Well-being, and Resilience to Advance Undergraduate Degree Completion in Physical Sciences, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Marc Ordower, Randolph College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,729.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Randolph College. Specifically, the project will provide 32 students
with four-year scholarships and specialized support services with the goal of
recruiting, retaining, and graduating students with four-year degrees in a
physical science, engineering, or mathematics. Scholars will be admitted and
progress through college in two cohorts, with a cohort of 16 students entering
in fall of the first and second award year. This project will build on existing
student services, adding programming that focuses on inclusion, mental health,
and resilience, which are identified as issues that can be addressed to increase
retention in STEM. The emphasis of the project on integrating student mental
health and well-being is innovative. It will use novel Wellness Wednesday
programming to support Scholars’ academic success, social wellness, and
emotional wellness throughout each year. By attending to student wellness, the
project has the potential to enhance students’ academic success and advancement
to graduate programs and professional endeavors, while also providing a model
that other institutions may replicate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
students with demonstrated financial need. The project will implement a
comprehensive set of activities and supports including: an intensive summer
transition program, a seminar series through all four college years, enhanced
tutoring services in a Living-Learning Community, peer, faculty, and industry
mentoring, and enhanced access to internships and research opportunities. The
project’s research efforts will focus on the impact of a proactive approach to
student health and wellness and intends to identify what works, especially with
underrepresented groups in STEM, including women and LGBTQ individuals. The
results will be relevant to any college, particularly small liberal arts
colleges, and may be useful to guide efforts to increase the numbers of STEM
majors and support them as they adjust to the demands of a four-year program.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.