* 2029924
* RAPID: Work in the Time of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Alexandrea Ravenelle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 188,928.00

Gig work, which is often conducted on platforms such as Uber, TaskRabbit,
Instacart, Care.com, and Rover, is the epitome of precarious work: the work is
so temporary that a 'gig' may last only a few minutes, and workers -- who are
usually classified as independent contractors -- are entirely outside the social
safety net of workersâ€™ compensation, social security contributions, paid leave,
or health insurance. Traditionally, low-income workers have fared worse
physically, psychologically, and economically in U.S. natural disasters. Also,
while white collar and professional workers conduct their work remotely via
Zoom, working from the relative safety of their home offices, gig and temporary
workers are increasingly being called on to ensure ready access to food,
medicine, and toilet paper for their middle and upper middle class work-from-
home peers. And the ranks of precarious workers on the frontlines of the
pandemic are only expected to grow. This project will examine the impact of the
coronavirus pandemic on exacerbating the existing vulnerability of precarious
and gig workers. This project will additionally examine how precarious workers
in essential jobs are weighing, and addressing, the health risks of working
versus the economic repercussions of unemployment, and how the pandemic, and
resulting recession, may affect worker views of the desirability of freelance or
gig-based work. Findings from the project will help to inform governmental
policies at several levels affecting gig workers, as well as labor force
participants who may be considering adoption or rejection of gig work in the
21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has challenged the
working conditions of gig workers who, by definition, cannot practice social
distancing when completing their tasks. This project, a mixed-methods panel
study, will utilize in-depth interviews and surveys with 200 precarious and gig
workers in New York City (NYC), the early epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Participants will include gig workers who find work via online platforms,
freelance workers in creative fields, and fast food and retail workers. The
first phase will be conducted between April and June 2020, a period that
coincides with the expected peak of the outbreak in NYC, and will examine how
workers are coping with these risks, and how the pandemic is shaping their lives
and understandings of their work. Follow-up interviews and surveys will be
conducted during Fall 2020, concurrent with the expected second outbreak, and
will provide an opportunity to study the impact of the Pandemic Unemployment Act
and economic stimulus checks on gig workers. Findings from the project will
inform sociological theories regarding precarious work, job satisfaction, and
job mobility. Findings will also inform theories regarding differential access
to the U.S. employment social safety net that appear among gig workers, as well
as between them and workers in more conventional jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.