* 2029895
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Design of Inhibitors for ORF7a and ORF7b Oligomerization in COVID-19
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Bryan Berger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Chemical and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems Division are funding Dr.
Bryan Berger (University of Virginia) and Dr. Jeffery Klauda (University of
Maryland) to investigate two proteins named ORF7a and OR7b from the COVID19
virus that have been implicated in how harmful the virus is to its host, e.g.
the human cells. The research will focus on how these two proteins form larger
protein complexes that in turn affect the interactions between the virus and the
infected cells and influence the immune response of the host. The research
informs the development of peptides that could be used to probe the viral
propagation. The research is based on the use of a combination of computational
and experimental methods. Dr. Berger and Dr. Klauda distribute to the scientific
community free of charge through Addgene the plasmids and associated protocols
developed for this project, thus enabling the global scientific community that
works on finding a solution to the current pandemic and to minimizing the
possibility of future outbreaks to quickly use the outcomes of their research.
This work will provide training for post-doctoral fellows working on critical
challenges using state-of-the-art experimental and computational methods. The
results of the research will be disseminated by the team to the greater
community through conferences and workshops at University of Virginia and
University of Maryland and through publications. The researchers also plan to
inform and educate students on possible mechanisms of virus transmission and
prevention by participation in existing outreach programs at their
Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to understand the
basis of specificity for transmembrane and juxtamembrane oligomerization of
ORF7a with BST-2 and for homooligomerization of ORF7b. Using bacterial
transcriptional assays for membrane protein dimerization based on the E. coli
AraC protein (AraTM and DN-AraTM assays), the researches determine specific
amino acid residues and structural motifs responsible for the protein
oligomerization in bacterial membranes. This knowledge informs computational
models for formation of BST-2/ORF7a heterooligomers and ORF7b homooligomers. In
turn, the computational models are used to make critical new predictions of
sequences for transmembrane peptides that could influence protein-protein
interactions involving ORF7a and ORF7b. These predictions and the properties of
the peptides are tested by synthesizing peptide libraries and using AraTM, DN-
AraTM, and mammalian, cell-based fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays.
Validation of candidate sequences are achieved using mammalian cell-based assays
for BST-2 function and apoptosis. The results of these studies could provide
high-resolution, experimentally validated models for OR7a and ORF7b homo and
heterooligomerization, as well as peptide sequences that can be used to probe
the roles of ORF7a and ORF7b in viral propagation in
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplement allocated to MPS and ENG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.