* 2029559
* Novel force sensors for in vivo live animal applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rui Yi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Physical forces impact a wide variety of cell functions ranging from stem cell
differentiations to cell migration, malignancy and wound healing. Monitoring
internal stresses is of critical importance in medical applications such as
tissue implants, prosthetics and minimally invasive surgery. Despite the clear
needs, the currently available force-sensing techniques are inadequate for
force-sensing in intact tissues in their natural states. This project presents a
novel nanosensor capable of highly sensitive force measurements in live animals.
The nanosensor makes use of specialized nanoparticles (upconversion
nanoparticles (UCNPs)), that, when excited by infrared light, will emit light
bands that can be manipulated to measure forces and tissue displacements at the
nanoscale in deep tissues. The proposed force sensor represents a transformative
new technique that will allow remote sensing of forces inside biological tissues
and generate 3D force maps, which will have far-reaching impacts on biology and
medicine as well as on a wide range of engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this project is to
develop a novel force sensing technique that allows minimally invasive in vivo
sensing of local force within a 3D volume of biological tissues. It promises
force measurements in the range of 1 nN and local deformation down to ~1 nm
using a conventional scanning optical microscope. The nanosensor is composed of
upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs), a flexible polymer and a metal
nanostructure. The proposed ratiometric sensing UCNP signal is excited by an
infrared light and thus does not excite background autofluorescence. By
exploiting the short-range UCNP-metal interaction, the sensor achieves high
sensitivity. Upconversion luminescence is a nonlinear process and naturally
allows imaging with excellent spatial resolution. The Research Plan is organized
under three phases: (1) design and fabrication of the nanosensor, (2) sensor
calibration and (3) demonstration of in vivo force sensing in live animal skin,
i.e., fully characterized and calibrated sensors will be injected subcutaneously
into live mice to measure mechanical forces in the epidermis during epithelial
cell migrations. It is expected that this novel technique will be capable of
producing 3D force maps of biological tissues in their natural states with
extremely high force sensitivity and spatial resolution. The research goals of
the project are integrated well with the education and outreach plans. Research
opportunities for graduate students will allow research to be integrated into
education. Research results will be integrated into courses and outreach
activities. The PIs have track records of mentoring graduate students,
undergraduate students and encouraging the participation of women and minority
students. The PIs are actively engaged in outreach programs to general public
and local industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.