* 2029249
* EFRI DCheM: Modular SynBio Processing Units for Distributed Manufacturing of High-Value Products
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Lilo Pozzo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,999,999.00

Distributed manufacturing replaces large national facilities with smaller
regional sites. It can relieve the stress on supply chains by shortening them.
It also uses local resources more effectively. Microbes can convert local
biomass into products. Their metabolic flexibility enables a wide variety of
products to be made. It also offers the potential for rapid switching between
products to meet local, regional, or national needs. The goal of this project is
to create and demonstrate modular bioreactor technologies. These will allow
repurposing of existing manufacturing facilities. They can be tuned to local
biomass resources as well as specific products. The modular design will
facilitate nimble responses to rapid shifts in demand and supply. Broad
participation in research will strengthen the US
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology offers the means of producing
a diverse array of high-value products from common biomass feedstocks. The goal
of this project is to develop and integrate modular unit operations (e.g.
continuous flow 3D-printed bioreactors) that will enable quick transitions from
product to product in response to changing market needs. They will utilize
common and locally available feedstocks and equipment. Transitions will be
accomplished by exchange and/or re-configuration of modular reaction units. The
project specifically targets the production of high-value natural medicines and
drugs. The project team will integrate expertise in synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering with recent materials innovations (e.g. 3D printed cell-
laden bioreactors). The development of 3D-printed cell-laden hydrogel structures
will permit continuous-flow operation and process intensification to facilitate
transport processes, reduce reactor sizes and allow for re-
configuration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.