* 2029980
* Influences of ecological niche on mechanisms of visual pathway maturation
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sarah Pallas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 572,596.00

The connections between nerve cells in juvenile brain networks are flexible and
can be shaped by the environment and experience. Network stability increases
with age, producing both costs and benefits. Different species have evolved
distinct patterns of plasticity reduction. This project compares developmental
changes in visual system plasticity across several mammalian species. It will
reveal how early sensory experience influences the way brain circuits are put
together, and how ongoing sensory stimulation maintains the boundary between
stability vs. flexibility of neural circuits. Because the genomes of many
mammals have now been sequenced, it is possible to employ genetic manipulations
that until recently were only feasible in mice. Comparative work is necessary to
arrive at a more complete understanding of plasticity mechanisms and to
determine whether animals with better vision and more reliance on visual
perception for survival than mice (the current species of choice) might provide
a better animal model for human visual development. Taken together, the results
of the study will provide important mechanistic information about how and why
the brain develops and changes with experience, and which animal models are the
most relevant for biomedical research. Understanding the natural processes that
control the boundary between plasticity and stability make it possible to
manipulate that boundary for human benefit. Results from this study will also
provide basic information about neural network plasticity which may be useful
for designing drug and rehabilitative therapies to treat or repair diseases or
injuries of visual pathways specifically, and brain pathways in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual experience during an early critical period
is required for normal development of visual cortical (V1) structure and
function in carnivores and non-human primates. Mice are now the preferred animal
model for studies of visual pathway development and plasticity. Visual
development and plasticity of mice differs from that of primates in both known
and unknown ways that may have important consequences for the generalization of
research findings to humans. Previous visual deprivation studies in hamsters and
mice from the P.I.'s lab have shown that early visual experience is not required
for normal developmental refinement of receptive fields in visual midbrain and
visual cortex. Instead, vision is necessary only for the maintenance of normal
function in visual midbrain (SC) and V1 of adults. The hypothesis to be tested
in this study is that the degree to which a species' visual system development
depends on visual experience is influenced by the extent to which vision is
important in their ecological niche. The predicted outcome is that nocturnal
species whose young stay in a burrow (such as mice) will be less dependent on
vision to shape the development of their visual pathways than diurnal species
whose young spend more time above ground. The timing and level of sensitivity to
visual experience will be measured in several rodent species that differ in
their daily activity patterns, nesting habits, and ecological niche. The rodent
data will be compared to that from a carnivore species that has traditionally
been used in studies of visual system development and plasticity.