* 2029502
* Studies of protein synthesis in the Bacteroidetes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 850,000.00

The Bacteroidetes represent an important group of bacteria, well represented in
intestinal tracts of mammals, including humans. Gene expression in the
Bacteroidetes differs substantially from that of well-studied bacteria, such as
Escherichia coli. This project will reveal the distinct manner in which proteins
are made in the Bacteroidetes. The knowledge gained may spur advances in
biotechnology and medicine. This project will also provide (i) research training
for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, (ii) summer research
opportunities for local high school students (Columbus Public Schools), and
(iii) mentorship training for junior faculty at Ohio State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all cells, ribosomes translate the genetic
code, synthesizing proteins based on the information content of mRNA. The rate
of translation varies dramatically, depending on the translation initiation
region (TIR) of mRNA. How intrinsic features of the TIR govern the rate of
translation initiation remains an important open question. In bacteria such as
E. coli, one well-known feature of the TIR is the Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence,
a purine-rich element that lies just upstream from the start codon. The SD pairs
with the anti-SD (ASD), a pyrimidine-rich element at the 3â€™ end of the 16S rRNA,
to promote initiation. Recent studies have shown that certain taxonomic groups
of bacteria, such as the Bacteroidetes, lack SD sequences in their mRNA. Yet,
their ribosomes retain the conserved ASD. The project aims to elucidate the
unique aspects of protein synthesis in the Bacteroidetes, using Flavobacterium
johnsoniae as a model organism. Specifically, the work will address (i) which
components of the ribosome govern ASD-mRNA pairing, (ii) how initiation complex
formation occurs in F. johnsoniae, (iii) whether the ASD plays a role in
ribosome assembly, and (iv) how autoregulation of release factor RF2 occurs in
F. johnsoniae. The results will provide fundamental insight on mechanisms of
translation initiation, programmed frameshifting, and ribosome assembly in
diverse bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.