* 2029553
* Machine-Learning-Optimized Refractory Metasurfaces for Thermophotovoltaic Energy Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new, environmentally friendly
energy sources is one of the grand engineering challenges faced by society.
Thermophotovoltaic devices convert waste heat into usable electricity and have
attracted a great research interest to satify the increasing need for electrical
power. Thermophotovoltaic (TPV) systems can take advantage of many energy
sources, including solar energy and waste heat from fossil fuels and industrial
processes. TPV systems could enable low-weight, versatile and compact
electricity generators that are noiseless, low-maintenance and energy-efficient.
Realizing high-efficiency TPV systems requires advancing fundamental knowledge
of materials, photonics, and design. A key challenge is to optimize multi-
functional TPV components and their constituent materials for stable operation
under environment and extreme temperatures. This project will use artificial
intelligenc (machine learning) to merge the knowledge of optical materials with
advanced optimization to achieve highly efficient TPV systems. The project will
create a fundamentally new, machine-learning-assisted optimization framework for
the realization of advanced TPV components. This project will leverage the
extended knowledge and database of tailorable optical materials and integrate
machine-learning algorithms with photonic
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the recent
years, there has been significant research interest in engineering the optical
and spectral properties of materials through the use of photonic metasurfaces
for efficient energy conversion, including thermophotovoltaics. The proposed
program merges advanced photonic topology optimization with deep-learning-based
inverse design methods and a comprehensive material database to unlock
unorthodox optical designs for the realization of highly-efficient components
for TPV applications. This effort will expand the design parameter space and
incorporate machine-learning approaches to achieve the dramatic improvement of
the speed and efficiency of topology optimization, as well as to build a large
documented materials database. Through unconventional optical design, the
program aims to develop highly efficient TPV energy conversion approaches by
enhancing radiative heat transfer process. The proposed TPV device could enable
unparalleled energy conversion efficiency potentially exceeding 50% by matching
the emissivity of the emitter to the bandgap of commercial photovoltaic cells
such as silicon, gallium antimonide, indium gallium arsenide. This approach
could elevate nanophotonic designs into previously unavailable regimes and can
be applied to photonic systems beyond TPV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.