* 2029641
* Effect of Crack-Parallel Stresses on Fracture of Concrete and Other Quasibrittle Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 614,799.00

This research will address prediction and control of fracture in concrete, with
implications in other heterogenous materials such as rocks, fiber composites,
ceramics, sea ice, rigid foams, shale, various bio-, biomimetic and printed
architectured materials. Concrete fracture is a serious safety concern
generally, and particularly during earthquakes. Fracture is always accompanied
by cracking which, in the long term, leads to environmental degradation as well.
Realistic fracture predictions based on standardized laboratory tests and
computer simulations is therefore critical to strong and durable civil
infrastructure. Recent research reveals that crack tips in quasibrittle
materials are surrounded by a wide zone of visually undetectable microcracking
damage, which controls crack growth yet is very sensitive to stresses that are
parallel to the cracks. The effects of these crack-parallel stresses are
currently unknown. This research will devise a new type of laboratory test,
which can measure the changes of energy required for fracture growth at various
crack-parallel stress levels. Testing will be conducted to better understand the
effect of crack-parallel stresses on normal and high-strength concretes as well
as fiber-reinforced concretes, and the results will be used to formulate a new
mathematical model for quasibrittle fracture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The crack-
parallel stress effects have gone unnoticed because they do not appear in the
currently standardized fracture tests and are not thermodynamic variables in
existing linear elastic fracture mechanics and cohesive crack models. The key
idea of this research is a modification of the notched three-point bend test
with four crucial features: 1) plastic support pads at notch mouth introduce
constant notch-parallel compression; 2) the end supports installed with gaps
engage only when the pads are yielding; 3) the test setup switches from one
statically determinate configuration to another, allowing unambiguous
interpretation; and 4) the size effect method, most effective for fracture
energy testing, is made possible. A finite element crack band model with a
tensorial damage softening law will be developed and calibrated by optimal
fitting of the test results. Finally, a multiscale model that incorporates
mesoscale mechanisms of frictional slip, microcrack opening, interlock and
splitting causing the crack-parallel stress effects will be devised. The results
are expected to transform fracture mechanics of quasibrittle
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.