* 2029633
* RAPID: The impact of norms and emotions on social distancing during COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* MONIQUE TURNER, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,994.00

Prior to the 2020 COVID-19 crisis, the U.S. had never attempted to influence
high-commitment behaviors at such a large-scale for an extended period. Humans
are "social animals"; promoting behaviors that protect the health of the
community, like physical distancing, is against our social nature and difficult
to maintain without people who truly believe in the importance of protecting
others. The nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and peoples’ response to it are
changing quickly as the social media and policy environment changes. Daily (even
hourly) attention to the news and social media posts is more commonplace during
crises, and this volume of exposure to information affects how we see and feel
about the world; ultimately it drives what we do. Yet, it is rare to be able to
document these rapid changes in real time. This study uses the team’s advances
in communication modeling and analysis of social media to examine the dynamic
relationships between social norms, emotions (including anger and guilt), and
COVID-19 risk reduction behaviors using social media data and self-report
surveys over the course of 2 months. This research can serve as the basis for
communication efforts to promote behaviors to slow the spread of the disease and
it can explain how social norms change over time. The Michigan State University
Health and Risk Communication Center supports the movement of the research
findings into practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Descriptive social norms (what is
common) and injunctive norms (approved by others) are likely to evolve more
quickly during a crisis relative to other times; yet studying norm evolution in
real time is challenging. The evolution of norms is, in part, shaped by
communication, both mediated and interpersonal. The advent of physical
distancing in the COVID-19 pandemic means a greater reliance on media for
information and fewer interpersonal contacts. Understanding the genesis of
norms, and their evolution in real time during a global pandemic is critical
because norms predict risk behaviors. Moreover, individuals’ perceptions of
their compliance with descriptive and injunctive norms co-vary with discrete
emotions and risk behaviors like physical distancing. This research proposes and
tests predictions about relationships among social norms, discrete emotions
(including anger and guilt), and risk reduction through physical distancing. The
methods combine a rolling cross-sectional survey and social media scraping
techniques. The study leverages a recently completed national Qualtrics survey
as a baseline. The project findings are translated for use in communication
interventions to promote risk reduction and reduce COVID-19 transmission and
future infectious disease outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.