* 2029992
* Legal Epidemiology Satellite Conference at 2021 Law Enforcement in Public Health Conference
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Scott Burris, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 10/31/2021
* USD 45,651.00

Law enforcement and public health (LEPH)are historically distinct domains. Law
enforcement has been tied primarily to public order and criminal investigations,
while public health’s focus is most closely aligned with establishing conditions
most conducive to health. In spite of that, the fields share much common ground,
with the central objective of both being the preservation of human well-being
through the regulation of behavior toward safety and security. Research on
effectiveness and impact of interventions can and should be an indispensable
guide to practice and policy-making. Past annual LEPH conferences hosted by the
Global Law Enforcement and Public Health Association have included robust
participation from researchers as well as practitioners. The conference in March
2021 and this proposed satellite offer a much-needed opportunity to engage more
researchers in the dissemination of high quality research on the effects of law
on public health (legal epidemiology). Linking this proposed satellite with the
regular conference will give more researchers the opportunity to interact with
the views, challenges and innovations of the practitioners they study. And,
deliberately incorporating legal epidemiology methods and research into the LEPH
conference exposes a greater, new audience of scholars and practitioners to the
methods and their applications, and supports further integral connection between
the disciplines. The satellite meeting provides an opportunity for researchers
in criminology, public health and law, and society research to articulate a
collaborative agenda, including important research questions and the development
of shared, formalized metrics. The meeting will have four areas of inquiry: 1)
measuring the effects of criminal law and law enforcement on the social
determinants of health; 2) developing shared metrics to inform LEPH strategy and
practice; 3) understanding people’s experiences of laws and legal practices and
their effects on health; and 4) identifying the role of health law in promoting
first responder health and wellness. The satellite also has broad-reaching
impact by generating increased scientific literacy in the area of legal
epidemiology among practitioners working at the interface of LEPH, and among
junior scholars. For the research community, the satellite will advance
translational research at the interface of law enforcement and public health,
illustrating the value of legal epidemiology in bridging theories and methods
across the two fields. It will advance scientific knowledge of the complex
relationships between law, law enforcement and public health, and it will help
make the case for an enhanced infrastructure for inter-disciplinary, cross-
sector research on law and its various influences on the public's health. For
the policy community, it will highlight areas of law-making and law enforcement
that can be actionable targets of innovation and reform, in furtherance of
public health. It will illuminate direct and indirect ways in which laws and law
enforcement practices reinforce or exacerbate disparities in health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.