* 2029857
* RAPID: Testing Important Judgment/Decision Making Phenomena in the High-Incentive Context of Covid-19: The Understanding of Physicians and Laypersons
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Hal Arkes, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 86,689.00

The coronavirus pandemic provides a rare opportunity to study public risk
perceptions and risk-related behaviors in the midst of a World Health
Organization Public Health Emergency of International Concern that could
threaten the quality of life of a wide spectrum of Americans. Few emergencies
within the United States have affected so many people. The situation is a rich
opportunity because it is occurring in real-time and is highly dynamic,
involving many players in our country and around the world. As a result, it
allows the research team a chance to compare this health threat with other
perceived disasters such as immigration, terrorism, and possible future public
health emergencies. The public’s perceptions and risk-related behaviors seem
likely to change over time in response to media coverage as well as actions from
our own and foreign governments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In one longitudinal
study, the research team invites participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk to
complete one survey each month for 5 months. The researchers query their risk
perceptions and affective responses toward the coronavirus, frequency of
discussions about the coronavirus with others, behavioral intentions towards
hypothetical experimental vaccines and treatments, and support for possible
policy solutions such as quarantine. The research also ascertains their intended
travel plans and media exposure to the pandemic including how much they trust
those sources. The team models the emotional, risk-perception, and behavioral
responses of participants toward the coronavirus by using a latent variable
growth curve model that examines the trajectories of variables over time. To
establish causal links, the scholars also conduct a second related experiment
that manipulates affect through narratives and examines its effects on risk
perceptions, medical decisions, and policy decisions. Participants are assigned
to a more negative or less negative condition, and mediation analysis is used to
evaluate the manipulation’s effects. In these studies, theoretical links are
made between risk perceptions, social amplification of risk, the affect
heuristic and other functions of affect, and numeracy. There is a dynamic test
of the three functions of affect by correlating current feelings over time with
risk judgments, intended prevention and treatment behaviors, and support for
policy options. Theoretical research on affect has not been tested in the
setting of a world health emergency. This research results in deep mechanistic
understanding of how emotions and media exposure influence vaccine and treatment
choices as well as support for policies. Finally, the second study establishes
causal links between affect and support for prevention, treatment, and policy
strategies. The research tests the dynamic and causal power of the functions of
affect and motivated reasoning in order to lay the groundwork for interventions
for emotional responses to the coronavirus and future epidemics. The research
also has important implications, including for communication methods, for other
affect-rich decisions faced by the public and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.