* 2029521
* Life on an oxidizing planet: Microbial ecosystems of a Neoarchean carbonate platform
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Czaja, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 311,760.00

The story of life on Earth is largely the story of microbes and microbial
ecosystems. Microbes were the first life on Earth, they are still the most
abundant form of life, and it is becoming increasingly well understood that no
complex life forms could survive without them. However, though the importance of
microbes is undeniable, their early evolutionary history is not well understood.
About 2.4 to 2.3 billion years ago, microbes changed this planet in a profound
way by adding oxygen to the atmosphere. We do not know exactly how this
oxygenation took place or how it impacted life on Earth, but we do know it
ultimately paved the way for the evolution of multicellular life including all
animals, plants, and fungi. This project will study fossilized microbial
ecosystems that lived 2.5 billion years ago and will not only expand our
knowledge about the early evolution of life on Earth, it will aid in the search
for life on other planets. International collaboration, student training and
educational outreach activities will be important components of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbial ecosystems that will be studied in this
project are preserved across the Campbellrand-Malmani carbonate platform (CMCP)
in South Africa. The CMCP formed over a 200 million year period, between 2.7 and
2.5 billion years ago. The project team will analyze the diverse microbial
ecosystems that existed across the CMCP and produce a holistic view of a
Neoarchean marine ecosystem and important details about a pivotal period in the
coevolution of Earth and life. This will be accomplished by describing the
preserved microfossils, using stable carbon isotope analysis to constrain the
possible metabolic pathways the fossilized microorganisms used in life,
calculating the diversity of observed microfossil assemblages and the similarity
of CMCP microfossil assemblages observed in different microbialites, and
evaluating evidence of Neoarchean biomineralization seen during preliminary
observation. This project will use multiple microscopic and spectroscopic
techniques, including transmitted light microscopy, secondary electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, confocal laser scanning
microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy, isotope
ratio mass spectrometry, and secondary ion mass
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.