* 2029836
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: LARGE: Adaptive Interference Rejection with Synthetic Channel Diversity (AIR SynCD)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Bernd-Peter Paris, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 220,000.00

As the demand for wireless services increases and the usable spectrum becomes
ever more crowded, wireless systems need to become more robust against
interference from many other signals. Radio receivers form the last line of
defense, protecting wireless systems from today’s increasingly dynamic and
densely occupied spectral environments. This project will develop a novel radio
receiver architecture capable of operating across a large portion of the
wireless spectrum while simultaneously being capable of adaptively suppressing
interferences as they arise. Since interference may change as a function of time
and location, an algorithm will be developed to help the receiver adaptively
adjust its response to one or more of these interferers so that the system can
take advantage of the wireless spectrum whenever and wherever there is a need.
Recent explosive growth in internet usage have brought to light humanity’s
increasing dependence on wireless access and the significant role wireless radio
receivers have in enabling the continued expansion of connectivity. This project
has specific plans to educate and train rising engineers, at both the graduate
and undergraduate level, to think holistically about the components and
operation of wireless systems and establish robust receivers for the future.
Specifically, PIs will pilot a new seminar course needed to succeed in a
doctoral degree program, which will include managing advisor-advisee
relationship, reading and writing research papers, giving effective research
presentations, and pursuing a career after graduation. PIs also have plan to
partner with Diversity Programs in Engineering at Cornell to recruit incoming
doctoral underrepresented minority (URM) students from across all engineering
disciplines for the one-hour seminar each week during the Fall
semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will horizontally integrate signal
processing and algorithm development, circuit design and optimization, and RF
component design and tuning to create a new class of receivers able to identify,
adapt to, and suppress interference effects while maintaining maximum frequency
agility. Research will focus on three integrated and interdependent thrust
areas. Design of receiver front-ends that use passive networks (of inductors,
capacitors, and other electromagnetic elements) to diversify the inputs from one
or more antennas into a larger number of output taps, which then feed into a
bank of reduced-power sub-receivers. Such a radio will be able to receive
signals from a wide range of frequencies, while providing enough measures of
both signal and interference that the byproducts of that interference can be
separated from the signals using digital signal processing. This will involve
both developing the required circuit theory and optimization tools and designing
working prototypes at the printed circuit board and integrated circuit level.
Development of digital-domain algorithms to provide control feedback to the
front-end to enhance the required diversity for proper suppression. Development
of adaptive RF magnetic devices to provide real-time tunability of the passive
network. This will involve magnetic material and device development, and require
close interaction with the circuit and algorithm designs, to best understand the
optimal balance between different component trade-offs, such as between tuning
range, component quality factor, and frequency of operation. The proposed new
receivers have the potential to enable significant enhancement in adaptive
interference mitigation and improve the robustness of future wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.