* 2029372
* Scholarships, Services, and a Framework of Programmatic Belonging Cues to Improve Undergraduate Student Success in Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Gerald Griffin, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,061.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, this project at Hope College in Holland, Michigan, will
provide 15 students with four-year scholarships and with services to support
recruitment, retention, and graduation of the Scholars with four-year
engineering degrees. Students will progress through the program in two cohorts,
one of eight students beginning in the first year of the award and a second
cohort of seven students beginning in the second year of the award. During their
first two academic years, students will be mentored and participate in
activities such as cohort building, supplemental instruction, career development
opportunities, and a vocation-focused diversity and inclusion seminar series.
This focused set of interventions is expected to lead to strong cohort
development, which, when combined with continued attentive faculty mentoring, is
expected to aid in the persistence of students to graduation. Students in the
program will participate in early research or internship opportunities that will
help to address employment needs of regional employers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The program aims to increase the retention of students through a
framework that is easily transferable to other institutions. This framework
includes longitudinal, focused integration of belonging cues into each student’s
academic programming. Belonging cues are short, simple activities that invoke
students’ sense of belonging. Examples include highlighting successful engineers
who were first-generation or from low socioeconomic backgrounds and providing
current students with messages from former students about their successful
transition to college and persistence through adversity. Research questions will
investigate if regular application of such programmatic belonging cues over an
extended period leads to lasting improvement in motivation and sense of
belonging that results in increased GPA and student retention. Qualitative and
quantitative methods will be used to determine the attainment level of program
objectives and to assess a student’s sense of belonging and feelings of support
as it relates to their persistence. Self-determination theory, a well-
established theory used in various contexts, will serve as the theoretical
framework for the evaluation. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.