* 2029025
* RAPID: Monitoring for SARS-CoV-2 in municipal wastewater and sewage to elucidate infection dynamics across major metropolitan areas of the United States
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Francis de los Reyes III, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The global COVID-19 pandemic has created major impacts to public health and the
economy. Currently, there are over two million confirmed cases of COVID-19
worldwide, with nearly 700,000 cases in the United States. Limited testing
capacity and asymptomatic infections have resulted in significant unknowns in
the actual number of infections by SARS-CoV2 (the virus responsible for
COVID-19). Therefore, alternative methods of tracking the SARS-CoV2 are urgently
needed. The goal of this RAPID project monitor public health by surveilling
SARS-CoV2 presence in wastewater in four cities in CA, NC, Washington DC, and
TX. Samples will be gathered before, during, and after infection peaks in these
four cities, creating a data collection essential to understanding the current
pandemic. Coronavirus levels will be determined using methods that target
specific parts of the virus. The wastewater data will be compared to data from
the healthcare system to determine if testing wastewater can help predict
COVID-19 presence in a community. Knowledge gained from this study will advance
the understanding of how wastewater testing can be used to guide healthcare
resources to individual communities, reducing long-term economic disruption of
the larger community during future outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited
diagnostic testing and asymptomatic infections result in large uncertainty in
the actual extent of SARS-CoV2 infections. Analysis of municipal wastewater is
equivalent to analyzing a pooled sample from all community members for a
community-scale measure of infection dynamics. A coordinated effort across four
major geographically diverse metropolitan areas, Orange County, Raleigh,
Washington, and DC, Houston will address knowledge gaps in the use of wastewater
surveillance as a public health monitoring tool. Raw wastewater and primary
solids will be collected from four municipal wastewater treatment plants
throughout the infection period to quantify SARS-CoV2, seasonal influenza, and
an enteric virus in the samples. Using identical experimental protocols and
incorporating other viruses into this analysis will validate and expand the
understanding of wastewater surveillance as a public health monitoring tool for
various human viruses in addition to SARS-CoV2. The team has public health and
wastewater treatment expertise to examine how wastewater data relates to
clinical data. The results from this study will help to characterize the full
potential of wastewater surveillance as a public health monitoring tool and help
prepare public health officials for future outbreaks. Results and methods will
be shared in publicly available using FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable,
and reusable) protocols to assist the larger network of researchers studying
SARS-CoV2 in wastewater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.