* 2029704
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The realization of nasality across the typological spectrum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Lev Michael, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,901.00

This dissertation project will advance our understanding of speech sounds in
human languages by investigating nasality in languages with rare nasal speech
sound systems. Nasal sounds are produced with air flowing through the nasal
cavity, such as [m] and [n] in English, and are present in nearly all of the
worldâ€™s languages. However, much remains unknown about the range of possible
nasal speech sounds systems in human languages, and what is responsible for the
emergence of different types of nasal systems, meaning that there is a
significant gap in our understanding of this fundamental aspect of human
language. This study will help fill this gap by: 1) investigating nasality
systems in languages that represent two distinct ends of the typological
spectrum in terms of the size of the domains over which duration and intensity
of nasality are controlled by speakers; and 2) investigating the hypothesis that
nasality systems which are very sensitive to the duration and intensity of
nasality are associated with languages where nasality plays an important role in
making distinctions in meaning. With respect to the typological spectrum of
nasality, at one extreme this project will investigate a language that
distinguishes speech sounds that differ in the duration of nasality within
individual sound segments, as evidenced in contrasts between prenasalized [nt]
and postoralized [nt]. At the other extreme, it will investigate a language that
exhibits a slow, gradual increase in nasality over entire words, and where
nasality is thus less clearly tied to individual sound segments, but rather
larger domains encompassing many sound segments. These rare phenomena indicate
that speakers of human languages are sensitive to minute distinctions in
nasality, both in its temporal extent as well as in the amount of nasal airflow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;That speakers of human languages are sensitive to such
fine-grained differences in nasality raises the question of why these phenomena
are observed in some languages, but not others. This study investigates the
hypothesis that part of the answer lies in the functional load of nasality (a
measure of the amount of "work" that any particular contrast does in a language)
in different human languages. The functional load of nasality is likely much
higher in languages at these extremes of the typological spectrum than it is in
other languages for which nasality has commonly been investigated, e.g. English
or French, making such languages critical for understanding how the range of
nasality systems found in human languages may arise. This project is based on
intensive fieldwork with speakers of languages exhibiting different kinds of
nasality systems, and relies on two key methodologies. First, interview-style
elicitation techniques will allow for a detailed description of the rules that
govern the realization of nasality in these languages. Second, the project will
develop a corpus of oral narratives in these languages, which will be
transcribed, translated, and archived for the preservation and dissemination of
these data. An analysis of the corpora will make it possible to measure the
functional load of nasality in these languages and shed light on how functional
load is related to the types of speech sounds found in human
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.