* 2029909
* I-Corps: Electrospun composite nanofibers for point-of-use and point-of-entry drinking water treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of high-performance filters to improve access to safe and reliable
drinking water. Contaminated drinking water is a public health crisis affecting
hundreds of millions of people worldwide, including many across the United
States. The proposed nanotechnology-enabled water filter technology provides a
unique solution to pervasive drinking water pollutants, including lead and
arsenic. As an in-home or point-of-use (POU) technology, it is envisioned that a
product would be used at the primary faucet used for water consumption or in
reusable water bottles. The technology may be especially valuable for those
relying on unregulated water supplies like private drinking water wells, where
water is often consumed with little to no treatment. Institutions with older
plumbing systems would benefit from these filters at their fountains and
bubblers. This could positively impact communities with limited freshwater
resources or needs of humanitarian missions or natural
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of nanotechnology-enabled water treatment devices. Electrospinning to fabricate
functionalized polymer-metal oxide nanofiber composites for drinking water
treatment coupling physical and chemical removal routes for a diverse range of
pollutants has been shown. Accordingly, the overarching goal of this work is to
translate nanofiber fabrication recipes to industrial scale and demonstrate the
performance of the functionalized polymer nanocomposites using a prototype
point-of-use (POU) water treatment device (e.g., for use at the tap, within a
home refrigerator or a reusable water bottle). Development efforts include
scaling up electrospinning processes to fabricate nanofiber membrane sheets of
dimensions necessary for integration into POU treatment devices; integration of
these nanofiber membrane sheets into prototype POU treatment platforms to
demonstrate ease of installation, use and maintenance; and validation of the
device for regulatory approval of removal of lead (Pb) and arsenic (As). The
transformative aspect of this technology is to create multi-functional,
nanostructured materials with synergistic performance
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.