* 2029940
* RAPID: Seismo-acoustic radiation from a local earthquake aftershock sequence: how, when, and why seismic waves cross the ground-atmosphere interface
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Lee Liberty, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 73,643.00

Central Idaho experienced a rare large earthquake (M6.5, depth ~14 km) on the
evening of March 31, 2020 (local time). This is the second-largest ever recorded
earthquake in Idaho, and because earthquakes of this magnitude are uncommon, the
prospect of recording a valuable aftershock sequence motivated Boise State
University researchers to set up a sensor network the following day in an area
near to the epicenter. This deployment included both seismometers (to measure
seismic waves underground) and infrasound sensors (to measure pressure waves in
the air). This new network greatly enhances the detection capacity to the more
than 283 M2.5+ aftershocks that have already been recorded by the distant
regional seismic network. In addition, this new network will significantly
improve the accuracy of aftershock locations, which will allow us to understand
and map the fault distribution in the area and better anticipate future
earthquake hazards, including potential large earthquakes that could come in the
following weeks and months. In addition to tracking the seismic radiation from
these aftershocks, preliminary analyses from the monitoring of infrasound, or
low frequency pressure waves in the atmosphere, has revealed the production of
an incredible amount of earthquake ‘sounds’. These air waves have been
identified at multiple sites across the geophysical network, and early analyses
indicate that they originate in the surrounding mountains as the mountains shake
during the passage of the seismic waves. Past observations of mountain-generated
air waves have only been studied at long distances; therefore, scientists know
very little about the process of earthquake sound generation. Thus, monitoring
the Stanley, Idaho aftershock sequence by expanding and maintaining the local
geophysical sensor network will provide a unique and fleeting chance to study
not just this region’s earthquakes, but also the transmission of seismic energy
to the air (and vice versa). An improved understanding of earthquake-generated
air waves may lead to new methods of monitoring seismic hazards, including
secondary hazards in mountainous regions like avalanches and rockfalls,
benefiting the communities exposed to such hazards and the agencies that must
respond to them.

Aftershocks of Central Idaho’s recent large earthquake (March 31 2020, M6.5,
depth ~14 km) provide an ephemeral and unique opportunity to understand
topographic seismic-acoustic energy conversion. Motivated by the rarity of
events of this magnitude in Idaho, a team of researchers from Boise State
University (BSU) began deploying seismometers and infrasound sensors in the
region surrounding the epicenter the following day, resulting in a sensor
network with excellent spatial coverage. The BSU network includes several
spatially dispersed sites including both seismic and acoustic arrays (closely-
spaced clusters of sensors that can identify correlated signals and determine
the wave’s propagation vector), enabling it to identify backazimuths to wave
sources that can be mobile, low in amplitude, continuous, or with emergent
onsets. Additionally, because some infrasound sensors and seismometers are co-
located, it will be possible to determine the mutual responses of seismic and
acoustic instruments to acoustic and seismic waves. Early results from the
temporary BSU network include aftershocks that are not detected on permanent
regional stations as well as frequent earthquake-generated infrasound.
Earthquake-generated infrasound is observed at multiple sites, is not associated
with rock falls or avalanches, and appears to originate in nearby mountainous
topography during the passage of seismic waves. Such infrasound has previously
only been observed at regional distances where atmospheric propagation effects
are strong, limiting the resolution of source inferences; the BSU network does
not suffer from this limitation. Maintaining and expanding the BSU seismo-
acoustic network during the aftershock sequence can elucidate the conversion of
wave energy between the ground and atmosphere in unprecedented detail. This
improved understanding of earthquake-generated infrasound will include topics
like controls on infrasound generation (e.g., dependence on earthquake magnitude
and depth, topographic properties, and seismic wave type), infrasound properties
(e.g., radiation patterns and duration), coupling of earthquake-generated
infrasound back into the ground, instrumentation sensitivities (e.g., the
response of seismometers to infrasound and of infrasound sensors to ground
motion), and analytical methods for locating earthquake infrasound sources.
Earthquake-associated topographic infrasound could serve as a new monitoring
method in earthquake-prone mountainous areas. Due to the need to distinguish
earthquake-related mountain infrasound from secondary seismic hazards like
avalanches or rock falls, an improved understanding of earthquake infrasound
will help communities and agencies affected by such hazards.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.