* 2029053
* EAGER: STEM Illinois: The Land-Grant Model of Outreach and Education to Nurture Future Underrepresented Computer Scientists
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Ruby Mendenhall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Despite decades of computer science pipeline programming, participation of
students of color in computer science and information technology disciplines
remains alarmingly low. STEM Illinois is a project deeply rooted in the historic
mission of land-grant institutions, which is to democratize higher education and
to address the world?s most pressing societal challenges. This project will
specifically work with 50 to 100 students whose parents do not have a college
degree and who are at risk for dropping out of school. Computer scientists from
these backgrounds represent a small number of faculty and industry
professionals. The STEM Illinois project seeks to evaluate and analyze the
impact of COVID-19 on their educational outcomes and pursuits by using a radical
model of intergenerational outreach and education. This model seeks to create a
culture of innovation where all members of the community see, understand, and
feel that they can support their youth in computer science innovation. It is
importance to understand which aspects of the culturally engaging project foster
a computer science identity and persistence among the
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the STEM Illinois project is to create a
unique ecosystem that will nurture future computer scientists in industry and
the academy. This project will provide underrepresented students with computer
science activities that include using spatial analysis to map communities
vulnerable to COVID-19, coding, big data analysis, artificial intelligence, data
visualization, math, algorithms, and access to a recording studio to represent
computer science concepts using art and music. Students will receive
unprecedented access to mentors and professional experiences that include
interviewing industry/academic computing scientists for podcasts, giving
TEDxYouth talks about their experiences with computer science, questions and
answer sessions with Nobel Prize Winners, etc. This project will increase the
number of marginalized students majoring in Computer Science and Information
Technology at the University of Illinois and around the country. The goal is
also to increase the number of students in computer science internships and jobs
at large companies such as State Farm, American Association of Retired Persons
(AARP) and Microsoft (workforce development). The project will be evaluated
using pre- and post-tests surveys, interviews, and participant observation. The
project will use the Computer Science Attitude and Identity Survey (or a similar
instrument) that includes questions about how confident a person feels about
their computer science skills and how much interest they have in computer
science as a profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.