* 2029792
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Relationships, social distancing, social media and the spread of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Matthew Baum, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 10/31/2021
* USD 117,500.00

This project seeks to improve the national response to the COVID-19 pandemic by
launching large-scale data collection through a rolling national survey linked
to individual social media data. We generate information useful to policymakers
and local authorities and offer near-real-time state-by-state disease tracking.
Our data allow officials to understand where the virus is currently spreading,
facilitating improved allocation of resources. We also evaluate the networked
nature of the disease, tracking its flow based on the reported social
relationships of the survey participants and their social distancing behaviors.
The project captures how well the information and communication needs of
Americans are met during this crisis, observes patterns of citizen compliance
with government recommendations, stay-at-home orders, and enforced lockdowns,
and assesses their impact on suppressing the spread of the virus among diverse
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two core objectives: (1)
producing information that will be immediately useful in improving the national
response to COVID-19; and (2) using COVID-19 data to understand how people adapt
to and make sense of a national crisis that has important and immediate
ramifications for their daily lives. We rely on a large-scale, rolling national
survey that is conducted on a daily basis, with approximately 3000 respondents
per day. We also link the survey data to the social media behavior of
respondents. The large sample sizes collected daily offers near-real-time state-
by-state disease tracking, as well as the ability to observe key differences in
responses to policies across demographic groups. The design will capture how
people use technology to work, get informed, and stay connected, and
respondentsâ€™ financial difficulties, employment experiences, and parenting and
educational challenges in response to the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.