* 2029257
* RAPID: Perceived Risk and Impacts of COVID-19 in Socially Vulnerable Urban Neighborhoods
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Andrew Parker, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 10/31/2021
* USD 199,737.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is requiring unprecedented response policies, including
stay-at-home orders, closing of schools and non-essential businesses and
services, and travel restrictions. As these policies are implemented, profound
residential segregation in the US also creates differences in the backdrop of
conditions faced by lower-income, minority communities, compared with others.
Understanding how housing conditions, neighborhood socioeconomic conditions,
access to basic services, and community sentiment affects peopleâ€™s experiences
of the pandemic is important because reducing the spread of the disease and
burden on the public health system depends critically on people staying at home.
This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will examine how characteristics of
built and social environments influence the impacts of COVID-19 and associated
response policies on risk perceptions, mental health, financial well-being, and
food security for residents in disinvested, racially isolated, urban areas. Our
approach advances the science of risk perception and models of community
vulnerability and resilience. The data and insights will help policymakers to
target assistance toward individuals and neighborhoods most in need of support
during the COVID-19 pandemic. This research will also assist planning for post-
pandemic recovery among the most vulnerable in US
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on an existing longitudinal
panel study of residents in two neighborhoods participating in the Pittsburgh
Hill/Homewood Research on Neighborhoods and Health (PHRESH). The randomly
selected PHRESH cohort comprises 1,000 households for which data have been
collected since 2011 on food security and access, home conditions, resilience,
physical and mental health, social cohesion, and extensive sociodemographic
data. A randomly selected subsample of 500 individuals from the PHRESH cohort
will be administered a telephone survey that includes new questions about:
COVID-19 illness and policy experiences; neighborhood perceptions and
satisfaction; cognitive, affective, and behavioral elements of perceived risk;
and impacts on mental health, financial well-being, and food security. This
project will test the hypotheses that COVID-19 and associated policies impact
risk responses, mental health outcomes, financial well-being, and food security,
with 1) social and built environment characteristics either amplifying or
reducing (i.e., moderating) the effect of COVID-19 and 2) community sentiment
such as neighborhood perceptions and satisfaction potentially explaining (i.e.,
mediating) any significant associations between COVID-19 and study
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.