* 2029579
* RAPID - Impact of Coronaviridae lipid, protein and RNA interaction on copper, zinc, and their derivatives coated personal protective equipment surfaces and viral infectivity
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Robert DeLong, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,140.00

Personal protective equipment (PPE), such as face masks, gloves and surgical
gowns, forms the primary barrier for medical, healthcare and laboratory workers
for protection against contact with severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). The virus lives on the surface of currently available
PPE materials for many days. Recent evidence suggests that copper or copper zinc
oxide composites with antimicrobial activity may inactivate virus. However, the
mechanism for this is poorly understood at present. This project will test the
hypothesis that PPE surfaces coated with copper or zinc oxide nanoparticles
(NANO-PPE) will cause denaturation and degradation of viral biomolecules, thus
leading to viral inactivation. The project sheds new insight into hybrid
materials containing these biotic metals on the PPE surface, especially
characterizing their interactions to biomaterials such as lipid, protein or RNA
and the impact on structure-function. The RAPID project draws on several
complementary areas of technology including, nanomaterial surface chemistry and
processes, biophysics, biochemistry, and virology. This provides a unique
interdisciplinary training environment for a diverse group of post-graduate,
graduate and undergraduate students to engage in this cutting-edge research.
Societal impact is that NANO-PPE stands to inactivate virus on contact, better
protecting personnel from viral infection and thus limiting community spread,
and long-term may help protect against other healthcare associated infections
and drug resistant bacteria. This project is jointly funded by the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this RAPID project is to
gain a more fundamental understanding of nanoscale interactions of viral or
viral-mimetic lipid, protein and RNA to PPE materials surface-coated with copper
or copper/zinc oxide composites. The goals of the project are; 1) to fabricate
PPE materials coated with copper and/or zinc oxide nanoparticles, mixtures and
composites, 2) to characterize their nano-bio interactions and quantify the
biomolecular denaturation and degradation caused by the nanoscale interaction,
and 3) to place surrogate respiratory virus in contact with NANO-PPE and
determine functional impact on viral titer and infectivity. Standard industrial
scale processes such as electrospinning and deep coating will be used to coat
the surface of PPE (face-mask, nitrile glove and surgical gown) with copper and
zinc oxide nanoparticles. Surface interactions with the viral lipid, protein and
RNA will be investigated by transmission electron microscopy, FT-IR,
Raman/Photoluminescence, and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Biomolecular
denaturation and degradation will be quantified by 2-dimensional fluorescence
difference spectroscopy, circular dichroism, gel electrophoresis, tryptic
digestion and liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy. Finally, viral titer and
RT-PCR will be used to quantify impact of nanoscale interaction on biological
activity. Overall, the experiments will probe structure-functional impact of
nanoscale interaction of virus and its inhibition by coming into contact with
NANO-PPE. The project will be integrated into a graduate class in Nanomedicine
within a unit on nanoscale interactions and characterization methods and into
the PI and co-PIs research programs involving undergraduate, masters, PhD and
post-doctoral students. Products of this research will be translated to a
corporate partner for rapid manufacturing and introduction into the healthcare
and laboratory supply chain. This project is jointly funded by the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.