* 2029158
* RAPID: RETrofitting  REsiliency AgainsT COVID-19! (RETREAT COVID-19!)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Yury Dvorkin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2022
* USD 149,951.00

In densely populated urban environments, such physical infrastructure systems as
gas, electric power and water networks are critical enablers of shelter-at-home
policies that help slow down the spread of the COVID-19 outbreak. However, from
the infrastructure viewpoint, these policies cause a major shift of gas,
electricity and water consumption to residential rather than commercial
neighborhoods, which may face unusual demand profiles for infrastructure
services, possibly leading to outages and inability (or limited ability) to
serve sheltered population groups. Such outages take societally unacceptable
death tolls, even without factoring in the effect of the COVID-19 outbreak. For
example, only among medically insured Americans, the estimated number of
electricity-dependent persons residing at home was 685,000 (2012), among whom
roughly one fifth is vulnerable to even short 3-4 hour power outages. The main
goal of this proposal is to analyze infrastructure operations under different
scenarios of disease outbreaks, using real-life infrastructure and public health
data from New York City, and inform infrastructure operators and urban planners
on efficient strategies to mitigate public health risks. In these analyses, the
project team will specially focus on needs of vulnerable population
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical objective of this proposal is to
bridge the current gap between infrastructure and epidemic models to understand
how the demand of infrastructure services change under different outbreak
scenarios. To this end, we will first internalize the effects of health
epidemics in infrastructure models. The epidemics model will include
Susceptible-Infectious-Susceptible (SIS) and Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered
(SIR) models, which make it possible to reasonably simulate the spread of
infectious diseases as flu and influenza (SIS) and measles, mumps, rubella
(SIR). Second, using real-life data on the COVID-19 outbreak in NYC and models
of gas, electricity, transportation and water systems, our research team will
carry out an infrastructure vulnerability analysis under different outbreak
scenarios, which will be appropriately designed to represent potential
trajectories of the COVID-19 outbreak (e.g. "bell" shape, when the outbreak
peaks and then gradually decays or the "W" shape, when the outbreak can have
multiple peaks). We will develop outage models of critical infrastructure
equipment (water pumps, gas compressors, electric power transformers) in order
to adequately capture accelerated wear-and-tear of these resources due to the
atypical and shifted usage during the outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.