* 2029949
* RAPID: Large-scale functional analysis of antibody repertoires elicited by SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Arum Han, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 10/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The award to Texas A&amp;M University will support research on a novel lab-on-a-
chip system, to determine the identity, functionality, and clonality of
antibodies (Abs) elicited by SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19. One of
the most important functions of Abs during viral infection is neutralization,
the process whereby Ab binding to viral or host targets prevents viral entry
into host cells, thereby thwarting disease. Conventional approaches for
determining the functions of pathogen-specific neutralizing Ab (nAb) repertoire
are time- and labor-intensive, and thus have only been used to investigate small
portions of Ab repertoires. This award will support research to develop a system
that enables fast, direct, functional assays that measure viral neutralization
activities of Ab-producing cells. In addition to the strong scientific impact,
this award will support cross-disciplinary training postdoctoral, graduate
student, and undergraduate student trainees, including women and scientists from
historically under-represented groups. Results from the studies will be
disseminated rapidly and in peer-reviewed journals and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, the large-scale analysis of
antibody repertoires was cost-prohibitive, owing to their massive sizes.
However, over the past decade, novel sequencing approaches, including Ig-seq,
have provided unprecedented insight into Ab gene repertoires. However, despite
these dramatic advances, our understanding of the functions of Ab repertoires
remains incomplete. Support from this award will advance a droplet microfluidics
platform termed PRESCIENT, that enables fast, single-cell (digital) resolution,
direct, functional assays that measure viral neutralization activities of Ab-
producing B-cells, thereby providing a system for rapidly characterizing a large
repertoire of nAbs against viral pathogens. The overall objectives are to
deliver: A fully integrated microfluidic platform with dual fluorescence
detection capability and system level throughput of at least 10 assays/sec
achieved; demonstration that sera from inoculated mice react with recombinant
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein antigen; and characterization (at single cell
resolution) the nAb (functional) repertoire against pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2-GFP.
This RAPID award will thus deliver the first global functional characterization
of Abs that neutralize pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2, a timely response to the ongoing
global pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 and an important complement to the ongoing
computer simulation studies conducted by other labs. This RAPID award is made by
the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.