* 2029548
* RAPID: Speech as a modality for airborne transport of virus-laden droplets in the COVID-19 pandemic
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Goodarz Ahmadi, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 199,369.00

This RAPID project will advance the understanding of how infectious diseases are
spread from speaking, which is directly relevant to informing decisions
regarding social distancing measures in the current COVID-19 pandemic. During
regular conversation, small virus-laden droplets are generated in the
respiratory and vocal tract. They are then expelled into the surrounding
environment as airflow exits the mouth. Larger droplets may impact surfaces in
the immediate vicinity, while smaller ones may stay suspended in the air as
aerosols for long periods of time. Both types of expiratory droplets pose an
infection risk. Larger droplets may land directly on individuals that are in
close proximity, while smaller aerosolized particles are capable of traveling
longer distances and infecting people much farther away by being inhaled into
the respiratory tract. Currently, the range of distances that particles travel
when produced by speech, and the resulting infection risk posed to individuals
in the immediate (near field) and more distant (far field) vicinity, is not well
understood. The potential for increased infection risk due to prolonged speech
in indoor environments, where airborne particles may accumulate over time and
reach higher concentrations, is also not known. This research proposal aims to
answer these questions by performing physical measurements of speech in tandem
with numerical modeling of droplet transport to predict infection risks in both
the near and far field of an infected speaker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to determine how virus-laden droplets are spread during speech.
Particular emphasis is placed on investigating specific vocal intonations that
produce high velocity bursts of air at the mouth (i.e., fricatives and
plosives), which are hypothesized to propel particles over relatively long
distances and increase infection risk in both the near and far field.
Experimental velocity field measurements of the human mouth jet will be acquired
using particle image velocimetry for sustained vowels, fricatives, and plosives,
at varying levels of loudness. Separately, aerodynamic particle size
spectrometry will measure the droplet size distributions generated by these same
utterances. These data will be used to validate and inform an unsteady Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes computational fluid dynamics model that adopts an
Eulerian-Lagrangian approach to model and quantify droplet dynamics. Coupling
the expiratory velocity fields and particle dynamics for specific speech
utterances will facilitate predicting the infection risk arising from voiced
speech by using viral titer levels and infectious doses for the SARS-CoV-2
virus. Near and far field infection risks will be quantified for both open and
confined surroundings, where the competing times scales associated with
ventilation, particle settling, and virus inactivation rates, will influence the
steady-state particle accumulation. Mitigation strategies to decrease infection
risk in indoor environments will also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.