* 2029670
* SWIFT: LARGE: Adaptive Radio Frequency Interference Cancellation for Radio Science Observatories
* MPS,OMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Alan Edelman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,259,720.00

Scientific radio observatories, including radar systems and radio telescopes,
require access to the radio spectrum for experiments. In some cases the
experiments many be conducted in frequencies that already overlap communications
systems or which are subject to unintentional radio frequency interference
(RFI). By exploring techniques for mitigating the interference we will help to
preserve the integrity of scientific measurements and improve the ability of
radio observatories to operate in a future environment of radio spectrum
sharing. The techniques developed will focus on automated methods to identify
and mitigate radio interference. The approaches taken will include advanced
mathematical methods and artificial intelligence techniques. These methods will
be highly efficient compared to existing approaches and usable immediately to
help improve the quality of radio observatory data. The underlying techniques
and algorithms are likely to be highly useful beyond the immediate context of
this proposal. They will be made available as open source software in the Julia
programming language to enable widespread use by the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific radio observatories including radar systems and
radio telescopes require access to the radio spectrum for experiments. In some
cases the experiments are limited to bands which can be protected but many are
conducted in frequencies that already overlap existing communications systems or
are subject to unintentional radio frequency interference (RFI). We aim to
explore techniques for spectral coexistence in the context of experimental radio
science for Geospace and Astronomy applications. Our approach is to explore the
development and application of algorithms and mathematical techniques for
adaptive cancellation of RFI for systems at MIT Haystack Observatory. Modern
radio observatories must co-exist with a vast increase in both licensed and
unintentional sources of RFI. The experiments at these observatories often
require the measurement of signals that are significantly below the background
thermal noise floor. A core goal of the effort is to develop algorithms and
methodologies that will enable interference-immune radio science systems.
Starting from existing approaches to space time adaptive filtering (STAP) and a
sidelobe cancelling architecture we will implement a sparse reference sensor
network and explore: (1) automated methods for identification and classification
of RFI focused, (2) random matrix, sketch, and neural network techniques to
accelerate the algorithms, and (3) the application of sparse software radio
networks to provide simultaneous RFI mitigation for multiple radio observatory
sensors. Our proposed work will enable advanced algorithms for adaptive
cancellation of RFI in the context of a large scale radio facility. The
approaches should be generally applicable to a wider range of radio facilities
and experiments. In many cases the adaptive cancellation techniques may enable
observations in spectrum that might otherwise not be usable. Mathematical
approaches to the efficient application of these algorithms and their scaling
using high performance computing will be demonstrated. Both the underlying
techniques and the specific algorithms are likely to be highly useful beyond the
immediate context of this proposal. Project results will be disseminated in
venues, spanning communities from signal processing, computer science,
mathematics, and Radio Science (i.e. URSI). The scope was slightly reduced after
review to focus on four areas of the proposal associated with the multi-channel
sidelobe cancellation architecture instead of five, with the specific reduction
being determined as the work progresses. While the major project goals remain
unchanged, as part of the scope reduction, the team will utilize smaller
datasets to reduce computational costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.