* 2029739
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Quantifying Social Media Data for Improved Modeling of Mitigation Strategies for the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Konstantinos Mykoniatis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 04/30/2022
* USD 141,527.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will support research that will
contribute new knowledge related to modeling social behavior and community
activity during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as future pandemics with COVID-19
characteristics. The model focuses on compliance with mitigation strategies and
public health guidelines, thus enabling the selection of policies that are most
effective in promoting both the progress of science and advancing national
health and prosperity. Various pandemic models are currently being used to
predict the spread of a virus and establish which mitigation strategies are the
most effective. These models are heavily based on assumptions and may include an
oversimplified reality of how populations react and behave. This research will
provide needed knowledge and methods for the development of a model of how
individuals in the U.S. react to certain mitigation strategies, such as social-
distancing, stay-at-home orders, quarantines, and travel advisories, by mining
and analyzing social media data during the COVID-19 crisis. This enhanced
modeling approach and its resultant model will be of great value to disaster
response managers and policy/decision makers to understand human social
behavior. This work allows assessment of the effectiveness of mitigation
strategies and public health guidelines during pandemics (and other crises).
This project will also form the basis of a publicly available case study
suitable for university level students that can be widely incorporated in
courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although individual-based and homogeneous mixing
pandemic models provide useful insights and predictive capabilities within a
range of possibilities, they are highly sensitive to peopleâ€™s actions. This
research aims to provide an enhanced approach to model social behavior and
community activity during a pandemic in terms of compliance with mitigation
strategies and public health guidelines. Social media data present a brief
window of opportunity for research on how, and to what extent, the public does
or does not comply with the recommended mitigation strategies and public health
guidelines. The research team will collect real-time data from social media
related to COVID19-exposed regional populations in the U.S. The data will be
analyzed using machine learning techniques to identify non-mutually exclusive
clusters of people based on similarity of their demographic, geographic, and
time information, and establish relationships among clusters. The analyzed data
will form the basis of a data-driven multi-paradigm simulation model that
captures changes in public sentiment over time, quantifies the
resistance/compliance with mitigation strategies and health guidelines, and
gauges overall effectiveness of various mitigation strategies and advice over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.