* 2029811
* I-Corps:  Chip-scale laser ranging module for precision autonomous navigation and vehicular safety
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2020
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of precision laser sensing for vehicular navigation and safety.
Recently, there has been a substantial commercial effort to build modular light
detection and ranging (LiDAR) units to achieve the perception stack of
autonomous and robotic-drone platforms. However, most state-of-the-art LiDAR
sensors are based on mechanically rotating laser arrays or bulk solid-state
lasers that are large, heavy, consume high-power and are difficult to scale.
Recent results have demonstrated a chip-scale LiDAR architecture based on on-
chip lasers and optoelectronics, enabling a solid-state approach with high
performance. In this I-Corps program, the goal is to identify potential
customers and market of highest need through the customer discovery process, and
to develop a detailed and robust business model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of precision laser sensing for
vehicular navigation and safety and supported by preliminary chip demonstrations
in the laboratory. Using this technology, the 3D vehicular surroundings may be
mapped via laser time-of-flight reflection. Together with modeling and design
parameter analysis, performance of the LiDAR chip has been examined using
advances in the photonic design, coupled with advances in the laser precision
measurements and thresholds, and detector signal-to-noise ratio. The photonic
implementation is scalable through the foundry processing compared to prior
studies on bulk rotating laser arrays or bulky solid-state lasers. This chip-
scale laser sensing technology may enable the readiness level of autonomous
vehicle sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.