* 2029549
* Enhancing stress tolerance using a phase-dependent stress response
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Kathleen Greenham, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2024
* USD 661,275.00

Climate change threatens global crop production. These threats vary in
frequency, type and severity depending on geographic location. As a consequence,
crops grown across latitudinal zones require diverse coping strategies. To
ensure the future of crop production, this project will apply an imaginative
model for crop improvement based on the plantâ€™s circadian clock, an internal
timekeeper that enables plants to coordinate growth with the environment in
accordance with the daylength. This internal oscillator, much like the human
circadian clock, controls when physiological and metabolic changes occur
throughout the day. As a result, plants under stress turn on and off certain
genes at specific times of day to modulate physiological responses. The energy
cost associated with a stress response is high and while turning these genes on
indefinitely can provide stress tolerance it often leads to a significant
reduction in yield. This project will test whether cold stress tolerance can be
achieved by modifying the timing of the response through fine-tuning when these
genes are turned on and off and monitoring the physiological impact on growth.
These tests will be performed in the model plant Arabidopsis and crop Brassica
rapa, a diverse crop that includes Chinese cabbage, turnip, oilseed and leafy
vegetable varieties that have a wide range of cold tolerance traits to be
studied. The methods and tools used to create these modifications will be made
available to the scientific community to allow for implementation in other crop
systems against a variety of stresses to improve yield throughout the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models for abiotic stress improvement often
rely on over-expression of identified transcription factors (TFs) that confer
improved stress response but come at a cost to overall growth and yield. As a
central integrator of environmental signals, the circadian clock provides a
unique target for optimizing responses to the environment while maintaining
proper physiological processes. This project incorporates time dependent
transcriptome and physiological cold stress datasets from diverse B. rapa and
Arabidopsis genotypes into temporal gene regulatory networks (GRNs). These GRNs
will be used to identify Temporal Stress Regulator (TSR) TFs that are associated
with cold tolerant genotypes. TSRs showing altered temporal responses between
tolerant and sensitive genotypes will be selected for phase-dependent TSR
synthetic constructs. CRISPR/Cas9 techniques will be used to adjust the
expression of the native TSR in the sensitive genotype to mimic the pattern
observed in the tolerant genotype. These phase-altered TSRs that are integrated
into the circadian and/or diel networks will be tested for improved stress
tolerance using physiological measures of PSII efficiency, growth rate,
flowering time and biomass. Transcriptome profiling of successfully altered
genotypes will be performed with temporal resolution to identify the degree of
GRN reorganization and improve future model predictions. In addition to
providing data analysis tools and techniques for applying this method to other
crops, a plant stress education module will be introduced to middle school
students to introduce them to plant biology and help prepare them for STEM-based
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.