* 2029523
* Symposium SICB 2021 An Evolutionary Tail: EvoDevo, structure, and function of post-anal appendages.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* James Nagler, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 14,630.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Many animal species have tails, which are
remarkably diverse in shape and function. They can be short, long, thick, thin,
feathered, hairy, bald, spiked, or even absent. Tails can serve many functions,
including propulsion, communication, flagging or rattling, balancing, and
grasping. However, although tails are important to animal function and
evolution, compared to limbs, tails are vastly understudied. Relatively little
is known about their development, morphological diversity, or mechanical
function. This award supports a cross-disciplinary symposium that will bring
together scientists and engineers who study a wide variety of tail and tail-
related topics in animals and robots. It will facilitate and enhance exchange of
knowledge and expertise. The outcomes of this symposium will be a collaborative
workshop that will identify critical unanswered questions concerning the biology
of tails and a roadmap for addressing these challenges through future research.
The symposium highlights early-career researchers and members of groups under-
represented in the sciences. In partnership with Howard University and the
Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology Broadening Participation
Committee, participants in the symposium will host an outreach event to provide
a networking experience for students from Howard University and potentially
other Historically Black Colleges and Universities in the Washington, D.C.
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Although
diverse and common among animals, tails are vastly understudied structures, even
though the importance of a functional post-anal appendage is recognized in many
robotic designs. Understanding how tails develop and function contributes
insight to potential evolutionary significance of the appendage. This symposium
brings together investigators from multiple disciplines with research interests
in this area who have worked relatively independently, from distinct
perspectives. They will share findings on the diversity of development, form,
and functions of tails - in animals and robots – and seek general principles
that have driven the success of this appendage. The symposium will facilitate
cross-disciplinary research discussions among fields including developmental
biology, engineering, physics, and behavioral biology. In addition, an organized
luncheon will further facilitate the active exchange of ideas, concepts, and
approaches among diverse researchers who employ different model systems. The
symposium emphasizes early-career researchers and groups under-represented in
STEM, and provides opportunities for mentoring, sharing of ideas and concepts,
and development of new collaborations. The outcomes of the symposium will be a
forward-looking review article that will delineate the current state of tail
research and identify the unanswered questions with potential to be addressed by
interdisciplinary collaborations. This review article will introduce the
compilation of this symposium’s papers in Integrative and Comparative Biology.
Finally, the grant will help support an outreach event centered on Minority
Serving Institutions in the region of Washington, D.C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.