* 2029097
* Development of a high-throughput/high-sensitivity, in situ 14C extraction line for US earth sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Joerg Schaefer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,538.00

This award will fund the development and construction of a next-generation
extraction system that will isolate in situ 14C from the mineral quartz. This
next-generation in situ 14C extraction system will be housed at the Lamont-
Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) of Columbia University and open to the US
research community. Implementation of a new in situ 14C extraction system will
make available new research avenues for LDEO scientists, an early-career
investigator, and US researchers aiming to utilize in situ 14C in their own
research programs. New in situ 14C measurement capabilities will address
important research avenues in US earth sciences including: 1) ice-sheet
stability and determining how ice sheets were configurated in the geologic past
when they were smaller than today, 2) when and how quickly ice sheets and
glaciers retreated in the past, and 3) how quickly ice sheets and glaciers
modify the landscapes they rest upon. Addressing all of these questions are
important for developing accurate predictions of sea-level rise for the upcoming
centuries. This new, more user-friendly in situ 14C extraction system will be
used to recruit students and attract young scientists from ethnically
underrepresented populations and the investigators will travel to the annual
Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science
(SACNAS) meeting as part of this initiative. A next-generation extraction line
will allow LDEO to better recruit and educate undergraduate students through the
LDEO Summer Intern program, and allow LDEO to continue to attract graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, and young scientists, in turn laying the
foundation for complimentary research trajectories in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ 14C has emerged as a powerful tool for
quantifying earth-surface processes, but methodological difficulties in
extracting tiny amounts of 14C from quartz has limited its potential and
widespread use despite its scientific potential. Advances in method development
and the application of in situ 14C are needed to tackle outstanding research
questions that require low-level analytical measurements; in turn, low-level in
situ 14C measurements need to be available for widespread use by the US earth
science community. The PIs will build a next-generation, high-sensitivity/high-
throughput in situ 14C extraction system housed at the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory (LDEO) of Columbia University and open to the US research community.
The new stainless-steel extraction line releases in situ 14C from quartz by
flux-free heating and yields blank levels reduced by a factor of ~5x versus
current-generation 14C extraction lines, thereby significantly improving 14C
detection limits. This extraction system design reduces complete sample
processing time from 3-4 days down to ~10 hours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.