* 2029105
* RAPID: A multiscale approach to dissect SARS-CoV-2 attachment to host cells and detect viruses on surfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Rohit Pappu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The 2019 novel coronavirus, identified as the cause for the pneumonia pathology
reported in Wuhan, spread quickly and became a global pandemic. The project will
employ experimental methods to develop sensors for the detection of SARSCoV-2
from environmental samples and develop predictive models for virus attachment to
cells by applying computational machine learning methods. The outcome of this
project will contribute to the development of proactive measures to identify
viruses with pandemic potential before they are able to transmit and spread
broadly among humans. The graduate students involved in this research will gain
experience in protein biochemistry, fluorescence microscopy, and computational
simulations and experience utilizing those skills to problems of societal
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF Rapid response Research (RAPID)
project will support a project that is aimed to characterize receptor
interactions mediated by the Spike protein (S) of SARS-CoV-2. Development of
fluorescence-based assays to characterize SARSCoV-2 attachment to Angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE2)-functionalized surfaces with controlled density and
mobility, identifying peptide mimics of the ACE2 ectodomain for the development
of sensors to detect SARSCoV-2 from environmental samples, and develop and
validate predictive models of CoV attachment from primary sequence using machine
learning constitute the specific goals of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.