* 2029401
* Microscopic Theories of Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Alexander Seidel, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 11/30/2023
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education on fundamental organization principles of matter with the innate
capacity for the technological harvesting of quantum physics. Matter displays
the remarkable tendency to organize itself into different phases, such as
liquid, gas, or solid. At the microscopic level, different phases of matter
correspond to different organization principles, also known as orders. For some
states of matter, these orders favor the emergence of entirely new particles
that cannot exist in vacuum, but are prisoners to their phase of matter, and can
have spectacular and useful properties. One class of such emergent new particles
is known as “anyons”. These particles exhibit the “spooky action at a distance”,
which Einstein attributed to quantum phenomena in a most dramatic way.
Concretely, this means that they open up revolutionary avenues for information
processing, causing exponential speed-up for certain calculations when compared
to classical computers, while being more robust compared to other schemes of
quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a central
dilemma accompanying the exciting prospect of anyon physics: There exist a
wealth of theoretical models predicting the existence of anyons with great
clarity, and there exist experimental platforms where certain types of anyons
are widely expected to exist. However, most models do not allow for practical
realization, and existing experimental systems make characterization and direct
control of anyons highly challenging. The project team will harvest and further
develop recent theoretical progress to make contact with present-day
capabilities for building artificial materials. Theoretical models will be
developed that are now within grasp of these capabilities and will give access
to a rich world of anyon physics in the presence of unprecedented experimental
control. The same approach will be extended to other forms of matter and
collective quantum phenomena that have only recently come within the reach of
our experimental capacities, such as the so-called supersolids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will further develop the interface between
condensed matter physics and other areas of physics, such as quantum
information, as well as pure mathematics, and pave the way for technological
applications hinging on this interface. The project will train graduate students
in the PI’s group, which have included women and/or underrepresented minorities
in STEM, and offer mentored research experiences for undergraduate students.
Result will be communicated to the public via Washington University’s public
lecture series and outreach activities sponsored by the Center for Quantum
Sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and education on the fundamental understanding of correlated
matter. The ability to gain insight into universal properties of interacting
quantum many-body systems hinges on the realization that certain forms of order
prevail over all complexity. Among the most fascinating orders known are
topological orders, realized in fractional quantum Hall liquids and suspected to
be possible in quantum magnets and cold atom systems. Emergent phenomena in
these systems are inherently quantum in nature, lending an unusual stability to
macroscopic superpositions and making them nearly ideal for certain schemes of
quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge that these and other
intricate states of matter in principle exist comes with the challenge of
defining conditions that stabilize them. Experimental conditions, where,
specifically, topological orders are widely accepted to exist, so far afford too
limited control to probe their most defining features directly. On the other
hand, a new era of quantum control is dawning, where on certain platforms,
Hamiltonians of unprecedented complexity can be engineered. It nonetheless
remains challenging to construct Hamiltonians with guaranteed ground state
properties, especially for non-Abelian phases, that are within reach of these
new quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will break new ground
on these and related problems via: (i) Construction of a class of lattice
Hamiltonians with highly local two-body interactions (as opposed to "more than
two"-body) whose ground state properties are exactly known, and are those
defining a non-Abelian topological phase, (ii) Construction of local lattice
models with exactly known quantum many-body-scars of exactly computable
bipartite entanglement entropy in a quantum dimer setting, whose Hilbert space
size scaling is very favorable for complementary exact diagonalization, (iii)
Extension of Pfaffian methods for dimer models, a traditional powerhouse for
creating solvable models in quantum many-body and statistical physics, to
certain non-planar lattice graphs, and (iv) Further development of a coupled-
chain approach to explain the existence and stability of some phases of exotic
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will further develop the interface
between condensed matter physics and other areas of physics, such as quantum
information, as well as pure mathematics, and pave the way for technological
applications hinging on this interface. The project will train graduate students
in the PI’s group, which have included women and/or underrepresented minorities
in STEM, and offer mentored research experiences for undergraduate students.
Result will be communicated to the public via Washington University’s public
lecture series and outreach activities sponsored by the Center for Quantum
Sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.