* 2029899
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Historical Ecology of Long-term Agricultural Practice
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Daniel Plekhov, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 0.00

Rural landscapes have become increasingly appreciated as forms of cultural
heritage in their own right, with rich histories on par with those of urban
spaces. Policies aimed at the preservation of these landscapes must frequently
contend, however, with the ongoing use of these places by local communities,
whose needs may run counter to those of conservation. At the same time, growing
water and food crises worldwide have led to renewed research aimed at
understanding the functions of ancient agricultural systems and the possibility
of their adaptation for sustainable and effective use in the present. Critical
to the objectives of both conservation and sustainable adaptation of these rural
landscapes is an understanding of the social contexts in which ancient
agricultural systems functioned, the motivations for their initial construction,
and the reasons for their successes or failures over the long term.
Archaeological methods and approaches are well-suited for addressing these
issues due to the time-depth of archaeological study, allowing for the
investigation of rural changes through time and the responses of communities in
the face of social and environmental challenges. This study will evaluate the
sustainability of ancient agricultural technologies as well as probe the ongoing
role of local communities in ensuring their maintenance and continuing
functionality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the long-term
history of construction, use, maintenance, and abandonment of agricultural
terraces. It investigates a city that has seen rapid urban expansions and
gradual demographic declines, thereby serving as an ideal context in which to
investigate the social and environmental conditions under which agricultural
systems stay in use, are transformed, abandoned, and revitalized. Contrary to
conventional narratives that focus exclusively on the city context, the
associated hinterlands have been occupied at varying intensities for long
periods. There is growing evidence that during this time the hinterlands have
continued to be cultivated and modified. The assumption that much of the rural
infrastructure (i.e., terraces, dams, cisterns, and canals) must have been built
during the heyday of the city, is thus worth questioning. This project will
apply a wide range of dating approaches to determine the chronology of terrace
construction and use, shedding light both on how long certain agricultural
systems remained in use, as well as where. Through detailed mapping and survey,
the diversity of terrace types and functions will also be recorded, showing the
many ways in which local communities have modified and utilized these
landscapes. Altogether, by better understanding why, where, and how terraces
were historically built, used, and abandoned, this research will inform
contemporary policy making on heritage management and rural revitalization
through its long-term perspective on the formation of rural
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.