* 2029478
* PurSUit: Discovery, characterization, and elucidation of the global patterns and determinants of anaerobic fungal (Neocallimastigomycota) diversity in the herbivorous gut
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Andrew Foote, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 09/30/2023
* USD 762,260.00

Herbivores rely on microorganisms residing in their digestive tracts for
breaking down ingested grasses and other feedstock into soluble products. This
transformation is achieved by the concerted action of a highly diverse microbial
community of bacteria, archaea, protozoa, and fungi. Within such intricate
assemblages, members of the anaerobic gut fungi (Neocallimstigomycota) remain
the most enigmatic. Compared to their physical neighbors in the herbivorous gut
or their phylogenetic neighbors in the fungal tree of life,
Neocallimastigomycota diversity, ecological preferences, and evolutionary
history is poorly understood. This project aims to discover and characterize
novel members of the Neocallimastigomycota by implementing an ambitious sampling
scheme covering a broad range of wild and domesticated herbivores. The project
will also develop innovative approaches for characterizing Neocallimastigomycota
diversity using a combination of culture-based as well as culture-independent
strategies. In addition to discovering novel microorganisms, the proposal will
elucidate factors controlling the occurrence, abundance, and distribution of the
Neocallimastigomycota in the herbivorous gut. The research will contribute to
workforce training by involving multiple undergraduates and graduate students in
research activities, with special emphasis on recruiting students from
minorities (Native Americans, Hispanics, and African Americans) that are
underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct
an extensive global-level diversity survey of herbivores that harbor, or
putatively harbor, members of the Neocallimastigomycota to fill significant gaps
of knowledge regarding their scope of diversity in nature. A broad spatial,
temporal and replicate sampling effort will be implemented to fully characterize
Neocallimastigomycota diversity on a global scale. The project will provide an
updated taxonomic framework for the Neocallimastigomycota, characterize multiple
novel taxa, establish minimal and recommended standards for taxa description and
naming, establish the utility of novel phylogenetic markers for culture-
independent diversity assessments, expand Neocallimastigomycota culture
collections, and promote initiatives for storage, sharing, and maintenance of
strains. Further, the extensive dataset and associated metadata generated will
be utilized by the researchers to address specific questions and hypotheses
regarding the ecological and evolutionary drivers shaping Neocallimastigomycota
diversity and community structure in herbivores. Specifically, the project will
examine the impact of host phylogeny, domestication, host age, and biogeography
on Neocallimastigomycota diversity, as well as the evolutionary considerations
underpinning Neocallimstigomycota diversity in non-mammalian
herbivores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.