* 2029535
* RAPID: Leveraging Virtual Reality to Improve Compliance with Physical Distancing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Richard Landers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Physical distancing is currently the most effective countermeasure against the
rapid proliferation of the virus that causes COVID-19, and scientific
projections indicate that these practices will be necessary for a year or
possibly even longer. As the current circumstances are unprecedented, the
compliance rate for physical distancing over an extended period of time is
unknown. Many people, especially young adults, typically being used to active
social life, can find this physical/social distancing leading to social
isolation. Unfortunately, social isolation is strongly associated with negative
outcomes for mental health and therefore represents a serious threat to long-
term compliance. Mitigating the negative impact of physical distancing on
social-emotional wellbeing is therefore paramount, as failure to consistently
maintain these practices could result in additional outbreaks or a rebound of
the pandemic. To address this enormous threat to global public health, this
project leverages virtual reality technologies to facilitate group social
interaction that is potentially unsafe to experience in the real world. Virtual
Reality (VR) provides the capability to interact with other people in a shared
3D environment, thereby opening the doors for a multitude of shared experiences
and activities that would not be possible with other remote communication
modalities such as videoconferencing. The aim of this project is to promote the
use of web-based VR technology as a safer environment that mitigates the effect
of social isolation, leading to better psychological health. The challenge here
is the lack of a broader variety of VR content, as well as shared activities
that capture the imagination, which would make it compelling and engaging to
spend time in the virtual environments. To address this challenge, this project
will catalyze a community effort for crowd-sourced or user-generated VR content
(or environments) and shared activities to facilitate virtual social interaction
during the pandemic, thereby contributing to worldwide efforts to encourage
physical distancing. This effort will involve the longitudinal investigation of
virtual reality usage and social-emotional wellbeing, which will lead to new
insights for the design and development of technology-mediated support systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the COVID-19 pandemic continuing for months,
significantly large fluctuations in the number of people getting infected are
being observed. This has resulted in prolonged recommendations of
social/physical distancing. For many, especially for people used to a socially
active lifestyle, such extended social distancing leads to social isolation that
adversely impacts mental health. To mitigate this, this project will enable the
use of web-based VR for overcoming social isolation without endangering human
health due to physical proximity. In this context, there is a distinct need to
create engaging VR environments and shared activities that can be customized for
different social groups. This project is divided into three phases: an immediate
response to deploy and facilitate the use of online social virtual environments;
medium-term activities to catalyze a broader community effort; and a long-term
plan for ongoing support and empirical evaluation. In order to rapidly address
the urgent need, the first phase will involve: (1) using a web-based
infrastructure, creation of new VR environments and shared activities, and
deploying and distributing them; (2) creation of onboarding procedures, tutorial
videos, and public-facing documentation; and (3) outreach through news outlets
and social media to promote their use as an alternative medium for social
interaction during the pandemic. Over the medium-term, a broader community
effort will be organized to create a diverse collection of user-generated
content and shared activities, to maintain engagement over an extended period of
time. To this end, surveys will be conducted to identify technical gaps,
generate ideas for new scenarios and content, and establish guidelines for the
community. The project will continue to support this community effort over the
long term. Additionally, a longitudinal study will be conducted to evaluate the
impact of virtual reality usage, social-emotional wellbeing, and physical
distancing behaviors. Design guidelines and scientific results produced under
this project will be widely disseminated to inform the design and development of
future virtual reality technologies and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.