* 2029556
* RAPID: Rich and Accurate Auxiliary Databases for Supporting Virus Data Efforts
* TIP,ITE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Cafarella, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 04/30/2022
* USD 164,811.00

This COIVD-19 RAPID project will assist in the mitigation of the negative
impacts of COVID-19 on public health, society, and the economy, by creating
high-quality databases from highly distributed data about medical and
governmental services related to COVID-19. The project will develop software
tools to help in the creation of "auxiliary" databases with high-quality data to
assist in making better decisions, avoiding fraud, and yielding high-quality
analysis sooner in the urgent and rapidly evolving situation created by the
coronavirus pandemic. The techniques that will be used to achieve high-quality
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) linking "background data" to the data sets to
enable quality-checking and fraud detection. For example, ensuring that hospital
information listed in the medical resource database is annotated with an
accurate phone number so that a volunteer can contact the hospital and check on
the accuracy of the data, and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) creating new "join keys"
to enable easy integration of data in the auxiliary database with other data.
The project will work closely with other related COVID-19 RAPID efforts which
are working on various aspects of data and information collection from the
Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on creating two high-quality
databases using these strategies: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) A unified medical
institution auxiliary database, which will be a database of all known US medical
institutions and &lt;br/&gt;(2) A unified government office auxiliary database,
which will be a database of all known government offices in the United
States—city halls, courts, licensing offices, etc.—at any level of government.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both these data sets are crucial for ensuring that
citizens receive a base level of medical aid and government assistance. These
resources would be beneficial not only for this particular pandemic, but would
become essential resources, in general, for the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed auxiliary data set creation infrastructure
will include a rich schema of background information, used for quality-checking,
and a set of join keys for data integration. While there is a huge array of
medical institution data sets online, many of the data sets are misaligned due
to lack of standard names and/or data integration keys since different projects
make different local decisions in choosing these values that may not be
universally compatible. As a result, the background information becomes less
rich and makes integration with data from other institutions or analysis
pipelines much more difficult. The strategies used to create this infrastructure
would include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) synthesis of preliminary auxiliary
datasets, which includes generating common, candidate attributes for all objects
in the input set, for example, creating a helipad field for hospitals based on
examining all hospital data in Wikidata; &lt;br/&gt;(2) identification of inputs
with missing values, and filling in those values with a combination of Web
extraction tasks and crowdsourcing tasks, and &lt;br/&gt;(3) flagging values
that are suspected of being incorrect by, for example, automatically creating a
set of machine-learned predictors for each column in the auxiliary data. The
system could then run the predictor and identify outlier
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track A: Open Knowledge
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.