* 2029268
* PFI (RAPID): Disinfection of COVID-19 Coronavirus via Cold Plasma Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Donglu Shi, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI) RAPID project is the development of a “dry” cold plasma treatment that
would lead to a commercial device for disinfection of everyday items in order to
urgently respond to COVID-19 pandemic. In contrast to “wet” disinfectants such
as hand sanitizers, alcohol, and bleach that may not be readily used for
disinfecting fabric surfaces, the “dry” approach can be applied to everyday
items including mail, delivered packages, paper money, and clothing that can
become contaminated through contact with the public. Cold plasma is a gas of
ions generated by radio frequency power produced at room temperature and applied
at atmospheric pressure. Cold plasma can generate many reactive species that are
lethal to a variety of viruses including SARS-CoV-2. Cold atmospheric plasma is
environmentally benign and safe to operate. It can be quickly developed into a
hand-held device for every household use. This research will allow the team to
develop an adaptable disinfection method for COVID-19 control and enable society
to respond to viral pandemics quickly and safely. Success of this project will
ensure that the United States maintains strong leadership in medical sciences
and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on obtaining first-
hand experimental data to design and develop a commercial product for daily
disinfection of everyday items that may not be easily treated by conventional
wet disinfectants. The research team will develop several plasma systems in a
biosafety level-2 (BSL2) lab and investigate the efficacy of plasma ablation of
viruses for routine disinfection of surfaces. The initial study will focus on
plasma disinfection of typical enveloped viruses or pseudotyped viruses. After
identifying the mechanism that results in virus inactivation, the team will then
identify a BSL3 laboratory where Sars-CoV-2 itself can be plasma treated and
tested. The goals of this research are to determine the molecular and viral
responses to plasma treatment related to coronavirus inactivation and optimize
the system parameters for the most effective disinfection treatment. The team
will systematically control the plasma parameters such as frequency, power, and
treatment time and will observe cell-plasma interactions in terms of viral-
transfection and activity. The experimental data will provide a scientific base
for the design of a novel disinfection device that can be quickly developed and
commercialized for effective control of COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.