* 2029380
* Supporting Undergraduate STEM Graduation and Career Pathways Through Student and Faculty Learning Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Ericka Mochan, Carlow University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2026
* USD 649,826.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, and technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of
high-achieving, low-income students. The project is centered at Carlow
University, a private, liberal arts university in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Over
its five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to 18 full-time
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, and/or data
analytics. First-year Scholars will receive up to four years and transfer
Scholars will receive up to two years of scholarship support. The project will
support Scholars within a cohort-based Scholar learning community that includes
mentoring and other high-impact support practices. The project also features a
STEM faculty learning community centered on shared interest in Scholar outcomes,
with the goal of enhancing STEM teaching and implementing best practices in
Scholar support. The Scholar/Faculty learning community model is intended to
foster connections among students and faculty that will contribute to successful
graduation and pursuit of STEM careers. The project’s research study will
provide insight into the effectiveness of a potentially replicable, dual
learning community approach for supporting STEM student success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Specific project objectives include: 1): Recruiting 18 low-
income, academically talented, full-time students who pursue degrees in biology,
chemistry, and data analytics over the grant period; 2) Increasing first-year
retention and graduation rates of the Scholars; 3) Placing a high proportion of
Scholars in STEM-related jobs or graduate school within six months of
graduation. The project will also examine the impacts of participation in
learning communities on women in STEM. Despite abundant research on learning
communities, few studies have examined the extent to which learning communities
contribute to success of low-income women in STEM. A social science researcher
will address this gap by conducting a research study measuring the impact of
learning communities on Scholars’ confidence in overall college success and
their attitudes, learning experiences, and intrinsic motivation in STEM,
including their academic abilities, interest in working in STEM fields, and ease
in the social transition to college. A project assessment and evaluation plan,
conducted by an external evaluator, will inform improvements throughout project
implementation. Results of this evaluation will be disseminated via local,
regional, and national conferences and publications to inform the academic
community and provide opportunities for replication. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.