* 2029796
* Collaborative Research: Rising Doctoral Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Mayra Artiles Fonseca, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 12/31/2025
* USD 582,205.00

Research has shown that underrepresented historically underrepresented racial
and ethnic groups (African American, Hispanic American, Native American, and
Pacific Island) are finishing the doctorate in engineering in lesser rates than
their majority peers. For every seven doctorates in engineering granted to
majority students, only one minority will obtain one. To address this problem,
we developed the Rising Doctoral Institute (RDI) which aims to provide a timely
and preparatory experience for rising doctoral students in engineering to
address issues related to transitioning into the PhD encountered by
underrepresented students. However, we understand that a single intervention
will not change the landscape for underrepresented PhD students. For this
reason, our proposed project aims to develop a research-based intervention model
of this preparatory experience and develop a community of practice among
institutional partners to develop and adapt this model for local contexts.
Integral to the project is an investigation of the dynamics of academic systems
and how implementing programs like the RDI can influence systemic change within
the institution. Thus, the goals of the proposed project are to (1) research the
effect of early interventions for doctoral students on the transition into the
engineering doctorate, and (2) develop sustainable models for institutions to
implement on their campus to help underrepresented studentsâ€™ transition into the
doctorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the integrated research-to-practice design. Using quantitative and qualitative
research methods, we will uncover the factors that lead to a successful
transition into the doctorate among underrepresented students as well as
strategies for designing context-appropriate local RDIs. To meet these goals, we
designed a five-year project. In year 1, we will host an RDI modeled after a
pilot program hosted in 2019 and invite representatives from five collaborating
institutions to observe and coach them as they develop an RDI-type intervention
for their institution. In year 2, the collaborating institutions will each host
an RDI-type intervention at their institution, and the RDI PIs will serve as on-
site consultants helping the collaboration institutions address the needs of
incoming underrepresented graduate students. In year 3, we will host a showcase
with the initial collaborating institutions to overview different models of the
RDI and scale the project to up to 20 new institutions to develop their versions
of the RDI. We will also develop the network of institutions hosting RDI
interventions through mentor group sessions. In years 4 and 5, we will nurture
this community of practice led by the five initial collaborating institution
leaders and develop products based on the research findings such as evaluation
tools for measuring the impact of RDI, guides to hosting support programs such
as the RDI, and guides for mentoring doctoral students entering the PhD. Over
five years, this project has the potential to positively impact the doctoral
degree completion rates of approximately 1,500 underrepresented doctoral
students who will participate in an RDI implementation and 50 leaders from
collaborating institutions across 25 institutions. The research outcomes
include: 1) research-based variations on an intervention model for rising
underrepresented doctoral students in engineering, 2) data on the impact of such
early interventions in the transition of underrepresented doctoral students into
the doctorate, and 3) a research-based model to assist institutional leaders
with developing sustainable support structures and systems for incoming PhDs at
their institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.