* 2029564
* RAPID: Understanding the Impact of Abrupt Changes to Instructional Methods on Underrepresented Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Nicola Sochacka, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 04/30/2022
* USD 152,514.00

The 2020 global pandemic caused by COVID-19 has forced higher education
institutions in the United States to immediately stop face-to-face teaching and
transition to virtual instruction. While this transition has not been easy for
any instructor, the shift to online learning has been especially difficult for
students in STEM courses, particularly engineering, which has a strong
practical/laboratory component. This project investigates how the pandemic is
impacting students historically underrepresented in engineering. There is an
urgency to collect this data in the midst of the crisis. Through the use of an
online data collection platform, SenseMaker, short stories will be collected
from underrepresented engineering students to describe how they are experiencing
the COVID-19 crisis during the transition to online learning. These stories will
be used to help provide institutions with tools necessary to ensure minority
students are not left out of decisions made with the majority in mind. This
RAPID project will adopt the SenseMaker approach to investigate how
underrepresented college students cope in times of crisis. This study builds on
a previous investigation of community experiences in a crisis context; namely
the SenseMaker approach was used to investigate how stakeholder groups in Puerto
Rico adapted in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria (NSF
#1832678).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research question that guides
this project is: How has the abrupt transition to online instruction due to
COVID-19 affected students historically underrepresented in engineering? More
specifically, the investigators are interested in understanding how the
transition has impacted underrepresented students based on the following
factors: 1) year in school (underclassmen vs. upperclassmen); 2) Predominately
White Institution attendance vs Minority Serving Institution attendance; 3)
socioeconomic status; and, 4) geographical location. This RAPID project will
collect data until December 2020. The approach is to continuously collect micro-
narratives of participants’ experiences (qualitative data) and responses to a
survey questions that prompt participants to make sense of their experiences
(quantitative data). These data will be analyzed for patterns to inform actions
to improve the experiences of underrepresented engineering students. These data
will inform future work that will focus on the development of empirically
informed policies to aid institutions as we continue to navigate this current
pandemic and reduce the disruption of such transitions in the future.
Additionally, an outcome of conducting this research is to inform institutions
of challenges faced by this particular population to highlight that diversity
and inclusion efforts must be attended to in virtual learning environments and
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.