* 2029258
* RAPID: Examining Media Dependencies, Risk Perceptions, and Depressive Symptomatology during the 2020 COVID Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Kenneth Lachlan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2021
* USD 66,453.00

The COVID-19 pandemic presents a unique opportunity to examine risk perceptions
and responses on both a national and regional scale. When faced with a major
health crisis, individuals are likely to be motivated to seek information in
order to alleviate anxiety and gather information about how to protect
themselves. While these dependencies are well documented, less is known about
the extent to which media dependency translates into desired behavior, and the
extent to which other effects associated with these dependencies may help or
hinder this translation. Particularly troubling is prior research supporting the
notion that depressive symptomology may lead to inaction, and that reliance on
different news sources may lead to variability in the perception of risk. The
current study extends previous research by investigating the extent to which
risk perception and motivation to take protective action are tied to specific
source preferences, and the degree to which individual processing
characteristics and related responses influence these relationships. The
research also aims to investigate the argument that depressive symptomatology
may lead to inaction under such circumstances. Further, the research team
explores specific protective actions and perceptions of risk while the threat is
imminent, as opposed to relying on recall. The findings contribute to our
knowledge base by filling a significant gap in the social science literature on
emergency response by evaluating the links between trait processing, source
preferences, depressive symptomatology, and protective actions. The new
knowledge is beneficial to emergency managers for message design and
placement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An online survey gathers data from a nationally
representative sample of 5,000 respondents to assess the key variables of
interest. Participants are asked about the relative importance of varying news
outlets, sources of first alerts, time spent seeking information, risk
perception (including magnitude and probability), specific protective behaviors
advocated by the Center for Disease Control, and depressive symptomatology.
Questions also measure emotional well-being, level of involvement in the
information gathered, trait need for cognition, and ruminative coping
tendencies. Prior findings concerning the role of rumination in information
seeking are reexamined for replication and extended to investigate the
subsequent role of this processing style in both depressive symptomatology and
protective actions, such as social distancing. Source preferences are reduced
into clusters using Exploratory Factor Analysis and examined in terms of the
impact of specific source preference clusters on risk perception and protective
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.