* 2029950
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Addressing Transit Accessibility and Public Health Challenges due to COVID-19
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Abhishek Dubey, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 54,912.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has not only disrupted the lives of millions but also
created exigent operational and scheduling challenges for public transit
agencies. Agencies are struggling to maintain transit accessibility with reduced
resources, changing ridership patterns, vehicle capacity constraints due to
social distancing, and reduced services due to driver unavailability. A number
of transit agencies have also begun to help the local food banks deliver food to
shelters, which further strains the available resources if not planned
optimally. At the same time, the lack of situational information is creating a
challenge for riders who need to understand what seating is available on the
vehicles to ensure sufficient distancing. In partnership with the transit
agencies of Chattanooga, TN, and Nashville, TN, the proposed research will
rapidly develop integrated transit operational optimization algorithms, which
will provide proactive scheduling and allocation of vehicles to transit and
cargo trips, considering exigent vehicle maintenance requirements (i.e.,
disinfection). A key component of the research is the design of privacy-
preserving camera-based ridership detection methods that can help provide
commuters with real-time information on available seats considering social-
distancing constraints. The datasets and algorithms developed through this
program will be swiftly released to the research community in order to encourage
a wider collaborative effort that will help other transit agencies that face
similar challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research lies in the design and evaluation of integrated operational
optimization for both fixed-line and on-demand transit (including paratransit)
under atypical capacity constraints, which requires maximizing transit access
but minimizing contact. The challenge for optimization is the uncertainties that
arise due to the atypical travel time and travel demand distribution, both of
which need to be learned online again due to the changed scenarios. While it is
possible to optimize these transit modes separately as prior work has done,
integrated optimization can lead to significantly better results. However, this
is difficult as the solution space of these problems is very large. The approach
is based on rapidly composing and comparing the effectiveness of principled
decision-theoretic approaches such as Monte Carlo tree search, optimal trip
assignments using integer programming and problem-specific heuristics, and
demand aggregation for on-demand transit. To develop a model for varying travel
demand, the research uses novel neural network architectures to estimate usage
and seating patterns in real-time from cameras that are already installed within
transit vehicles. This will enable transit agencies to obtain travel demand even
when they are running fare-free operations to minimize contact with drivers.
Working with partner transit agencies, the researchers will be able to make the
services more accessible for the community during these challenging times. This
project directly relates to Smart and Connected Communities program as it
demonstrates the importance of integration of technical and social research with
strong community engagement in improving resilience of transit systems due to
pandemics and other crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.