* 2029270
* RAPID: Regenerable Antiviral Nanoporous Materials for Protection
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Omar Farha, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With over 2 million positive cases
and 160 thousand deaths as of mid-April 2020, global society is currently
suffering physically, socially, economically, and politically because of the
ongoing pandemic outbreak - Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). The main
pathway that the virus is spreading is through respiratory droplets produced
when people sneeze or cough, which can then infect people nearby. Thus, the
United Statesʹ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has recommended
covering one’s face to help slow down the spread of the virus. The traditional
face masks, however, can only act as a physical barrier, which means that the
virus will stay active on the mask and can still be transmitted if touched while
removing/wearing the mask. Therefore, developing face masks to deactivate the
viral threats can efficiently stop/slow the spread of the highly infectious
virus, COVID-19. With funding from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant supports
research that focuses on developing antiviral masks by chemically modifying the
textile surfaces to deactivate the viral threats; this in turn reduces the risk
of spreading the virus and generates reusable masks. The research serves the
national interest and NSFʹs mission by developing advanced technologies from
hypothesis-driven scientific research to protect our nation’s physical, social,
economic, and political health and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant
supports research that employs nanoporous materials to modify textile fibers and
generate antiviral facial masks with funding from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate. The support enables a materials science approach
that mitigates the negative impacts of COVID-19 on public health. Masks that not
only protect the wearer but also deactivate the virus significantly reduce the
spread of infectious viral threats such as COVID-19 since an active virus
residing on a mask still possesses a great threat to the wearer and their
environment. This research project investigates means to cover the surfaces of
textile fibers with antiviral agents that are active towards viral threats; in
this way, the viruses can be deactivated by disintegration upon contact and/or
post-treatment while filtered air is allowed to pass through the mask safely.
Specifically, the researchers employ the integration of metal–organic framework
based antiviral composites on textiles-based facial masks and later on N95 or
similar masks. The protective nano layer added on the masks enables the
disintegration of the viral threats, which allows the reuse of masks due to
reduction of cross contamination during removal and/or wearing of the masks.
This RAPID project offers a solution to the severely urgent challenge of the
shortage of effective antiviral protective materials while advancing physical
and materials science and educating the general public on the research-driven
solutions to global challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded
using funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.