* 2029850
* RAPID: Extreme water use patterns and their impact on the microbial and chemical ecology of drinking water.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Ameet Pinto, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,268.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has infected over a million people in the United States to
date. Stay-at-home orders and the closing of non-essential businesses have been
implemented in many municipalities to limit the spread of COVID-19. An
unintentional impact of these interventions is a drastic change in where and how
much drinking water is used. For example, water use in commercial buildings has
decreased while water use in homes has increased. There is limited understanding
of how changes in water use across densely populated cities impact drinking
water quality, and what actions must be taken to lower any potential risks.
Changes in water use can change the type and number of chemicals or harmful
organisms present in the system, affecting water quality and public health. The
primary goal of this RAPID project is to understand the effect of drastic
changes in water use patterns across residential and commercial locations on the
quality of drinking water. Drinking water quality will be monitored at multiple
residential and commercial locations in the City of Boston, during and after the
pandemic. Results from this study will have a direct impact on post-COVID-19
recovery. Results inform efforts to protect public health and water
infrastructure in future scenarios where water use patterns change drastically
over short time periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stay-at-home advisories and
related cessation of all non-essential businesses in response to the global
COVID-19 pandemic have dramatically altered drinking water use patterns across
the United States. An unintended consequence of these changes is the potential
public health concerns of water non-use. Specifically, water use in commercial
buildings has decreased dramatically, leading to extended stagnation and loss of
disinfection capacity. Stagnation can lead to the growth of biofilms in plumbing
containing opportunistic pathogens or corrosion due to the potential for
anoxic/anaerobic conditions. At the same time, water use in homes has increased
greatly which may also affect biofilms in building plumbing. The objectives of
this RAPID project are to determine the impact of (1) changes in water use
patterns on the microbial and chemical ecology of drinking water; and (2) growth
of biofilms on the bulk water microbial community as a function of varying water
use patterns. The research team will leverage ongoing efforts at chemical and
integrated metagenomic monitoring of drinking water in the City of Boston to
address the project objectives. In the short-term, this research will generate
much-needed data and insights to inform recommissioning strategies. This is
particularly important in the short-term as the individuals suffering or
recovering from COVID-19 may be exposed to opportunistic respiratory pathogens
from drinking water. Results will also inform guidance for water utilities on
flushing and disinfecting water that was not used in large commercial buildings
during the public heath interventions. In the long term, the ability to compare
the impact of extreme changes in water use patterns on the chemical and
microbial ecology of drinking water in a full-scale drinking water system has
the potential to significantly enhance understanding of the biological stability
of drinking water. Thus, results from this study will have a direct impact on
post-COVID-19 recovery while also leveraging the current situation to provide
lasting advances in drinking water quality management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.