* 2029156
* Heat stress and host-parasitoid-endosymbiont interactions: Developmental timing and physiological mechanisms of thermal mismatch
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2024
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 614,704.00

Heat waves and other extreme climatic events are becoming increasingly common.
Heat waves may disrupt the ecological interactions between insect hosts and
their natural enemies, including parasitoids (insects that are parasites of
other insects). The proposed studies use lab, greenhouse and field experiments
to determine how heat waves alter the interactions between an insect
agricultural pest, the Tobacco Hornworm Manduca sexta; its main natural enemy,
the parasitoid Cotesia congregata; and a specialized symbiotic virus of the
parasitoid that manipulates the physiology and development of the host. The
studies test the hypothesis that the developmental timing of heat waves can
generate a wide range of ecological outcomes, including successful parasitism
and host death, parasitoid and viral death with host rescue and survival to
adulthood, and suppression of the virus with production of abnormally large and
long-lived caterpillars. The studies will also quantify how effects of heat
waves on this host-parasitoid interaction alter hornworm consumption of its
Tobacco hostplant, and the consequences for hostplant survival and seed
production. These studies will provide a detailed experimental analysis of how
heat waves can disrupt host-parasite interactions and result in a wide (but
predictable) range of ecological outcomes. Because insect parasitoids are the
major natural enemies of many insects, and parasitoids are widely used in
biocontrol of important agricultural pests, understanding the consequences of
heat waves for host-parasitoid interactions is critical for predicting effects
of climate change on agricultural crops and their pests. The project continues
outreach projects to both K-12 and adult learners, including hands-on science
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme climatic events may be of particular
importance for hosts, parasites and endosymbionts, because the developmental
timing of their life stages is often intricately intertwined. How do
physiological differences among hosts, parasites and symbionts affect their
responses to thermal events throughout the life cycle, and determine the
ecological outcomes of species interactions in complex thermal environments? The
proposed studies address these questions using one model system, involving an
important agricultural pest and its major control agent: the herbivorous insect
host, Manduca sexta; its specialist Braconid wasp parasitoid, Cotesia
congregata; and the parasitoid’s endosymbiotic polydnavirus, CcBracovirus
(CcBV). The proposed studies use an integrated set of lab, greenhouse and field
experiments to explore the hypothesis that, depending on developmental timing,
short sublethal heat stress events can produce a wide range of outcomes for
parasitized caterpillars—from successful wasp emergence and host death, to
complete wasp mortality, abnormal host phenotypes, and even successful host
metamorphosis (‘host rescue’). These studies will: A) determine how
developmental timing of heat shocks following parasitization alters gene
expression of the virus; growth, development and survival of the wasp; and
immune responses, developmental physiology, and success of the host caterpillar;
B) evaluate whether early heat shocks can rescue caterpillar hosts from
parasitization; C) quantify how parasitization and heat shock alter herbivory by
caterpillar hosts, and its consequences for hostplant success; D) use
experimental field gardens to quantify thermal environmental variation and heat
events, and document their consequences for thermal physiology, wasp emergence
and host success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was supported by the
Integrative Ecological Physiology and the Symbiosis, Defense and Self-
recognition programs in the division of Integrative Organismal Systems, Biology
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.