* 2029251
* EFRI E3P: Sequestering Microplastics Using Upcycled Plastic Waste
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Anne McNeil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The spread of microplastics throughout the environment is a growing problem with
potential for long-term harm to the nationâ€™s ecosystems. Numerous studies have
quantified their presence, identified their sources, and raised concern
regarding their negative impacts on human and environmental health. One major
source of microplastics is wastewater, for example, laundry waste-water that
contains fibers from clothing. While many larger plastic particles can be
sequestered by municipal wastewater treatment facilities, a sizable number of
smaller plastics are released into the environment. In this project, the
investigators will develop efficient microplastic remediation strategies to
capture and eliminate this source of pollution before it enters our waterways.
The adhesives they will design and use to capture the microplastics will
themselves be made of waste plastics. The investigators will test these
different functional modifications added to these waste plastics to assess the
material's ability to capture microplastics of different sizes, shapes and
compositions. Once captured, the investigators plan to upcycle the various
microplastics into industrially usable materials. Together, these three project
goals will bolster a sustainable plastics economy with less reliance on fossil
fuels as well as reduced plastic waste in rivers, lakes, and oceans. This
interdisciplinary work will be supported by both NSF Engineering Directorate and
the Chemistry Division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of this project,
students will gain interdisciplinary research experience working on real-world,
challenging sustainability problems through the perspectives of chemistry,
materials science, engineering, and environmental science. Persons with
disabilities (especially neurodiverse individuals) and other individuals from
groups that are historically underrepresented in the sciences will be engaged in
the project to promote a diverse, globally competitive workforce. Through
engagement with local Michigan communities and key stakeholders in the plastics
economy, the outcomes of this project will be widely shared to inform citizens
and industry about the importance and practicality of a circular plastics
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to re-use waste superabsorbent
polymers (SAPs) as adhesive material which will capture and remove microplastcs
from water. These goals will be achieved by elucidating mechanisms of
microplastic adsorption using simulations, fine-tuning the properties of the
adhesive through synthesis, measuring clarification for adhesive-coated
particles based on sedimentation, and modeling environmental, social, and
economic life-cycles. The team will advance fundamental knowledge in adhesive-
mediated microplastic capture (e.g., the binding, thermodynamics, kinetics, and
selectivity) and elucidate how best to use these components in functional
wastewater clarifiers. Emerging Technology Sustainability Assessment, a novel
assessment tool that takes into consideration of environmental, economic and
social aspects, is being developed for evaluating the potential costs,
tradeoffs, and benefits of the new technology developments. The investigators
aim to use this technology in laundry, to capture microfibers at their source,
or in wastewater treatment applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.