* 2029283
* IRNC: Core Improvement: Americas-Africa Lightpaths Express and Protect (AmLight-ExP)
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2025
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2025
* USD 3,115,366.00

Big data science in South America and Sub-Saharan Africa will dramatically
evolve over the next five years, with increasing dependency on advanced
cyberinfrastructure and programmable networking. Significant projects include
The Vera Rubin Observatory, the High Luminosity Large Hadron Collider
experiments and the Square Kilometer Array in S. Africa. AmLight-ExP supports
high-performance network connectivity required by international science and
engineering research and education collaborations involving the NSF research
community, with expansion to South America and West
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AmLight-ExP is a reliable, leading-edge
infrastructure for research and education. With significant investments from the
Academic Network of São Paulo, Brazil’s Research and Education network, the
Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, the regional network of
Latin America (RedCLARA), and national R&amp;E network of S. Africa
(TENET/SANReN), the total bandwidth provided by AmLight ExP between the U.S.
South America, and Africa is expected to grow to over 4 Tbps in aggregate
capacity from 2020-2025. This flexible inter-regional infrastructure enables
science communities to expand research and learning activities, empowered
through access to scalable optical spectrum on submarine cables and programmable
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AmLight-ExP increases the rate of discovery.
Faster discovery means quicker focus on the greatest benefit for society.
AmLight-ExP is a catalyst for new communities of researchers and learners with a
bridge, linking U.S. Hispanic and African students, teachers and researchers.
AmLight-ExP is committed to serving the needs of graduate and undergraduate
education through models that bring together students and the networking
community with scientists from all domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.