* 2029999
* RoL: Evolution of multicellular individuality
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Richard Michod, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 955,977.00

Humans are made up of many cells, but for billions of years, life on earth
consisted of unicellular organisms whose bodies were a single cell. Why and how
unicellular organisms evolved into multicellular individuals is a major unsolved
question in biology. Answering this question will help scientists understand one
of the more familiar features of life on earth, which is its hierarchical
structure. Genes exist in chromosomes, chromosomes exist in cells, cells exist
in multicellular organisms, and multicellular organisms exist in complex
societies. Each of these levels in the hierarchy of life represents a level of
organization on which natural selection may act. During evolution, each one of
these levels has arisen from a group of lower-level units. How did groups of
cells evolve into a new multicellular individual is the basic question addressed
by this proposal. The researchers approach this question by testing a general
theory of evolutionary transitions. The researchers present a novel hypothesis
that stress responses are instrumental in the origin of cell groups and in the
origin of specialized types of cells that arise in these groups. They will test
this hypothesis in the volvocine green algae, a lineage of organisms that span
hierarchical levels from single cells to multicellular individuals. Testing this
hypothesis will help the scientists to better understand human disease. For
example, the evolution of cancer in a human body is the reversal of the
processes studied in the research. A cancerous cell has stopped cooperating with
other cells in the multicellular group and has regained its capacity to evolve
at the single cell level. In other words, cancer is a disease in which
individuality changes from the level of the multicellular group back to the
level of the cell. The project will result in training of undergraduate and
graduate students and also will develop curricula to better teach concepts
related to the evolution of complex organisms to middle school students. The
proposed work will provide societal benefits through the development of methods
of high-throughput phenotyping and imaging of cell groups that may help with
medical diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution by natural selection requires
heritable variation in fitness at the individual level. During evolutionary
transitions in individuality, such as the evolution of multicellular
individuals, fitness must be remapped from the cell level to the new level of
the multicellular individual. Previous work has shown that stress responses can
be a major impetus for the reorganization of fitness during the transition to
multicellular individuality. There are two basic criteria of multicellular
individuality investigated in the work: group inseparability and somatic cell
division of labor. The researchers have shown that these two individuality
criteria respond to stress in species with intermediate complexity and levels of
individuality. The researchers also will examine the phenotypic and underlying
genetic responses to stress that affect group formation and the origin of new
cell types. The application of phylogenetic methods to reconstruct the
evolutionary history of plastic somatic cells will allow the researchers to
determine whether the plastic development of somatic cells preceded or followed
the origin of key genes necessary for cellular differentiation. Furthermore,
they will use experimental evolution to test whether obligate cellular
differentiation evolves in lab populations under the conditions predicted by
their models. Finally , the researchers will identify the genetic basis for
these stress responses via experiments utilizing gene expression analyses and
gene knockouts to understand the role played by gene co-option in the origin of
multicellularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.