* 2029370
* RAPID: Flow Asymmetry in Human Breathing and the Asymptomatic Spreader
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Aerosol transport of viruses during breathing and speaking, as is common during
social interactions of people, is largely unstudied. There is significant recent
evidence that the fluid dynamics behind these flows may play a significant role
in the spread of Covid-19. The rapid spread of Covid-19 highlights the lack of
effective guidelines and mitigation strategies for reducing the impact of a
contagious virus in the absence of a vaccine. Recent evidence from hospitals,
and even the press, suggests that the fluid dynamics of this transport pathway
should be re-investigated. The focus of this research will be to quantify the
complex flows associated with speech and breathing during a conversation or
nearby encounter and show how transmission of particles between individuals
occurs. The understanding gained from this work will provide actionable
mitigation strategies to reduce transmission from asymptomatic people. These
outcomes can be useful in the short term by offering routes to reducing
potential viral transport and future infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will show how the inherent structural flow difference between
exhalation and inhalation during speech or simple breathing could be a potent
yet unsuspected transport mechanism for pathogen transmission. The results will
quantify an important aspect of this transmission, which in the case of Covid-19
is associated with asymptomatic carriers during relatively close social
interactions. The quantitative characterization of this important topic
surrounding viral transmission has largely been absent from the fluid mechanics
and transport phenomena literatures, and even absent more generally from
quantitative studies of public health. Using flow visualization and numerical
simulations, the investigation will decipher the fluid dynamics in the
neighborhood of the head of an individual during breathing and speaking, and the
corresponding environmental mixing important to potential transmission
(inhalation of particles by a nearby person). This approach will allow
quantifying the fraction of particles exhaled by one person that are inhaled by
a nearby person as a function of their separation distance. In these ways, the
research will shed new light on a simple yet fundamental mechanism of transport
associated with simple human activities, i.e., breathing and speaking, which can
be generalized to many pathogens and aid in the identification of potential
mitigation strategies for disease transmission by
aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.