* 2029309
* IRNC: ENgage: Strengthening Global Cyberinfrastructure Ecosystems to Advance International Science Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Dale Smith, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,940,755.00

The Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC) develops network communications
infrastructure and local engineering capacity in areas of the world where
inadequate research and education network (REN) connectivity poses a significant
barrier to international collaborations with US scientists and educators. By
helping build physical network infrastructure and the human technical capacity
to maintain and upgrade it, NSRC assists the US science community by fostering
state-of-the-art global cyberinfrastructure (CI), ubiquitous access to global
scientific communities, remote scientific instruments, and shared data
resources. NSRC exemplifies the NSF's stated strategic goal of "encouraging
collaborative research and education across organizations, disciplines, sectors,
and international boundaries." &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSRC incubates and builds
sustainable CI consistent with the guiding principles of the International
Research Network Connections (IRNC) program, including: technical training and
direct engineering assistance to improve operational infrastructure from
university campuses to national and regional RENs; engaging RENs to participate
in globally interconnected testbed facilities with the IRNC initiative;
disseminating information about best practices for design, development, and
operation of CI resources; and amplifying numerous training programs to foster a
new generation of network engineers and leaders in underserved communities,
while providing experiential learning opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students. NSRC achieves this through targeted capacity building
activities and partnerships with universities, RENs, Internet Service Providers,
industry, government and supranational agencies in Africa, Asia-Pacific, the
Middle East, Latin America-Caribbean, and North America. Substantial financial
support from industry and international partners, facilitated by NSRC, leverages
NSF funds to augment the impact of its work with the global R&amp;E
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.