* 2029966
* Understanding Transformation Superplasticity, High Temperature Deformation and Manufacturing of Entropy Stabilized Oxides
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Julie Schoenung, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 439,961.00

The inherent brittleness of ceramic materials often makes them difficult to form
during manufacturing, limiting them to applications that do not require complex
shapes. The recently discovered class of ceramics, entropy stabilized oxides
(ESOs), exhibit a unique reversible phase transformation behavior that provides
significant control over the properties via heat treatment, thus allowing for an
efficient means of manufacturing these materials into complex shapes without
fracture or failure. This award supports fundamental research to explore the
mechanisms underlying transformation superplasticity and uncover new methods of
manufacturing ESOs. These materials show promise as supercapacitors, battery
cathodes, catalysts, and electrolytes, which impacts U.S. industry and economy.
The project explores the fields of advanced manufacturing and materials science
and engineering, with educational, training and outreach activities that provide
exposure to interdisciplinary topics for undergraduate, graduate and K-12
students, especially those from underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entropy stabilized oxides (ESOs) are ceramic
materials in which configurational disorder is compositionally engineered into a
single phase with multiple cations randomly populating sublattice locations.
ESOs display a reversible phase transformation behavior when heat treated within
a particular temperature window. This phase transformation manifests as a
controllable phase heterogeneity, giving unprecedented control over the
microstructure of ESOs. Such a dramatic transformation could be leveraged to
enhance ductility during high temperature deformation, allowing for efficient
forming through transformation superplasticity and cyclic deformation.
Transformation superplasticity allows for mechanical deformation of more than
100% due to the internal strain that arises from the mismatch between co-
existing phases, which can accumulate during thermal cycling. The research
involves the following tasks: 1) synthesis and consolidation of bulk ESO samples
with different grain sizes; 2) heat treatment to achieve the desired phase state
(amount and composition of the secondary phase(s)); 3) high temperature
deformation and superplastic forming; and 4) evaluation of microstructure and
properties. Experiments are complemented with theoretical modeling to analyze
the influence of grain size, applied stress, pressure, strain rate and
temperature on diffusion, and consequently deformation mechanisms and
superplasticity. This research establishes a relationship between starting
microstructure and deformation behavior, thus advancing the understanding of
deformation mechanisms in ESOs and their potential for superplastic forming
using techniques such as forging and extrusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.