* 2029918
* RAPID: Interdependent social vulnerability of COVID-19 and weather-related hazards in New York City
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* P. Timon McPhearson, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 197,475.00

The study will integrate survey, social media, building infrastructure, energy
demand and use, and social- demographic data with simulations of potential
emerging weather-related extremes to examine interdependent social vulnerability
to COVID-19 and weather in New York City (NYC). The research will leverage
cutting-edge simulations, modeling, and visualizations of urban social and
infrastructure systems to understand how human behavior changes in response to
shelter-in-place policies may expose potential interdependent and cascading
social vulnerability to COVID and weather extremes. The primary research
question is: How will existing vulnerabilities to health, weather, and economic
hazards be affected by new guidelines designed to reduce COVID-19 transmission
rates in NYC? The primary outcome will be to advance knowledge for understanding
COVID-19 impacts in the national epicenter of the virus outbreak and where
solutions will be needed for many months as the pandemic begins to interact with
weather dynamics and drive interdependent vulnerability over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the COVID-19 pandemic evolves rapidly in NYC, there is
an urgent need to collect data on social and economic impacts as they emerge,
and join these with existing local, regional, and national datasets to
anticipate potential interdependent impacts of COVID-19 as weather dynamics
shift over coming months. Social survey and social media data are especially
critical to collect now as perspectives on location specific experiences and
perspective of green space as critical infrastructure can change over time.
Additionally, social media data can only be accessed cost-effectively via
Twitter in weekly intervals and analyses are needed now to understand policy
impacts in time to plan responses and strategies for resilience to
interdependent COVID-weather extremes impacts. A convergent scientific approach
is critical for examining how vulnerable populations may be further impacted as
spring turns to summer with potential heat waves and extreme rainfall events.
The analysis will examine how overlapping vulnerabilities interact with
availability and usage of urban green spaces for physical and mental health
during COVID-19 shelter-in-place policies. For example, data will include weekly
geo-located tweets overlaid with buildings and green space spatial data to
explore dominant locations of social media activity in NYC to understand which
parks and open space are most used, and which will require additional resources
to meet public need for physical and mental health. This data will provide input
to real-time decision-making in NYC to impact current emergency responses,
planning and policies that consider direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19,
weather extremes, and interdependent vulnerabilities. There remains limited
systemic understanding of what forms resilience to COVID-19 should take,
especially when considering interactions with additional drivers of social
vulnerability. Thus, the broader impacts of this research lie primarily in
direct engagement with local practitioners—governmental officials, non-
governmental organizations, community organizations—to improve their ability to
conduct integrative planning and improve real-time decision-making to reduce
social vulnerability and plan emergency response in the novel context of ongoing
COVID-19 transmission that may be combined with weather-related extremes.
Further, research will be provided to current NSF Growing Convergence Research
(GCR) collaborators in Atlanta, Phoenix, San Juan (PR), and across the cities in
the UREx Sustainability Research Network. (SRN), seeding opportunities to
replicate methods and findings. The project PIs will train interdisciplinary
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in this convergent science approach
and provide an important mechanism to bring scholars with advanced data science
skills to gather important emerging data and advance novel research to
understand the potential of interdependent COVID-19 and weather-related impacts
on vulnerable populations in NYC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.