* 2029814
* MODULUS: Integrative multiscale modeling and multimodal experiments to decode systems-level molecular mecanisms of epithelial systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Weitao Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 899,916.00

The goal of this project is to integrate novel multi-scale mathematical modeling
approaches and specifically designed experiments for predicting how molecular
signaling drives cell and tissue shape generation and maintenance during
development. Experimentally validated multi-scale mathematical models of
biological systems will be used to infer the basic principles and rules of
epithelial morphogenesis. The interdisciplinary research program will be used to
discover new roles of morphogens as regulators of cell mechanics and how cell
mechanics provide indirect potential feedback into morphogen signaling during
development of the fruit fly Drosophila wing imaginal disc, one of the main
biological models for studying basic mechanisms of animal and human development.
The study of perturbations to normal development will also provide general
biological insights into the mechanistic basis for diseases from birth defects
to cancers related to uncontrolled tissue growth. The project will also provide
a basis for developing predictive design tools for synthetic multicellular
systems, including engineering organoids or soft robotics. The project will
provide training for students from underrepresented groups in mathematical and
computational biology, quantitative biology and biological signaling pathways
regulation. One-day workshops will be held by the UC Riverside Interdisciplinary
Center for Quantitative Modeling in Biology to disseminate scientific knowledge
and facilitate cross-fertilization between fields of mathematical and
computational biology, applied mathematics, quantitative and experimental
biology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will combine mathematical
modeling and quantitative experiments to answer key questions regarding how
morphogens such as the Bone Morphogenetic Protein and Wingless/WNT signaling
pathways regulate the cytoskeletal proteins that control cell and tissue shape
formation and maintenance during organ development. The research will focus on
developing multi-scale models of epithelial morphogenesis in the fruit fly wing
imaginal disc during larval development due to the wealth of genetic and imaging
tools available to test specific hypotheses that connect morphogens to
actomyosin contractility and the extracellular matrix. Models that incorporate
biochemical signaling and cell mechanics in three dimensions will be developed
and calibrated using experimental data. Breakthroughs in the theory of reaction-
diffusion systems on deforming surfaces coupled with coarse graining approaches
describing cell membrane and cytoskeleton will be utilized together with data
driven surrogate models that derived from experimental images. Machine learning
approaches will be used to extract quantitative information from biological data
to facilitate a comparison between experimental outcomes and model predictions.
Deep learning based super-resolution imaging approaches will be developed to
determine subcellular properties of cells. Statistical methods and sensitivity
analysis will be incorporated to prevent model overfitting. Combinatorial
perturbation simulations and experiments will result in systematic model
comparison. The project will also result in a general modeling platform for
predicting morphogenesis outcomes. The project will advance goals for STEM
recruitment and training students from underrepresented groups. Scientific
workshops will be organized to facilitate cross-fertilization between fields of
mathematical and computational biology and quantitative and experimental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) through the Systems and Synthetic
Biology Program, and the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the
Mathematical Biology Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.