* 2029069
* RAPID:  Aerosolization of Viruses and Bacteria in the Coastal Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2023
* USD 198,943.00

This RAPID project will investigate the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the
causative agent of the COVID-19 disease, in coastal waters near an area of
sewage outflow. The flow of sewage can become trapped in the surf zone, the
region where waterborne species can be transferred into the atmosphere. Any
viruses released in small sea spray droplets can remain airborne for hours, and
recent research has demonstrated that the aerosolized SARS-CoV-2 virus can
remain infectious for up to 3 hours. Thus residents in nearby regions could be
exposed to the virus through this unanticipated atmospheric
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Airborne samples will be collected near the US-
Mexican border where millions of gallons of untreated sewage from the Tijuana
River have been flowing into the ocean continuously for the last 5 months. The
samples will be tested for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 by the RTqPCR laboratory
technique, and subject to metagenomic and metatranscriptomic DNA and RNA
sequencing. The data will be visualized using a map created in collaboration
with the UC San Diego WIFIRE team showing the locations in which SARS-CoV-2 and
other viruses and bacteria are detected in air samples, providing critical
unprecedented information on the spatial distribution of the airborne
microbiome. The plan is for the air samples to be collected before and after
COVID-19 becomes widespread in Tijuana, the source region of the raw sewage.
This will enable the researchers to examine the relationship between the
airborne distribution of SARS-CoV-2 and the distribution of confirmed and
probable COVID-19 cases. This project will help to answer questions such as:
Which strains of viruses, bacteria, and other sewage-related pollutants are
released in sea spray aerosol in a coastal environment? How do ocean
concentrations of enteric viruses and bacteria and conditions (swell, flow, wind
speed) affect airborne concentrations? Do traditional water indicators of fecal
contamination provide any link with airborne concentrations of bacteria and
enteric viruses? Are there “hot spots” where certain strains of viruses and
bacteria are detected in higher abundance in the atmosphere (such as near the
mouth of the Tijuana River)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.