* 2029533
* EAGER: Functionally Relevant Structural Heterogeneity in Coronavirus SARS-CoV2 Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Abbas Ourmazd, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2022
* USD 299,723.00

In order to prevent infections by specific viruses, it is important to
understand the molecular details that drive the virus into host cells where they
replicate, making more viral particles that spread to other cells in the
infected individual. This award will help understand the mechanisms of the SARS-
CoV2 infectivity, the virus responsible for the current COVID-19 pandemic, by
employing machine learning algorithms to make movies of key proteins involved in
driving its infection. There is mounting evidence that viral proteins exist in a
range of structures, known as conformations, and that these can play a critical
role in their function. In this project, recently developed machine-learning
techniques will be used to determine the conformational landscape of key SARS-
CoV2 proteins at near-atomic level, with and without antibody involvement.
Atomistic insight into the conformational changes in SAR-CoV2 proteins is
expected to help clarify the structural basis of virulence in this virus and its
successors, ultimately providing a foundation for the development of suitable
therapeutic strategies against coronaviruses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
experimental cryo-EM snapshots, this project will map the functionally relevant
conformational heterogeneities of key SARS-CoV2 proteins to gain a deeper
understanding of the role of conformational heterogeneity in this pandemic
virus. The specific goals of this project are as follows: (1) Apply advanced
machine-learning algorithms to experimental cryo-EM single-particle snapshots in
order to determine the energy landscapes of key SARS-CoV2 proteins with and
without antibody involvement; (2) Identify the functionally important
conformational paths on the relevant energy landscapes; (3) Compare and contrast
motions along functional paths with those inferred by discrete clustering
methods; (4) Determine the biological implications of conformational motions
associated with function; and (5) Make the results widely accessible in order to
help facilitate the development of therapeutic
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.