* 2029880
* RAPID: COVID-19 Information Campaigns for Vulnerable Populations
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Abhijit Banerjee, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,668.00

Until the development of an effective vaccine, the success or otherwise of
reducing the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic hinges on whether individuals will
engage in health-preserving and health-seeking practices, especially among
vulnerable groups who have been, and will likely continue to be the most
impacted by the pandemic. It is however not clear how messages about social
distancing and personal hygiene effectively reach vulnerable groups. This
research project will use experimental methods to design and implement
innovative messaging programs in two vulnerable communities to study what
determines the effectiveness or otherwise of public health information
campaigns. In one community where information is sparse, the researchers will
recruit influential people in those communities to broadcast the messages that
will be designed. In dense information environments, the researchers will use
physicians whose racial and ethnicity mirrors those of the vulnerable population
which is the target of the information campaign. The researchers will compare
the effectiveness of information campaigns in the two communities to evaluate
the relative effectiveness of different approaches to public health messaging.
In addition to its contribution to economic science, this research can also
provide guidance on policies to reduce the spread of COVID19 and other
pandemics. This research therefore improves the wellbeing of US citizens as well
as help to establish the US as the global leader in public health messaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use a randomized
control trial (RCT) method in two vulnerable communities to investigate what
determines the effectiveness of public health messaging. The emphasis is on
messages to change two health behaviors---social distancing and personal hygiene
and mask-wearing. Messages in the two domains will also be framed in terms of
private versus public benefits of behavioral change as well as social distancing
versus hygiene and face covering. In addition, the PIs also vary the conduits
through which the messaging is provided in the study. In sparse information
vulnerable communities, the PIs will use agents identified as network nodes to
disseminate the information while in dense information vulnerable communities,
the PIs will use ethnically diverse physicians who represent the ethnic
diversity of the community as the conduit to present the message. The PIs will
then compare results from the two vulnerable groups, allowing them to see to
what extend the effectiveness of information campaigns depend on how they are
framed or who carries the message. The research design from this extremely
strong multi-disciplinary research team is very innovative. In addition to
economic science, this research project also contributes to graduate education
as well as public information policies. This research therefore improves the
health of US citizens as well as help to establish the US as the global leader
in public health messaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.