* 2029528
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Color Perception in Wild Hummingbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Noah Whiteman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 325,000.00

Birds have excellent color vision, relative to humans. Humans have three color
cone types in their eyes, sensitive to blue, green and red light, respectively.
Birds have these three cones plus a fourth which is sensitive to ultraviolet
light. Because of this it has long been unclear how avian color perception
works. To answer this question, it is critical to study birds in their natural
habitats. This research program will investigate mechanisms of color vision in
wild hummingbirds, which rely on color for foraging and courtship. The
investigators will perform detailed color-learning experiments in the field,
combined with physiological and genomic studies, to understand how hummingbirds
use color perception in their daily lives. This will provide new opportunities
for testing ecological and evolutionary hypotheses about pollination, mate
choice and plumage coloration. Because tetrachromacy (four color cone types)
developed in early vertebrates (and exists in birds, many fish and reptiles),
uncovering the details of hummingbird color vision will provide a deeper
understanding of color vision in many animals. Overall, this work will
contribute broadly to the fields of learning and memory, neurobiology, human
color vision, colorblindness and vision-related diseases. Hummingbirds are also
of great ecological importance as critical pollinators and bioindicators of
environmental health, and this research will provide insights into how they
perceive the world. The researchers will design in-depth educational programs
for middle school students, to be held at the Rocky Mountain Biological
Laboratory, in schools and at natural history museums. In addition, the
researchers will convene a workshop highlighting recent breakthroughs in
hummingbird research and conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative
study will improve our understanding of avian color vision. Birds have an
ancient and sophisticated color vision system, which they use to find food,
identify mates and navigate through complex landscapes. In recent years,
detailed psychophysical experiments in laboratories have yielded important
insights into the mechanisms of color vision in birds. However, laboratory
experiments often lack ecological context and reveal little about how
individuals in a population may vary in color perception and cognition. As a
result, we have a limited understanding of how birds use and process color
information in the natural world. This project investigates mechanisms of color
perception/cognition in wild, free-living hummingbirds at the Rocky Mountain
Biological Laboratory in Colorado and the surrounding area. This research
program has four main aims. First, the investigators will test standard models
of avian color vision using field-based behavioral experiments. Second, they
will design ecologically relevant experiments that account for colors
hummingbirds experience often in the context of foraging and courtship. Third,
they will determine the physiological mechanisms responsible for color vision in
hummingbirds. Fourth, they will explore the genetic and genomic mechanisms
underpinning color vision, particularly with respect to the genes for
ultraviolet- and shortwave-sensitivity. Hummingbirds provide a compelling study
system because they forage from diverse plant species with colorful floral
displays and, consequently, can quickly learn and remember different colors.
Using advanced psychophysical tools and RFID technology, combined with
physiological and genomic analyses, this project will provide a mechanistic
picture of how color perception works in wild
hummingbirds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.