* 2029262
* RAPID: The Role of Testing in COVID-19 Outbreak Control
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Lauren Childs, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2023
* USD 180,401.00

The global pandemic of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has taken a
staggering toll in terms of economies, livelihoods, and, most importantly,
lives. As with any emerging disease, many uncertainties remain about significant
disease characteristics such as transmission and immunity. Predicting disease
spread and the impacts of interventions is a challenge with imperfect and
incomplete information about the disease itself. Moreover, an accurate
accounting of the outbreak requires knowledge about the number of cases, which
necessitates fast and accurate testing. However, the current use and speed of
testing varies significantly across different locations. While testing alone
will not stop transmission, widespread testing gives richer information on how
an outbreak is progressing, particularly with a disease such as COVID-19 with
hidden transmission. Furthermore, knowledge of personâ€™s disease status leads to
better adherence to the strict isolation and social distancing measures used to
curb transmission. While many models consider the role of interventions in
flattening the curve, this project will address a key gap in modeling of
COVID-19: the impact of testing strategies on the ability to assess and
intervene against the ongoing outbreak. This project will develop new
mathematical models of transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the cause of COVID-19 along
with intervention strategies using testing. Two graduate students will be
involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
compartmental models of the COVID-19 outbreak incorporating the use of testing
in conjunction with other non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social
distancing. Testing capacity, accuracy, and delays will be built into these
models to closely resemble real-world challenges in implementation, which will
differ by location. The PI will analyze and simulate these deterministic models
to expand understanding of the requirements of testing for successful slowing of
the outbreak. The results from the novel models will be validated with
simulations from similarly structured stochastic models and actual data. Results
will be presented through a publicly accessible dashboard where information on
local testing procedures can be entered and examined to determine locally
appropriate strategies. This publicly accessible dashboard will help policy- and
decision-makers develop policies in the context of local testing capacity to
best slow the spread of COVID-19. In addition, this work will provide a
framework for developing priorities for testing and evaluation of intervention
in future emerging epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded with
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) program of
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.