* 2029868
* Harnessing evolution to reveal the molecular logic of kinetochore wiring
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Iain Cheeseman, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project focuses on the fundamental processes by which the genetic material
is distributed to each new cell that is formed. As the DNA in a single human
cell is approximately 6 feet long, it must be packaged into physical units
termed chromosomes. Every time a cell divides, these chromosomes must be
duplicated and faithfully distributed to each new cell. Over the course of a
lifetime in humans, this must occur trillions of times. To facilitate this,
mammalian cells form a molecular machine – called the “kinetochore” - that
recognizes each chromosome and physically segregates these chromosomes to the
newly formed cells. When this distribution machinery is defective, critical
genetic material can be lost or disrupted, with serious consequences to the
function and viability of those cells. Thus, it is critical to understand how
kinetochores assemble and function. However, there are substantial open
questions regarding the nature, function, and evolution of kinetochores. This
project will explore the changes to the kinetochore machine across mammals and
use evolutionary differences to create a new understanding of the way in which
this machine functions and adapts to differing requirements. The Broader Impacts
of the project will include the training of undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers, along with a high-school teacher in research
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eukaryotic chromosome segregation requires
the kinetochore, the macromolecular structure that connects chromosomes to the
microtubule polymers, which power their movement. Despite a conserved
requirement in directing chromosome segregation, the kinetochore is remarkably
flexible in its structure, composition, and organization across eukaryotes. This
project will harness kinetochore evolutionary plasticity to probe the molecular
logic by which kinetochores assemble and function. In particular, this project
will test whether changes to kinetochore protein sequences, composition, and
requirements across mammalian species represent evolutionary-driven mechanisms
that optimize fundamentally similar kinetochore activities to meet diverse
physiological constraints. By exploring this idea, this research seeks to
generate a coherent molecular model for how kinetochore components act
individually and in an integrated manner to achieve faithful chromosome
segregation in a way that is robust and conserved, and yet tailored to the
specific requirements of each species. Together, this project will define the
logic of kinetochore wiring, reveal the composition of the critical kinetochore
scaffold, the properties of the kinetochore-microtubule interface, and how these
are modulated across evolution to achieve an optimal
outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.