* 2029256
* Researching Pre-College Factors that Lead to Persistence in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gerhard Sonnert, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,993.00

This research project is studying the wide range of efforts underway nationwide
to offer computer science (CS) and computational thinking (CT) to K-12 students,
by measuring their impact on students' career interest in computer-related
fields and on their attitudes toward computing. While there is widespread
support for offering CS and CT experiences to pre-college students, there are
few national statistics on the prevalence of in-school/out-of-school offerings,
as well as personal hobbies and explorations. However great the enthusiasm about
pre-college CS and CT initiatives, little definitive evidence exists about their
long-term effects on students. Whereas many programs have been evaluated
individually, the field has yet to examine the relative impact of pre-college
students' CS and CT experiences on their interest in CS and STEM careers, their
attitudes toward CS, and their CS identity. This study measures the impact of
decisions about the use of computers and CT activities, made by CS and STEM
teachers, as well as teachers of other subjects, along with those made by the
creators of online resources, out-of-school time educators, and other involved
professionals. This study has the capability to reveal the most promising
educational practices and interventions (many developed with NSF support),
including in-school computing and CT instruction, after-school programs,
competitions, and clubs in a nationally representative sample of first-year
college students. Because the under-representation of females and certain racial
and ethnic minorities in the STEM and CS workforce has been a long-standing
concern, this project will have a strong focus on girls and underrepresented
minorities. It will determine both the degree to which these groups have access
to the various CS and CT-related opportunities and the extent to which these
opportunities translate into positive long-term outcomes for
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using epidemiological methods that control for prior
interest and background variables, this retrospective cohort study will collect
a nationally representative, stratified random sample of 8,000 college students
(enrolled in a mandatory freshman course, so that students with all levels of
interest and experience in CS and CT are included). It will model the degree to
which any prior CS- and CT-related experiences predict students' CS attitudes,
identity, and career interests, using linear and logistic regression.
Epidemiological techniques offer a cost effective and well-understood
methodology to simultaneously test multiple hypotheses, while controlling for a
host of demographic and background factors that differ for individual subjects.
This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.