* 2029840
* The Role of the Fountain Effect in the Evolution of Ionospheric Structures in Low and Mid Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Larry Paxton, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 12/31/2023
* USD 532,697.00

The Earth’s ionosphere is the layer of the atmosphere that has a relatively high
concentration of charged particles (ions and free electrons) that extends from
about 50 to 600 miles (80 to 1,000 km) above the Earth's surface. The density of
the charged particles varies with location and time and is influenced by the
change of Earth’s magnetic field. These density fluctuations are called
irregularities that affect radio communications and GPS accuracy. One special
phenomenon is a regional depletion of charged particles (plasma), which is
referred to as plasma bubbles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to perform
a focused study of the daytime electron density irregularities during
magnetically quiet periods and midlatitude plasma bubbles during magnetically
disturbed periods in the low and mid latitude ionosphere. Both phenomena are
believed to be closely related to equatorial plasma bubbles. The hypothesis is
that both phenomena are closely related to the transport of equatorial bubbles
by the fountain effect. The success of this project will establish the full
evolution scenario of equatorial bubbles throughout a day and provide closure to
the dispute regarding the sources of midlatitude bubbles. The project team will
establish the characteristics of daytime irregularities and midlatitude bubbles
by analyzing satellite observations (ROCSAT-1, C/NOFS, CHAMP, SWARM, and DMSP).
The physical processes underlying these phenomena will be identified by
conducting SAMI3 model simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both daytime
irregularities and midlatitude bubbles are unexplored fields in that there is no
clear knowledge of their characteristics and origin. Bubbles have been
understood as the phenomena in the equatorial region, but anomalously large
bubbles can develop and reach midlatitudes. This project is the first attempt to
validate this interpretation by model simulations. The proposed work is feasible
because the project will be performed using existing observational data and a
proven ionospheric model. The project team consists of experts in observational
data, models, and ionospheric phenomena, and therefore, can effectively perform
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geospace &amp; Earth Science group at
Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) in Johns Hopkins University has been hosting
high school and college interns so that they can participate in the staff’s
projects. One college student will be invited in the summer to participate in
this work and the team will provide mentoring on data analysis, computer
programming, and ionospheric plasma physics. This project will provide an
opportunity to facilitate collaboration between APL and Korea Space science
Institute (KASI) in space missions as well as ground-based observations through
the collaboration with Dr. Wookyoung Lee at KASI. The project will also motivate
other investigations of daytime irregularities in
midlaittudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.