* 2029790
* RAPID: Developing Social Differentiation-respecting Disease Transmission Models
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Lisa Keister, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2023
* USD 174,891.00

In this project, transmission models that account for differences in social
networks and exposure opportunities are developed to gain insight into the
unequal spread of COVID-19 across populations. Some areas have experienced slow
to no spread of COVID-19 while other settings have been overwhelmed. Within
high-volume locations, some neighborhoods have been at much greater risk than
others. To account for this uneven spread, these models incorporate population
differences related to social density and sociodemographic
characteristics—features that shape disease exposure and ability to social
distance. These models augment general understanding of how social situation
affects both disease risk and the cost of disease mitigation efforts, which will
allow decisionmakers to evaluate the relative costs of different health-
preserving interventions and, potentially, optimize interventions that minimize
economic harm while maximizing physical safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to have accurate, flexible and scalable models for disease
transmission that can account for observed social differentiation in disease
spread. Simulation models are employed to meet this goal, drawing on best
estimates from the COVID-19 pandemic for disease-specific infection parameters
and rates of transitioning into hospitalization, death, or recovery. Modeling
occurs on two levels: Agent-Based Models (ABMs) and small-area cell-based
simulation models. ABMs are constructed from social network data and allow for
maximum flexibility, being tunable to different types of populations, ranging
from rural communities in developing nations to dense urban centers. Small-area
(census block group) cell-based simulation models, which translate network
structure to interaction probabilities based on demographic and economic
similarity profiles, include population differentiation but scale to the
national level. These two modeling strategies complement each other and can be
used to evaluate different mitigation strategies for both health effectiveness
(lives saved) and economic hardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.