* 2029421
* RAPID: Transmission and Immunology of COVID-19 in the Pandemic and Post-Pandemic Phase: Real-time Assessment of Social Distancing & Protective Immunity
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Markus Hilpert, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,992.00

In March 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic took hold in the United States and
threatened the lives a livelihood of all Americans. At this time, the pandemic
is being driven by person-to-person transmission of the coronavirus known as
SARS-CoV-2. The U.S. government, both state and federal, responded to the
pandemic by launching social distancing as an intervention, ordering schools and
non-essential businesses to close throughout most of the country. Mathematical
models are required in order to measure the transmission of COVID-19 in the U.S.
This research focuses on building mathematical models that include data on
social distancing to measure how effective the intervention is at slowing the
disease. The researchers will also evaluate strategies for reopening schools and
workplaces. Importantly, the researchers will measure the risk for a second
pandemic wave by accounting for how the immune system reacts to the infection.
This research is important because it will provide the U.S. government with
models that it can use to choose among options for reopening cities. These
models will also reveal the number of deaths averted by social distancing
policies. In addition to the great societal benefit of this research, it also
brings scientific advancement and broader impacts by demonstrating how novel
datasets can be collected in real-time and models can be deployed during a
public health emergency. This project provides professional development
opportunities for an early career scientist.

Transmission models will be used to explore creative ways for phased reopening
of cities in order to minimize disease-induced mortality and overburdening of
hospitals. The researchers will focus on the 62 counties in New York state, the
current epicenter of the pandemic. The researchers will fit a city-level
COVID-19 transmission model which accounts for social distancing quantified by
Google traffic data, and ground-truthed by public transportation data, live-
webcam streams, and Google trends indicating individuals are staying home. The
researchers will explore transmission dynamics and hospitalization trajectories
under different scenarios of adaptive immunity (e.g., long-lived sterilizing
immunity, waning immunity, and immunity that reduces symptoms in subsequent
infections). Models will be parameterized using data on testing, COVID-19
clinical cases, hospitalizations, and mortality via Maximum Likelihood by
Iterated Particle Filtering (MIF). Modeling will be done in real time, requiring
the statistical inference pipeline to be sufficiently nimble to account for the
rapidly changing epidemiological situation. The researchers are interfacing with
policy makers as part of CDC working groups on modeling COVID-19 and will
actively share data through the NIH MIDAS coordination network.

This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases
Program in the Division of Environmental Biology, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.