* 2029875
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SMALL: Understanding and Combating Adversarial Spectrum Learning towards Spectrum-Efficient Wireless Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Yasin Yilmaz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

The next-generation wireless network is expected to be efficient, reliable,
secure and spectrum-intelligent to maximize the efficiency of using the wireless
spectrum. Dynamic spectrum access and management designs have shown their
potential to substantially improve the spectrum utilization efficiency. To
achieve the goal of securing efficient spectrum access and utilization, it is
common in wireless network systems to collect and use spectrum reports from
individual nodes to detect malicious behaviors and/or eliminate attack impacts.
The goal of this project is to understand the potential strategies and impacts
of a new attack, called adversarial spectrum learning, which aims to learn from
the wireless spectrum data and construct specific attack models against spectrum
management systems to disrupt the network performance. The project will also
provide effective countermeasure against adversarial spectrum
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on studying important
research problems associated with adversarial spectrum learning via analytical
modeling, comprehensive simulations, and experimental evaluations. Specifically,
the research team aims at (i) formulating the adversarial spectrum learning
strategies that can be used by malicious attacks to disrupt the spectrum
efficiency and evaluating their damaging impacts in varying wireless and network
conditions; (ii) detecting adversarial spectrum learning attacks via new non-
parametric detection methods; (iii) creating attack prevention and secure
management methods for secure and efficient spectrum access in the potential
presence of adversarial spectrum learning, and (iv) comprehensively evaluating
the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed detection and prevention
strategies. Appropriate elements from the project will also be integrated into
educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.