* 2029457
* RAPID: Collecting Reliable COVID-19 Datasets in Crisis Conditions
* TIP,ITE
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Rastislav Bodik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 10/31/2020
* USD 69,998.00

This RAPID project enables approaches to mitigate the negative impacts of
COVID-19 on public health, society, and the economy by deploying technologies to
enable collecting reliable COVID-19-related data sets under crisis conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the midst of a crisis, such as the COVID-19 pandemic,
generators of critical new data, such as hospitals and critical health
organizations, lack the time and resources to make this important data readily
available for use by others. One cannot expect the already overburdened primary
data providers to do the extra work needed to make the data more accessible for
others to use. Even those who already publish data on their websites often do
not have the time to edit/modify the data, for example to apply newly introduced
tags, such as Schema.org’s new tags related to coronavirus. Yet, these data are
critical in a crisis in order to inform the public; improve emergency response;
and aid the scientific community in its efforts to find solutions. Currently,
the teams that are engaged in dataset collection are employing slow, tedious,
and painstaking manual techniques. The interactive dataset collection tools to
be developed by this project will provide an alternative approach, empowering a
community of volunteers to help with data collection efforts. The data
collection tools developed can be used with only an internet connection, a web
browser, and brief training, thereby putting the effort well within reach of a
large population of potential volunteers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
automatic data extractors assume that (i) webpages in a single website are
structured uniformly, because they were produced from the same template and (ii)
relevant webpages originate from a single website. As a result, much of the
prior work in the area of web data extraction and ingestion focuses on
‘syntactic’ extraction. Currently, dedicated data collection teams are
collecting data with a combination of expertise and time-consuming and
painstaking manual effort. Other teams are hiring call centers to call hospitals
in each state to collect their capacities. Such high-cost, high-effort
approaches do not scale well to all the datasets that one would like to be able
to access and analyze. Many COVID-19-related datasets are scattered over
thousands of websites with similar information but no structural similarities--
e.g., each hospital’s website may look different but may contain very similar
and related data. The technical challenge that this project will tackle will be
to build a ‘semantic’ data extractor that locates the information of interest
despite divergent website structures. The software tools that will be created
for data ingestion can be used by the many individuals who are keen to
contribute their time and effort to help combat COVID-19, without compromising
their physical distancing efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made
by the Convergence Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities
and is associated with the Convergence Accelerator Track A: Open Knowledge
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.