* 2029853
* RAPID: Poirot: From Contact Tracing to Private Exposure Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Jun Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,571.00

Infectious diseases such as COronaVIrus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) are known to
spread rapidly from person to person. In the absence of an effective vaccine or
drug treatment, infection control relies on (i) rapid identification and
isolation of persons with infection; a process called contact tracing, and/or
(ii) extreme social distancing measures to reduce contact between people.
Contact tracing processes used today are manual, time-consuming, error-prone,
and do not scale. Scaling contact tracing through the use of smartphones pose
risks to individuals' privacy and confidentiality. The other approach of
physical distancing that has been implemented by governments has resulted in
societal and economic distress. This project builds Poirot to detect exposure in
a privacy-preserving manner automatically. As physical distancing measures are
eased, a tool such as Poirot can be used to help the essential workers track
exposure to the infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poirot is a privacy-preserving
system that uses smartphones to (a) detect contact with potentially infectious
individuals, and (b) provide recommendations for infection control (e.g.,
isolation, testing). Compared to other suggestions that utilize smartphones,
Poirot makes three key innovations: (i) it takes into account the transitive
nature of infection when notifying users, (ii) it utilizes user-contributed
information beyond just contacts (e.g., use of personal protective equipment) to
assess exposure status, and (iii) it can incorporate information retroactively,
such as back-dated activities of infected users who were initially not in the
system. These features present unique challenges in privacy, cryptography,
secure multiparty computation, infectious disease epidemiology, and data-
intensive systems. First, any exposure detection application, despite the
emergency, must ensure the fundamental privacy rights of an individual. Poirot
presents novel techniques in using secure multiparty computation algorithms to
address this challenge and implement the features mentioned above. Second, any
exposure detection solution must scale to millions of users, which cannot be
done with current general-purpose secure multiparty computation tools. Poirot
employs novel methods to speed up secure multiparty computation by revealing
differentially private statistics and using techniques from data-intensive
computing. Finally, revealing exposure status to individuals from smartphone
identified contacts and user-contributed information can result in privacy
violations. Thus, Poirot's selection of notification strategies will be informed
by rigorous analysis of the privacy implications of different ways of notifying
users of their exposure. Addressing these challenges helps develop a pragmatic
and scalable solution for exposure detection that can be widely implemented by
public health agencies in the face of the current and future
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.