* 2029520
* RAPID: In-Home Automated and Non-Invasive Evaluation of COVID-19 Infection with Commodity Smartphones
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

A key to combat the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic is to prevent the
pandemic from overloading the public healthcare system, so that sufficient
medical resources could be available for hospitalized patients. This project
will develop new mobile sensing and Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques for
in-home evaluation of COVID-19 infection in order to pursue automated and non-
invasive screening of potential viral disease carriers. It aims to timely
identify negative cases caused by other diseases with similar symptoms, and
hence avoids unnecessary hospital visits as many as possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed techniques will use commodity smartphones to
measure the changes of humans’ airway mechanics, which are uniquely correlated
to COVID-19 infection. These measurements build on acoustic sensing with
smartphones’ built-in speakers and microphones. First, new acoustic waveforms
will be designed to minimize acoustic signal distortion in human airways.
Second, new signal processing techniques will be developed for accurate
measurements. Third, deep learning techniques will be used to develop generic
models that depict the core characteristics of airway mechanics. These
techniques will be evaluated by lab testing and experiments with student
volunteers. This research will enable identifying false positives of COVID-19
infection out of the clinic and could contribute to the containment of the virus
spread and damage. The proposed technologies will be applicable to a wide
variety of commodity smartphones and could also be used in daily practice with
handmade mouthpieces. Broader impacts will also result from a variety of
education and outreach activities. New courses will be developed to incorporate
the outcome of this research, and the research outcome will be disseminated
through technology transfer to industry. The outcome of this project, including
source codes and collected data from student volunteers, will be maintained at
the project repository (http://www.pitt.edu/~weigao/research_COVID19.html) for
at least five years, and will be made available to the public
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.