* 2029326
* EFRI DCheM: Renewable Energy Driven Electrocatalytic Co-Conversion of CO2 and Regional Feedstocks to Chemicals and Fuels
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Gewirth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,090.00

This project will address the grand challenge of achieving a sustainable global
society by moving towards carbon-neutral, energy-efficient, and distributable
chemical manufacturing technology. The PIs will develop the scientific
principles and technology to make distributed electrochemical reactors that
simultaneously remediate CO2 and upgrade stranded regional feedstocks in order
to generate commodity chemicals and transportation fuels. Specifically, the
electrochemical process will enable the use of renewable energy (e.g., wind and
solar power) to consume CO2 emissions from stationary sources (e.g., power
plants, chemical refineries) but will do so with lower energy requirements. The
team will accomplish this by using a single reactor to consume CO2 and to
perform selective oxidation reactions that upgrade regional feedstocks (e.g.,
biomass, biogas) into useful building block chemicals. The PIs will develop
fundamental insight into interfacial chemistry to design new catalysts for
electrochemical oxidations; apply reaction engineering principles to increase
the productivity and effectiveness of the reactors; and analyze the availability
and costs of critical resources to identify promising sets of reactions and
reactors for distinct regions in the United States. The team will benefit from
the inclusion of persons from underrepresented groups among senior personnel,
graduate students, and undergraduate students and will engage local K-9 native
Spanish speaker, Girl Scouts of Central Illinois, and other future members of
the STEM workforce through unique educational programs related to
electrochemistry, manufacturing, and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transformative nature of the proposed research resides in linking the reduction
of CO2 with the oxidative upgrading of regional feedstocks in a co-electrolysis
process. This effort leverages the team's recent technological advances for
energy-efficient flow electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to C2-products such as
ethylene and ethanol under alkaline conditions in tandem with oxidation of
waste, such as glycerol from the biofuels industry. Specifically, the PIs will
develop molecular insight into surface chemistry and catalysis at anodes in
alkaline conditions under flow, by synthesizing and characterizing new
electrocatalysts with multifunctional active sites needed for selective
oxidations. The team will design, evaluate, and optimize liquid electrolyte and
membrane-based co-electrolysis reactors for coupled CO2 reduction and selective
oxidations with a focus on process intensification (e.g., by varying
temperature, pressure, pH) for reactant-catalyst pairs. The team will use
technoeconomic analysis and life cycle assessment (TEA-LCA) with spatially-
resolved resource data to quantify system-level water, energy, and greenhouse
gas impacts to identify potential opportunities to deploy these co-electrolysis
devices via geographic information system based multicriteria decision analysis
(GIS-MCDA). Constant feedback between the research thrusts will ensure that
surface chemistry informs reactor design and process intensification; the
performance metrics update the TEA-LCA; and TEA-LCA guides catalysis and reactor
engineering efforts for promising reaction and identifies pressure points for
the process. The PIs will deliver multiple co-conversion solutions, each
optimized for a distinct geographical region in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.