* 2029319
* RAPID: Integrative analysis of multi-omics data to understand ACE2 regulation and cytokine storm
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Christina Chan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Many drugs are being tested for efficacy against COVID-19. The side effects of
these drugs are poorly understood. The issue is complicated because a number of
organ systems (lungs, heart, liver) can be affected by the infection. In
addition, underlying conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, or
cardiovascular disease increase the likelihood of serious complications or
death. This project is designed to identify the effects of these drugs on the
organ systems of vulnerable populations. This information would inform the
selection and application of effective drugs that also cause minimal negative
consequences. This project will also advance the education and research
experience of under-represented groups in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines “horizontal” and
“vertical” analyses of global genomic datasets. The “horizontal” perspective
will map the landscape of gene expression under various conditions that will
enable broader consideration of potential changes that drug treatments could
have on Covid-19. The “vertical” perspective will identify regulatory mechanisms
that suggest possible treatments to target specific responses (e.g., increases
in the different types and levels of cytokines or decreases in the ACE2 levels)
for the different phenotypes. The integrative approach of this proposal will
capitalize on the timely results from the latest studies and incorporate these
results into the gene regulatory network analysis to provide phenotypic-specific
guidance on potential anti-inflammatory treatments and insight into the host
response as a function of the phenotype. The scientific and engineering
contribution of this project is the development and application of an
integrative, multi-scale, and multi-faceted approach that models cellular
interactions (signaling and regulatory) to enable prediction of the phenotypic
responses to external stimuli, including drugs and pathogens. This integrative
modeling framework will be applicable to other pathogens and patient
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.