* 2029866
* RAPID: Identifying Geographic and Demographic Drivers of Rural Disease Transmission for Improved Modeling and Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Ted Mouw, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 05/31/2023
* USD 135,593.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will improve understanding of drivers
of disease transmission in rural areas, providing insights for improved
decision-making and public health management in rural communities. The majority
of current research relevant to modeling COVID-19 spread is focused on urban
systems. Given the vast differences in demographic, social mobility,
transportation, and built environment characteristics between rural and urban
systems, it is expected that rural spread patterns are different from urban.
This project will examine whether this is the case; identify key factors that
account for any differences; and how models should be adjusted to better fit
rural conditions. Based on those findings, the team will build an
epidemiological model well suited to rural communities. The project will also
begin the process of evaluating how well risk prevention policies and messages
could be adjusted for maximum effectiveness in rural communities. The research
team will share relevant findings with county- and state-level public health
managers and help them incorporate the findings into best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to conduct an
informed process of spatial, geographic, public health, wastewater
infrastructure and social data collection and synthesis for improved pandemic
management in rural communities. The project team will examine 3 rural and 3
urban counties in North Carolina. Initial data will be collected and synthesized
from COVID-19 epidemiological data at the state and county level, as well as
other available published information from COVID-19 research as valuable input
to a susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered (SEIR) modeling base approach. From
there, a guided process of data collection and synthesis will be used to
prioritize factors of importance in disease transmission across rural and urban.
Available data sources include health surveillance, cell-phone based mobility,
land use features, commuting patterns, essential business proximity, public
health infrastructure, and medical care availability. The team will
simultaneously gather wastewater samples in selected sewage and package
treatment systems across selected counties to quantify the prevalence of SARS-
CoV-2 in the relevant locations. This will provide an additional non-clinical
metric for disease prevalence. Given current inaccuracies of clinical testing
data, particularly in rural areas, these disease-presence data will constitute a
key measure of disease presence against which to validate insights emerging from
the SEIR model as well as to assess other metrics being used in public health
models. The final stages of the project will be to rectify the conceptual
framework of disease transmission drivers, and initial SEIR/spatial modeling
approaches with NC surveillance system data, and work with county and state
level public health managers and epidemiological to incorporate the findings
into best practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.