* 2029789
* Scholarships with Academic and Career Support to Increase Associate STEM Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Dawn Cummings, Community College of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/28/2026
* USD 649,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at the Community College of
Denver. Over its five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships to 40
full-time students who are pursuing associate degrees in Computer Information
Systems, Cybersecurity, Information Technology, Biology, Chemistry, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Mathematics, Geology, General Science, Fermentation
Science, or Physics. Scholars will be recruited and supported in four annual
cohorts of ten students each. They will receive up to two years of scholarship
support and access to other supports, including advising, tutoring, mentoring,
and leadership development. Finally, this project intends to broaden the
participation of women and other underrepresented student populations in STEM
degree fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project objectives are to: (i) recruit
eligible students into S-STEM eligible disciplines; (ii) create an effective
Scholar support system; (iii) improve Scholars' graduation rates; (iv) promote
the participation of women and underrepresented students in STEM fields; and (v)
create an infrastructure for seamless transition from the College of Denver to
four-year institutions in Colorado. The research and education products
developed through this project have the potential to advance scientific
knowledge and provide a model for other institutions that are interested in
developing strategies to contribute to a diverse STEM workforce. The project’s
outcomes and products will be disseminated through local and national science
education conferences and scholarly articles. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.