* 2029219
* Support of Active Student Participation in the 2020 Meeting of the North American Membrane Society (NAMS)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2020
* Manish Kumar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 10/31/2020
* USD 15,390.00

This award will provide partial travel support for 200 U.S.-based undergraduate
and graduate students to attend the 2020 Meeting of the North American Membrane
Society (NAMS) that is being held in an innovative online format. NAMS is a
premier membrane conference, providing outstanding technical sessions across the
full breadth of topics within membrane science and technology. The theme of the
2020 meeting is "Emerging Membrane Materials, Processes and Applications," which
aligns with several Grand Challenges recently identified by the National Academy
of Engineering. The meeting has a rich history of engaging graduate student
researchers directly through targeted programs and award opportunities. The goal
of this project is to extend these opportunities to undergraduate and graduate
students that are typically unable to attend the conference due to cost or time
constraints. Additionally, it will provide a platform for students to engage
with community leaders, despite the limitations imposed by the ongoing pandemic.
In particular, it will impact undergraduate students interested in membrane
science and technology but who are not yet committed to pursuing the field as a
career. The targeted undergraduate mentoring program will ensure the students
take full advantage of the technical, social, and networking opportunities
available to them at NAMS 2020. Early engagement in a professional
society/conference will provide students with motivation and encouragement to
pursue advanced degrees in their respective fields and, subsequently, develop a
healthy and diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAMS organizing
committee is comprised of diverse North American researchers, and invited
speakers from academia, industry, and government labs feature prominently in the
program. The meeting will feature five technical workshops, over 30 technical
sessions, daily plenary sessions, a poster session, and abundant unstructured
discussion periods to catalyze new collaborative relationships and research
ideas. The 2020 NAMS meeting will cover the following topics: (1) membrane
materials - chemistry and characterization; (2) membrane processes -
fundamentals and improvements; and (3) membrane applications - water treatment,
energy, and biological/food. Historically, hundreds of graduate students
participate in the NAMS meeting and engage in unique professional development
and training opportunities. This award will extend such opportunities to nearly
all the U.S. graduate students in attendance and will target undergraduate
student engagement through a mentoring program. Undergraduate students will be
paired with senior graduate student mentors who will serve as meeting guides.
The program's effectiveness will be assessed through surveys and observation of
student outcomes. It is anticipated that the award for meeting registration
subsidies will attract diverse young scientists in the field and enhance the
membrane science and technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.