* 2029919
* RAPID: Enhancing US manufacturing of small molecule active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) using Authoritative Systems Knowledge (ASK) - (ASK4APIs)
* TIP,ITE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* James Ferri, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 04/30/2021
* USD 155,000.00

This COVID-19 RAPID research program will develop a digital map of production
requirements and domestic manufacturing capacity for the pharmaceutical active
ingredient, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ). HCQ may provide a treatment option for
COVID-19; however, the pandemic already appears to be disrupting the global
pharmaceutical supply, which may cause shortages of this and other important
medicines in the United States. Shortages of medicines occur in part because the
domestic drug supply chain has become longer, more complex, and fragmented. The
United States has sophisticated chemicals and pharmaceutical manufacturing
capability, but many key raw materials and/or intermediates are manufactured
elsewhere in the world. Less complicated markets could respond to a shortage by
increasing production, but logistical challenges – especially the complexity of
the supply chain – limit the ability of domestic drug manufacturers to easily
increase production. Although the United States ranks second in global chemicals
exports, much of its manufacturing capacity is unable to be readily leveraged to
address anticipated shortfalls because there is no clear map of production
requirements or domestic manufacturing capacity that is capable of meeting these
requirements. HCQ will be “mapped” as an example case, with the potential to
refine and apply the same methodology even more rapidly to other compounds of
value to the public in treating COVID-19 or for application to other diseases or
emergent challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop a
systematic ontology - and more specifically, a knowledge graph – of HCQ
production of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) in hydroxycloroquine
(HCQ). The project plans to start with HCQ, but the methodology should be
readily applicable to other molecules such as Remdesivir or Favipiravir (which
have also been proposed as potential COVID-19 therapies). In partnership with
Procter &amp; Gamble, the project will leverage an Authoritative System
Knowledge (ASK) chemical systems approach, as well as data and resources from
the “M-Print” open knowledge network Phase I Convergence Accelerator project
(1937017). The ASK methodology is currently used by industry and government
organizations to manage electromechanical systems manufacturing and other
processes, but tools such as these are not yet widely used in the chemicals
industry. The project team hypothesizes that suppliers of necessary source
materials and intermediates in the US and abroad can be identified, and more
importantly that the chemical transformations required for the HCQ process could
be retooled within American facilities if that were a desirable outcome to
ensure robust supply. To test the specific hypothesis that US manufacturing of
HCQ could be optimized to minimize global supply chain challenges, the team will
develop a model approach that uses raw materials available in the U.S.,
including the production requirements to transform these raw materials into HCQ.
The greater insights &lt;br/&gt;into supply and manufacturing patterns are
envisioned to help decision-makers both inside and outside the supply chain
optimize processes. The overall goal is to rapidly address a critical need in
API manufacturing and reimagine its optimization in times of
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track A: Open Knowledge
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.