* 2029881
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Privacy protection of Vehicles location in Spatial Crowdsourcing under realistic adversarial models
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Chenxi Qiu, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 227,107.00

In vehicle-based spatial crowdsourcing (VSC), requesters can outsource their
tasks to a group of vehicles, which are required to physically move to tasks'
locations to perform services or tasks. To promote a cost-effective task
distribution, vehicles need to disclose their location information to VSC
servers. Location sharing however raises serious privacy concerns related not
only to whereabouts of the vehicles but also to sensitive information such as
drivers’ home/working address, sexual preferences, financial status, etc.
Current privacy protection mechanisms for location-services include location
obfuscation methods according to mobility patterns projected on a 2-dimensional
plane, wherein users can move in arbitrary directions without any restriction.
Obfuscation algorithms based on a 2-dimensional plane are unable to provide
strong privacy guarantees of vehicles whose mobility is restricted by road
networks, since road networks and traffic patterns facilitate vehicle tracking
and trajectory estimation. This research project aims to develop new location
privacy protection techniques by considering vehicles’ realistic mobility
features, and consequently lead to a more secure and trustworthy computing
environment in VSC. This project paves the way for a more realistic body of work
on location privacy, particularly regarding location-based services (LBSs). As
privacy concerns are still among the main obstacles for mobile users to
participate in many advanced LBSs, this project is poised to contribute to the
wider adoption of LBSs for many applications (e.g. location-based recommendation
systems). In addition, the project provides a set of diverse and interesting
topics for undergraduate and graduate students and outreach activities for the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three tasks. First, the
project starts with developing new adversarial models to capture the network-
constrained mobility features of multiple vehicles operating over roads.
Vehicles’ mobility is described by a Bayesian network, i.e., the exact and the
reported locations of vehicles are considered as hidden and observable states,
respectively, and the spatial correlation between hidden states can be learned
from the road network environment and traffic flow information. Second, as a
countermeasure for the adversarial models, the project develops a new location
obfuscation paradigm that can effectively protect vehicles' location privacy
without compromising quality-of-service (QoS), even assuming that adversaries
can leverage vehicles’ mobility features for inference attacks. Since the impact
of location obfuscation on both privacy level and QoS vary significantly over
different road segments, the new location obfuscation methods are designed to be
adaptive to various local road network conditions. Finally, considering the
scalability and the dynamics of VSC, the project applies distributed and
parallel computing techniques (e.g., optimization decomposition) to guarantee
the obfuscation algorithms to be implemented in a time-efficient
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.