* 2029417
* Career Pathways in Computer Science and Mathematics through Scholarships, Learning Communities, and Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Christy Wolfe, Bellarmine University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2025
* USD 988,470.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Bellarmine University, an independent, Catholic, liberal arts
institution. Over its five-year duration, this project will award four-year
scholarships to two cohorts of eleven students pursuing undergraduate degrees in
computer science, computer engineering, mathematics, or data science. This
project has an intentional focus on career preparation and will engage Scholars
in four Career Pathway Pillars: (1) an augmented learning community; (2)
enhanced faculty, peer, and alumni mentoring; (3) a new shared curriculum
experience; and (4) a dedicated career development program. Scholars will have
many opportunities to strengthen their identities as scientists and future STEM
professionals while they explore STEM careers, interact with local partner
organizations in industry and government, and job-shadow current STEM
professionals. The project will study the effectiveness of undergraduate
research and internships as strategies to improve STEM student outcomes. Results
of the study will provide insights into whether internships can provide similar
positive benefits as those that are well-documented for undergraduate research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Increasing the number of graduates will help
to address significant local industry needs in the rapidly changing STEM
workforce and, given the composition of the University’s student body, is likely
to contribute to STEM workforce diversity. The project will build on the
foundation of existing student learning communities and the well-documented
effectiveness of learning communities in nurturing academic and personal
success. The design of the project is rooted in theoretical perspectives that
emphasize the importance of community and sense of belonging, mentorship, strong
academic and social connections, and expanded access to resources that support
student success. The project will conduct systematic research comparing the
value of experiential learning for STEM majors in terms of breadth and depth of
each experiential learning type. The project will address the following
questions: 1) To what extent will student outcomes be related to the
characteristics of the experiential learning, including supervisor/mentor
behaviors? and 2) Are outcomes impacted by factors such as student cohort or
student demographics such as income or first-generation status? An external
evaluator will conduct formative and summative assessments of the project’s
progress towards goals, supported by a local Tech/Analytics Employer Advisory
Board. The project’s resources, findings, and outcomes will be shared with
industry, government, and higher education communities through presentations to
Advisory Board members, participation in regional and national conferences, and
publications in peer-reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.