* 2029677
* EAGER: Engineered nano-scale barrier to prevent viral infections
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Mark Humayun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 04/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

This project proposes to use in silico simulations to engineer nanoscale,
biocompatible, protective barrier that will enhance our first line of defenses -
prevention of pathogenic infection from entering and infecting the host. The
principal investigator aims to develop a topical method that will enhance
protection against virus attachment onto the nasal and oral as well as
conjunctival epithelial cells, while preserving normal physiology and
biochemistry. The project team will use computer models to engineer delivery
devices to produce the optimal particle characteristics to maximally prevent
microbial infection. If successful, this project can lead to paradigm changing
alternatives to reducing public health risk to air borne infections like
COVID-19 and seasonal flu which may be associated with devastating effects on
the United States and World economy. The proposed approach will be swiftly
conducted to present realistic solutions that may be useable in the face of this
COVID-19 pandemic as well as future flu viruses of similar
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fundamentally contribute to
modeling the interactions between viral membranes and nanoscale barriers. The
production of an innovative nanoscale biodegradable barrier may reduce the
socioeconomic and public health burden significantly by lowering the risk of
viral infection during the flu season or pandemics. The project team comprise of
an interdisciplinary team that include engineers, ophthalmologists, molecular
biologist, virologist and pharmacologist to explore a problem that could have a
tremendous impact on the way we respond to seasonal flu or pandemics. Besides
the potential benefits to reduce COVID-19 and influenza related deaths in the US
and worldwide, the proposed work will afford us the opportunity to train
engineering and biomedical students in a highly interdisciplinary research
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.