* 2029162
* NSFGEO-NERC: WAVE-induced Transport of Chemically Active Species in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere (WAVECHASM)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Chester Gardner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 301,360.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work. The WAVECHASM project seeks to improve
models of the atmosphere by including small scale processes from the upper
atmosphere into a large scale model housed at the NSF's National Center for
Atmospheric Research. This cross disciplinary project brings together the
physics of the near Earth space environment and atmospheric
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave-induced transport in the atmosphere is
important to a wide range of research problems, including general circulation
modelling, atmospheric chemistry modelling and thermal balance calculations.
However, computational cost constraints mean that it has not so far been
practical to include small-scale wave transport effects directly in global
models. WAVECHASM will enhance understanding of wave transport processes and
their relationships to chemistry by improving our ability to model the
constituent structure of the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT, 70-120 km).
The objectives are to quantify constituent transport theoretically, to develop a
wave-transport parameterization scheme suitable for incorporating into existing
global atmospheric chemistry models, and to use the upgraded models to
characterize wave-transport effects on the morphologies of key MLT constituents.
The US participants are responsible for developing the wave parameterization
scheme and testing its efficacy using extensive observational data collected by
numerous (unfunded) project partners from around the globe. The UK participants
are responsible for incorporating the parameterization scheme in the NCAR Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model and for assessing its performance against a
high-resolution regionally refined version of WACCM. Both the US and UK
participants with then use the upgraded models to quantify the wave- and
turbulence-induced vertical fluxes of key MLT species (Na, Fe, OX, HOX, COX and
NOX) and determine their relationships to wave sources in the troposphere and
stratosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.