* 2029145
* Chemo-Mechanical Coupling in the Erosion of Degradable Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Shengqiang Cai, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2023
* USD 330,515.00

This grant will focus on investigating the erosion of degradable polymers
subject to the concurrent actions of mechanical force and a reactive
environment. Degradable polymers have recently attracted increasing attention
for their great potential of reducing polymer waste and diverse biomedical
applications. In practice, degradable polymers often carry mechanical load
during their degradation. As a result, the mechanical force will inevitably
influence the erosion process of degradable polymers, and the degradation
process will also gradually change the polymer's mechanical properties. Despite
its importance in applications, the understanding of the interplay between
mechanics and chemistry in degradable polymers has so far been extremely
limited. This research program aims to use both experimental and theoretical
approaches to investigate the fundamental science governing the erosion of
degradable polymers under complex chemical and mechanical actions. This research
will contribute to the intense global effort to develop new degradable polymers
for reducing polymer waste as well as the incessant exploration of new
biodegradable polymers for novel biomedical applications. The impact of the
project will be further broadened via the integrated education and outreach
programs including interdisciplinary education and training opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students, internships for disadvantaged, first
generation high school and college students in the greater San Diego area and a
STEM program for academically-advanced 7-10th grade students from
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
discover the chemo-mechanical coupling effects in degradable polymers during its
erosion. The research objectives of this project include: (a) establishing a new
theoretical framework for predicting the time-dependent behaviors of degradable
polymers during the erosion process;(b) creating a new model for predicting
stress corrosion cracking in degradable polymers;(c) uncovering how applied
stresses may affect the erosion modes of a degradable polymer (i.e., surface
erosion vs. bulk erosion);(d)revealing the effects of applied stress on the
morphological change, induction time and front propagation speed of degradable
polymers during the surface erosion process. The project will create new
knowledge of the interplay between chemistry and mechanics in degradable
polymers, thereby laying the foundation for quantitatively predicting the chemo-
mechanical behaviors of degradable polymers and designing new degradable
polymers for diverse applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.