* 2029281
* RAPID: Ecological Dynamics of Human Coronavirus
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* John Yin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

With the zoonotic spillover of coronavirus into humans and the rapid emergence
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), humanity faces its first global pandemic in
more than a century. Current molecular, cellular and animal studies of the
infectious agent, SARS-CoV-2, use purified virus stocks that ignore a more
likely scenario which is that the natural infection spreads as a mixture of
active and defective virus strains. This project is developing mathematical
models and wet-lab experiments on human coronaviruses that highlight how
ecological interactions between such strains and their host cells critically
impact the dynamics of virus growth, spread and ultimately their ability to
cause disease. The developed models account for the presence of defective virus
strains. The broader impact of the results of this project would guide clinical
and front-line researchers with direct access to patients, in exploring broader
and deeper measures of the infection dynamics and in applying novel therapies.
The project has potential to significantly impact the development of strategies
that mitigate the pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
mathematical models and performs wet-lab experiments on human coronaviruses. The
outcome will highlight how ecological interactions between strains and their
host cells could critically impact the dynamics of virus growth, spread and
ultimately their ability to cause disease. The project goals are to: (i) extract
essential mechanisms and parameters of coronavirus intracellular growth from the
literature, (ii) build mathematical models that account for the kinetics of
viral entry, gene expression, genome replication and particle assembly in the
absence and presence of defective interfering (DI) particles, and (iii)
implement wet-lab experiments to demonstrate the emergence of DI particles from
coronavirus cultures, activation immune cytokine signaling, and validate the
intracellular kinetic models. This RAPID award is made by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.