* 2029167
* Building a Chemistry and Biochemistry Targeted Learning Community: The Impact of Vertical Mentoring on STEM Student Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2025
* Robert Iafe, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 10/31/2025
* USD 999,875.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at California State University San Marcos. This university is a Hispanic-
serving Institution that serves a primarily commuter student population. Over
its five-year duration, this project will fund scholarships of up to four years
to 20 unique full-time students, in three cohorts. Scholarship recipients will
be embedded in a 30-student Chemistry and Biochemistry Targeted Learning
Community. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective support activities that include a cohort
model for coursework; peer, graduate student, faculty, and professional
mentoring; and academic and professional workshops. Some learning community
participants will become peer mentors in subsequent learning community cohorts
to support the creation of a sustainable mentoring community. Given the
university’s Hispanic-serving status, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM fields. It can also contribute new understanding about the
impacts of a discipline-specific learning community with a multi-level vertical
mentoring experience and co-curricular support on students’ advancement to STEM-
related careers and/or graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. A robust project
evaluation will use a comparison group approach to probe the relative importance
of the scholarship relative to other aspects of the model. Non-cognitive
factors, such as sense of community, have also been demonstrated to affect STEM
student persistence. However, little is known about how these factors affect
chemistry and biochemistry students at a Hispanic-serving Institution with a
commuter population. A mixed-methods study will investigate the sense of student
community and the effect of project activities on departmental and institutional
change. The project has the potential to advance understanding about how student
community develops and how it relates to retention rates and post-graduate
competitiveness in STEM careers. Formative and summative evaluation data will be
collected through surveys, focus groups, and institutional records. Results of
this project will be made available through peer-reviewed publications,
conference presentations, and outreach to other four-year campuses. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.