* 2029498
* RAPID: Understanding increased social bias during the COVID-19 crisis in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Peter Enns, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2021
* USD 192,235.00

Research has found that disruptive social events can lead to increased social
bias toward outgroup members. This research examines this relationship in the
context of the COVID-19 crisis in the United States, which has adversely
affected the health and economic well-being of millions of Americans. Although
numerous incidents of bias directed toward immigrants and people of Asian
descent have been reported since the outbreak began, research is needed to
understand the extent of this bias and the factors that produce it. This
research will address this need, by analyzing both existing as well as new
survey data from nationally representative samples of Americans collected
throughout much of 2020, as the crisis emerged and continues to evolve. The
results will provide insights into how COVID-19 is affecting social attitudes in
the United States, and more generally, into the ways that diverse societies
respond to large-scale disruptions that threaten their way of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis that the
relationship between COVID-19 risk perceptions and social bias may be less
straightforward than existing theory and research suggest, and that this
relationship may vary as a function of local threat conditions, type of
perceived risk (health vs. economic), and personal characteristics. The research
team analyzes public opinion data from leading survey organizations to test this
hypothesis. In one component of the research, the team collects new data from a
representative sample of the United States public to measure attitudes toward
immigration and toward members of different racial and ethnic groups, alongside
attitudes about COVID-19. They repeat this survey throughout the spring, summer,
and fall of 2020 to study how these attitudes and their relationship may change
in real time. In a second component of the research, they analyze existing
survey data on COVID-19 attitudes that have been collected since February 2020.
By combining new data with existing data, they are building a comprehensive
dataset featuring thousands of survey interviews on COVID-19 attitudes and
social bias spanning most of 2020. This research will generate robust estimates
of COVID-19 attitudes and social bias, and their degree of stability versus
change, as the crisis continues to unfold. By revealing where and when social
bias is most prevalent, this research will help diverse societies such as the
United States protect their residents against negative treatment the next time a
similar crisis emerges, as well as during less severe incidents of disruption
and insecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.