* 2029911
* RAPID: Development and Testing of Low-Cost Sensor Platforms for SARS-CoV-2 in Aerosols
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted human health on a global scale, with over a
quarter million fatalities to date. There is growing evidence that COVID-19 is
transmitted by the presence of SARS-COV2 virus in small respiratory droplets
known as aerosols. To slow transmission of COVID-19, we need a better
understanding of how much virus travels through the air in these droplets.
Current methods to measure the virus are too time consuming to provide
information necessary to fully combat transmission through air. Using
nanotechnology, the proposed research will develop a faster way to measure
viruses in small droplets. This will allow us to measure the virus in more
locations to track them as they move through indoor air. The project team
leverages research expertise in nanotechnology, aerosol science, and viral
detection. Successful completion of this project will lead to production of a
more rapid COVID-19 analysis tool that does not require RNA extraction and can
be used for rapid and inexpensive testing. Results will be used to evaluate the
scientific validity of the “six-foot rule” recommended for social
distancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need for rapid
and sensitive environmental detection of the respiratory virus SARS-CoV2, the
agent responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Most current approaches for SARS-
CoV2 detection rely upon RT-qPCR for quantification of viral RNA. These
techniques are both labor and cost intensive. The goal of this research is to
develop a rapid SARS-CoV2 detection method to test the hypothesis that SARS-CoV2
is spread by aerosols. A second goal is to assess whether the recommended six-
foot social distancing guideline is scientifically valid, as research supporting
this recommendation is sparse. These goals will be achieved through the
development of a low-cost sensor platform for the rapid detection of aerosolized
SARS-CoV2 virus that uses surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) to detect
viruses in under an hour. The secondary objective of this study is to deploy the
developed platform within the built environment to quantify SARS-CoV2 transport.
The project team includes researchers with complimentary expertise in nanosensor
development, bioaerosol characterization, and virus detection. In the
development of the sensor platform we will examine virus recovery and detection
using both plastic and fabric coupons as well as gold-nanocellulose and gold-
adhesive tape SERS substrates. Transport of aerosolized SARS-CoV2 in the built
environment will be assessed using Phi6 (a surrogate for SARS-Cov2) and heat-
inactivated SARS-CoV2 nebulized to generate aerosols and droplets with sizes and
velocities consistent with human breathing, talking, and coughing. The low-cost
sensor platform will be deployed at various distances from an aerosolization
source. Virus concentrations will be measured using the SERS assay and compared
to results using RT-qPCR for validation. This effort will be the first to
explicitly focus on development of low-cost SERS-based sensor platforms for
detection of SARS-CoV2 within aerosols or droplets. Additional societal benefits
will result from assessment of the validity of the “six foot” social-distancing
recommendation for SARS-CoV2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.