* 2029558
* Harnessing Nitrogen Vacancy Centers for Hybrid Quantum Information Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Chunhui Du, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2024
* USD 345,000.00

Currently much progress has been witnessed in the quantum-information
technologies. The emerging quantum information applications serve as a
transformative operation platform enabling an unprecedented data storage volume,
processing speed, parallelization, as well as robust strategies against random
and malignant perturbations. Many of those advantages derive from their quantum-
mechanical nature endowed by excellent quantum coherence, controllable
entanglement, and high fidelity of operations, which enable opportunities for
outperforming their classical counterparts. Known as single-spin quantum bits,
nitrogen vacancy centers, optically-active atomic defects in diamond, are known
for their intrinsically long coherence time, single-spin addressability, and
notable versatility in a broad temperature range, offering remarkable
opportunities in designing multifunctional quantum-information systems. This
proposal aims to integrate nitrogen vacancy centers with functional spintronic
devices to develop hybrid quantum architectures, providing opportunities to
develop nitrogen-vacancy-based quantum computers. The proposed research project
will promote the participation of a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students from physics and engineering departments and outreach activities will
include lectures and demos to nearby high schools and community colleges. The
proposed research and education activities will increase the societyâ€™s awareness
in material science and quantum information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to address the
major challenges facing quantum-computing with nitrogen vacancy centers by
electrically manipulating the quantum spin states of nitrogen vacancy centers
via the localized microwave magnetic fields generated by spin-torque nano-
oscillators. By introducing the single-magnon mode sustained by a one-
dimensional magnetic coupler, macroscale entanglement between distant nitrogen
vacancy spin qubits can be established. The mutual interaction between spin-
torque nano-oscillators and nitrogen vacancy centers can be controlled in a
scalable fashion down to a sub-micrometer regime, which significantly improves
the scalability of nitrogen vacancy centers in developing quantum electronic
devices. By developing nitrogen-vacancy-magnon-based hybrid quantum systems and
demonstrating their operation in an ambient environment, it is proposed a
compatible, solid-state-based quantum-operation platform, which can be
conveniently extended to the on-chip devices. It is expected new opportunities
will emerge for designing high-density, scalable quantum memory and
significantly promote the role of nitrogen vacancy centers in developing next-
generation quantum technologies. The study will also elucidate the intriguing
science of spin-torque nano-oscillators. Nitrogen vacancy centers will provide
information to access the underlying spin transport and dynamic behaviors in
nano-spintronic systems and provide guidelines to design advanced magnetic
materials to improve the performance of spintronic electronics for future
transformative information technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.