* 2029410
* Collaborative Research: Workshop proposal: Building Foundations for Engineering Faculty in Engineering Education Research
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Karin Jensen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 67,592.00

Engineering faculty bring an important perspective to engineering education
research, yet they are rarely formally trained in educational research methods.
Training engineering faculty in engineering education research will support
faculty adopting research-based practices in the classroom and inform advising,
programming, and policies. This project will develop a series of virtual
workshops to support engineering faculty in developing educational research
skills and will facilitate their integration into the engineering education
research community. The workshops will also create a collaborative community of
engineering faculty and educational research mentors that will support the
development of engineering faculty and the success of engineering education
research projects funded by the NSF. Sustained engagement of engineering faculty
in educational research will create synergies between engineering education
research and engineering education practice. Outcomes of this project will
include (1) publicly available, archived resources about research in engineering
education, (2) a sustainable community that supports the success of engineering
faculty conducting engineering education research. The archived resources will
be hosted on a public website and available to any faculty interested in
learning educational research methods to improve engineering education. The
community will connect engineering faculty with engineering education research
experts and facilitate future opportunities for collaboration. These outcomes
will ultimately strengthen and diversify the engineering education research
community and make educational research more accessible to engineering faculty,
which will in turn support training the future engineering workforce via
implementation of research-based practices in engineering classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual workshop series will provide training,
structured support, and a virtual community of practice for NSF Research
Initiation in Engineering Formation (RIEF) program awardees to promote their
sustained engagement in engineering education research through the development
of research-related social capital, which enhances the flow of information,
develops desirable credentials, and reinforces research identity. The team will
use social network analysis and surveys throughout the two-year project to study
how interactions (1) among program awardees and (2) between awardees and members
of the engineering education research community influence the development of
research-related social capital. The workshops will support the success of
funded RIEF projects, helping program mentees fully integrate into the
engineering education research community during and beyond their grant cycle,
providing program mentors access to engineering education research resources to
support their mentoring, developing an external support structure for mentees to
learn about common research practices, and cultivating a community of other
research mentors. This project will build program participants’ professional
networks in engineering education research by increasing availability and
accessibility of past and present program mentees and mentors, engineering
education research content experts, people in leadership positions in the field,
potential future collaborators, and others positioned to support or promote the
work. This work will accelerate participants’ development of both strong and
weak ties and facilitate their purposeful use of those embedded resources to
help program mentees accomplish their engineering education research goals
during the two-year RIEF project cycle and beyond. The project will study the
impact of participation in a community of practice in developing engineering
faculty in engineering education research as well as identify how program
mentors effectively build mentee social capital. The project will build the
engineering education research mentorship community, support engineering faculty
professional development, and promote wider implementations of research-based
practices to support students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.