* 2029153
* SBIR Phase I:  IM3UNE: A Platform for Integrated Monitoring, Mapping, Modeling and Understanding of Novel Epidemics Like COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Ashlee Valente, GEOMETRIC DATA ANALYTICS
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,631.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to assist with preparedness and decision-
making for situations like the COVID-19 pandemic. This health crisis has been
exacerbated by a lack of real-time information or predictive information about
the extent, location, and spread of the disease. This Phase I project ingests
data streams from government agencies, healthcare providers, and the general
public, returning real-time, actionable information to assist in guiding a broad
and coordinated response. While this platform is particularly relevant in the
COVID-19 pandemic, it is disease agnostic, and will have utility for seasonal
influenza and other infectious diseases, positively impacting public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will create a platform aimed at providing real-time
identification of infectious disease outbreaks and predictions of disease
spread, with an initial focus on COVID-19. Among the gaps in the response to the
COVID-19 pandemic is capability to accurately track the magnitude, location, and
spread of infectious agents. This project aims to assess and demonstrate the
value of leveraging multiple modalities and sources of data for early detection
and prediction of disease outbreaks, with focus on COVID-19. The approach will
combine data fusion methods and epidemiological modeling approaches with
continual input from subject matter experts in an effort to generate actionable
information and predictive models related to disease spread. A variety of data
streams providing information on disease incidence, transportation data, and
sub-population interaction data will be used to construct progressively more
sophisticated SEIR models. These efforts will result in an improved
understanding of the utility and applicability of various data streams to
epidemiological monitoring and forecasting, as well as platform for users of
various levels of technical expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.