* 2029324
* Scholarships, Targeted Support, and Leadership Development to Increase Retention and Graduation of Math-Intensive STEM Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Daniel Lopez, Brookdale Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 11/30/2025
* USD 648,737.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Brookdale Community College. Over its five-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to thirty-two unique full-time students pursuing
Associate's degrees in engineering, computer science, chemistry, physics, or
mathematics. The Scholars will enter as three annual cohorts and receive
scholarships for up to three years. In addition to scholarships, Scholars will
have access to multiple supporting activities including: 1) a summer bridge
program incorporating academic, success, and cultural facets; 2) a weekly
skills-enhancement session tied to mathematics courses from pre-calculus to
Calculus II; 3) mentoring by faculty members from the Scholar’s discipline; and
4) a Leadership Seminar that will feature industry, faculty, and student
speakers and workshops designed to build leadership skills and belonging in
STEM. Scholars will be expected to engage in a leadership activity during their
second year. A research project, internship, or collaboration with a potential
four-year transfer institution will serve as Scholars’ capstone experience.
These support structures and leadership development activities are designed to
help level the playing field in STEM education by addressing academic and
cultural disparities. In addition, they will help prepare students to assume
leadership roles after graduation, thereby contributing to a more diverse and
globally competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific objectives include
increasing the retention and completion rates in the five targeted majors,
raising the completion rates in the four-course mathematics sequence common to
these majors, and enhancing the Scholars' sense of STEM identity. Course data
and student assessments will be used to study the effectiveness of supplemental
instruction in mathematics courses. Student reflective journals, pre- and post-
assessments, and individual and group interviews will be used to advance the
understanding of the conditions under which students develop identities as
scientists. Through dissemination of program components and outcomes at regional
and national conferences and in publications, insights and best practices will
be shared and adapted on a larger scale and at additional institutions. This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.