* 2029684
* Rapid: The Effects of COVID-19 on Household Energy Insecurity
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* David Konisky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2022
* USD 191,690.00

This project examines the economic and social impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
on energy insecurity among low-income U.S. households. Energy insecurity, which
is when a household is unable to pay its energy bills, is a significant problem
for low-income Americans, among other groups. In 2015, for example,
approximately 14 million households reported that they had unpaid utility bills;
17 million had received a disconnect notice from a utility company; and 2
million were disconnected from the electric grid. When a household faces energy
insecurity, the residents may engage in risky coping strategies, including
financial decisions and dangerous household heating behaviors. Such households
may also have to make difficult tradeoffs between energy and food, health
services, or other necessities. The problem of household energy insecurity is
likely to grow due to the economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The results from this project include immediately salient information about the
extent of energy insecurity among vulnerable U.S. households and reveal the ways
in which affected people are coping with their energy costs through formal
government assistance programs, social networks and connections, and other
strategies. The results provide critical information to policymakers, utilities
and electricity providers, nonprofit leaders, and other stakeholders that are
designing and implementing the response to COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
researchers administer a four-wave panel survey of low-income U.S. households
(i.e., income at or below 200% of the federal poverty line) to examine the
prevalence of energy insecurity and the strategies that people are using to cope
with additional material hardship generated by the response to the COVID-19
pandemic. The panel survey of a nationally-representative sample of low-income
households begin during the early stages of displacement, and then re-interview
study participants three times over the succeeding 12 months. The main
objectives are to measure and evaluate whether: 1) households that are more
sensitive to energy insecurity are already worse off, and if matters continue to
worsen in subsequent periods as economic displacement continues; 2) households
able to access financial assistance programs and social networks are better off
than those that cannot; 3) households that suffer material hardship, and
experience more severe energy insecurity, adopt more risky coping strategies;
and 4) households with access to relief programs are less likely to cope through
risky financial and behavioral decisions. The project provides new theoretical
and empirical insights into energy insecurity in the U.S., building on the
research teamâ€™s previous adaptation of the Vulnerability Scoping Diagram
framework to conceptualize household energy insecurity. This framework, enhanced
by insights from research on household decision-making during crises, provides
theoretically-informed hypotheses about how household energy insecurity is
likely to be affected by the economic displacement caused by the government
response to COVID-19. The survey designed for this project will be the first
panel study in the energy insecurity literature, enabling the researchers to
measure key concepts over time at the individual level and capture baseline
conditions during a period when insecurity is likely to be amplified by sudden
material hardship. Moreover, the survey provides for the consideration of
numerous types of sensitivity to policy-induced material hardship as well as
measurement of both formal and informal coping
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.