* 2029504
* SBIR Phase I:  Genetically Engineered BCG as a Microbe-Based Platform for Vaccination Against COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Borys Shor, MANHATTAN BIOSOLUTIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a safe and affordable COVID-19
vaccination technology, with broader utility in managing other contagious
diseases. The new platform is based on modified bacteria, with a long history as
a safe pediatric immunization for tuberculosis. The proposed technology is
expected to show heat-stability, safety, cost-effectiveness, and ease of mass
production. It can be used for children and at-risk groups including first
responders, the elderly, and those with underlying conditions. This can be
delivered in emerging and disadvantaged environments as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project enables a novel microbial vaccine
platform based on recombinant BCG bacteria (rBCG) engineered to target SARS-
CoV-2 and protect against COVID-19. The goal of this project is to develop BCG
that expresses SARS-CoV-2 protein fragments, which could lead to the induction
of appropriate immune responses against SARS-CoV-2 specific antigens. For this
project, new rBCG candidates with the highest secretion and durable expression
levels of viral polypeptides will be selected and prioritized, based on their
biological properties. The rBCG vaccines will be evaluated for safety and
immunogenicity in animal models. Promising candidates that show no adverse
events and induce robust T-cell and antibody responses will be selected for
future preclinical studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.