* 2029038
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Privacy for All: Ensuring Fair Privacy Protection in Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Wendy Hui Wang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 12/31/2024
* USD 699,540.00

Advances in the field of artificial intelligence and machine learning have
resulted in algorithms and technologies for improving cybersecurity. However,
machine learning is also vulnerable to novel and sophisticated privacy attacks
that leak information about the data used for learning and prediction. For
example, by accessing the prediction results of a machine learning model that
discovers the genetic basis of a particular disease, the privacy attack can
infer if a certain patient's clinical record was used to train this model. The
privacy attack can be discriminatory in the sense that it has a higher
successful rate for certain demographic groups (e.g., females) than the other
groups (e.g., males). However, none of the existing defense mechanisms against
these attacks consider such disparate vulnerability and thus perform disparate
efforts across different groups. This raises the serious concern of fair
privacy, i.e., how to ensure all groups and individuals are protected
equitably?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the core issues of
fair privacy from both technical and social perspectives. The project has five
research thrusts: (1) formalizing the concept of fair privacy quantitatively;
(2) unveiling the existence of disparate vulnerability to two popularly-studied,
machine learning enabled privacy attacks, namely membership inference attack
(MIA) and attribute inference attack (AIA), and investigating the underlying
causes of such vulnerability unfairness; (3) examining the fairness of the
existing defense mechanisms against MIA and AIA, and studying how these defense
mechanisms affect vulnerability unfairness; (4) designing effective mitigation
mechanisms that enable the defense mechanisms to provide equitable protection
against MIA and AIA; and (5) performing extensive social studies to explore
important social issues related to fair privacy, and utilizing social science to
shape the research of fair privacy. The research outcomes will be disseminated
broadly through the development of new courses for both STEM and social sciences
curricula, involving students into research through various events and student
societies. Students at different levels in both disciplines of STEM and liberal
arts will be exposed to cutting-edge research in security, privacy, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.