* 2029690
* RAPID: Smart Ventilation Control May Reduce Infection Risk for COVID-19 in Public Buildings
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Qingsheng Wang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 125,417.00

During the current COVID-19 pandemic, airborne transmission of the virus through
exhaled aerosols is a likely explanation for the rapid rate of new infections.
The risk of infection with COVID-19 could be reduced by employing feasible
measures in public buildings, such as smart and enhanced Heating, Ventilation,
and Air- conditioning (HVAC) design and operations, higher humidity levels,
surface cleaning and hygiene protocols, revised spatial configuration, etc. This
project aims to investigate a novel smart ventilation control strategy using a
CO2-based indicator to operate under a normal mode and a pandemic mode as
appropriate for common public buildings (e.g., office buildings, classroom
buildings, retail stores). These buildings are designed and operated in normal
conditions by default. The question to be studied is that, with the current HVAC
equipment and systems already installed in existing public buildings, can
operations be modified via smart ventilation control by diluting the air in a
space with cleaner air from outdoors to reduce infection risk for occupants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ventilation controls in public buildings under a pandemic
represent significant challenges. In this project, the research team will look
into the problem of potentially reducing infection risk with coronavirus through
three objectives: 1) Obtain a minimum ventilation rate for different HVAC
systems in most common public buildings to potentially reduce infection risk
through a risk analysis with Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations; 2)
Establish a scientific correlation between CO2 concentration with the potential
infection risk in spaces in public buildings to better monitor the infection
risk with numerical studies and limited field experiments; and 3) Evaluate a
novel smart ventilation control strategy that can switch between normal
operation and operation under a pandemic through a co-simulation of energy
performance and CFD simulations. COVID-19 has generated immense social-economic
impact, which may be mitigated by the proposed smart ventilation control in
public buildings to reduce the risk of being infected with COVID-19 during
occupation of public buildings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.