* 2029077
* Collaborative Research: Smart Stent for Post-Endovascular Aneurysm Repair Surveillance
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Haijun Liu, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

An abdominal aortic aneurysm is the most commonly diagnosed arterial aneurysm
that is an abnormal bulge on the aorta associated with the gradual thinning of
the vessel wall. With mortality as high as 80% in cases of ruptures, abdominal
aortic aneurysm accounts for more than 10,000 deaths in the United States every
year. One of the most common treatments is endovascular aneurysm repair, which
redirects blood flow away from the aortic wall and bypasses the weak spots by
implanting a covered stent graft in the aneurysm sac via a minimally invasive
procedure. Among the stent recipients, 30% of them can experience persistent
blood flow into the aneurysm sac, called ‘endoleak,’ leading to aneurysm
expansion and rupture. Thus, blood pressure and flow near the stent should be
periodically monitored. However, the commonly used imaging technique is highly
dependent on patient compliance, and its repeatedly administrated iodinated
contrast poses a risk of chronic kidney disease. As such, the overall objective
of this research is to create a Smart Stent based on a flexible and battery-less
membrane-based sensor and wireless bioelectronics with a deep-learning algorithm
to realize automated diagnosis of endoleak. This collaborative research will
integrate the scientific findings and discoveries with educational venues for
students across disciplines (Electrical and Mechanical Engineering), generations
(K-12 to lifelong learners), and two institutes (Temple University and Kansas
State University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research
is to develop a Smart Stent for post-endovascular aneurysm repair surveillance
that combines a flexible, and battery-less bioelectronic system with a deep-
learning algorithm to realize automated diagnosis of endoleak. The central
hypothesis is that Smart Stent, created by conformally weaving piezoelectric
porous membrane sensors inside and outside of the conventional stent graft, will
bring a novel electromechanical wireless biotelemetry scheme whose sensor data
can be directly analyzed by a deep-learning model for classification of complex
hemodynamics. The intellectual merits of the proposed research include 1) design
of an auxetic porous piezoelectric membrane for the Smart Stent that is
optimized for the multi-modal sensing of blood pressure and flow, 2)
microfabrication of complex 3D structure and surface-integrated micro coils for
near-field magnetic induction communication, 3) a novel electromechanical
interrogation scheme that converts energy from physiological information (e.g.,
blood pressure and flow) into wireless magnetic induction signals, 4) a
comprehensive evaluation using a precise aneurysm phantom model to build
baseline data for cardiovascular research, and 5) a deep learning-enabled
sensing classification algorithm that offers real-time, quantitative, and
automated assessment of five different types of endoleak. The research will
establish a machine learning-enabled wireless sensing system that will spur new
theory and understanding for the next generation implantable biomedical
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.