* 2029375
* EFRI E3P: Valorization of Plastic Waste via Advanced Separation and Processing
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,109,998.00

This project aims to reduce both the amount of waste plastic that ends up in
landfills or incinerators and the amount of virgin plastic required for new
products by focusing on two challenging issues: (1) sorting of mixed plastic
waste and (2) valorization of recovered plastic. High-throughput, automated
sorting will be accomplished through the combination of novel sensor technology
that will register the molecular signature of each piece of plastic, and machine
learning that, on the basis of this molecular signature, will identify in real
time the specific type of each piece of plastic. From the integration of these
new capabilities with existing technologies, an advanced mixed waste plastic
sorting process emerges that is adaptable to sorting other materials to enable
their recycling as well. Upcycling of sorted plastic will be achieved through
dissolution of select types of plastic in environmentally responsible solvents
in order to recover the desirable type of plastic (i.e., polyolefins), separate
it from additives or impurities, and render it suitable for reuse in new
products. Tailored chemical modification of polyolefins will produce functional
waxes that can serve as building blocks for high-value materials. This research
contributes to the Nation's advanced manufacturing capabilities and helps meet
both consumer demand for and corporate commitments to incorporating a high
fraction of recycled plastic into their products. A broad range of focused
activities are organized to facilitate the participation of a diverse student
cohort in the research tasks and the sharing of the knowledge generated with the
local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this fundamental
engineering research project is to enable a significant increase in both the
fraction of waste plastic that is being recycled and in the value of plastic
recovered for use in new products. Two aims will be pursued toward this
objective: (Aim 1): high-throughput multi-modal sensor recognition and
autonomous sorting of plastic waste and (Aim 2) physical and chemical molecular
valorization of recovered polyolefins. Aim 1 focuses on developing novel optical
sensors and advanced machine learning for the real-time, high-throughput
molecular-level detection of different types of plastics. The detection
capabilities will be coupled with vision-based recognition and tracking. The
integration of the newly developed capabilities with existing technologies will
result in an advanced sorting process that is deployable in existing materials
recovery facilities, adaptable to variable plastic waste composition, scale-
able, upgradable, and transferable to other industries. Aim 2 will develop
physical and chemical methodologies for the upcycling of plastics.
Environmentally responsible solvents will be used for the recovery of pristine
polymers via dissolution/precipitation processing of polyolefin-based plastics
that incorporate other polymers, additives, fillers, and/or impurities. From a
polyolefin starting material, telechelic short-chain polyethylene waxes are
developed, which can be used as building blocks for high-value materials such as
long-chain aliphatic polyester, cross-linked polyolefins, and resins for
additive manufacturing technologies. The fundamental and applied knowledge
generated in this project is poised to have a transformative impact on
addressing the grand challenge of significantly increasing the global plastic
recycling rates. This grand challenge is tackled here in a manner that is
environmentally responsible, technically feasible, economically competitive, and
societally beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.