* 2029027
* SWIFT:SMALL: Dynamic Wireless Resource Management and Transceiver Adaptation for Efficient Spectrum Utilization and Coexistence
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 412,794.00

Advanced wireless networks and technologies are taking the center stage in the
era of cyber-based data analytics and artificial intelligence (AI). Faced with
the surging needs for high speed wireless data connections driven by widespread
AI applications, effective solutions for effective spectrum utilization and
coexistence in broadband wireless networks become increasingly critical. This
project aims to develop new estimation methods and resource management tools for
wide-area radio networks to efficiently and accurately assess the radio channel
conditions and coverage quality map (radiomap) for providing high quality
services to the huge number of smartphones and other wireless devices. The
outcomes of this project can contribute significantly to the deployment of high
speed wireless services and their broadening applications in networked AI
applications. The broader impact from this research will also come through many
educational opportunities by providing opportunities in STEM to K-12, women, and
under-represented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In wireless networks,
accurate forward link RF channel estimation is critical to achieving high speed
data services to mobile terminals. At the same time, radiomap of RF signal
effect in a complex coverage environment provides vital information to
coordinate network service stations to efficient utilize limited RF resources
and to achieve effective interference mitigation in protected regions. This
project aims to develop new practical algorithms and resource management tools
for wide-area radio networks to efficiently and accurately assess the radio
channel conditions and interference radiomap, to facilitate coexistence with
protected RF applications serving potentially passive users. Specifically, the
research group will leverage recent successes of machine learning and data
analytics across a wide range of engineering and scientific applications to
develop innovative learning-based algorithms for accurate RF channel estimation
by minimizing the consumption of valuable resources while improving wireless
quality and spectrum utilization. To simultaneously protect sensitive nodes of
coexisting wireless applications, the project utilizes low cost and distributed
sensor measurements to derive accurate radiomap estimation. Furthermore, the
research group will extensively investigate the impact of spectrum allocation
and dynamic link-adaptation on interference mitigation to protect sensitive
services in designated areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.