* 2029860
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Understanding How Enamel Prism Lattices Promote a Remarkable Combination of Fracture and Wear Resistance in Grazing Mammal Dentitions
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Brandon Krick, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 54,002.00

Fracture and wear are common issues in engineering - to the extent that the
terms "worn," "fractured," and "broken" are generally synonymous with the end-
of-utility of devices. In many cases, traditional materials fail to meet the
complex, simultaneous performance requirements that would be ideal for next
generation engineering systems. The enamel of the teeth of grazing animals
represents one of nature's most remarkable biological materials -- a ceramic-
like composite showing exceptional strength, toughness, wear-resistance, and
ability to slow crack propagation. This is an important set of properties for a
structure that is key to long-term survival in these animals - as functional
teeth are required for feeding. This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project will study these damage-tolerant biomaterials using a
combination of evolutionary biology, biomechanics, and materials science.
Results and methods from this research will be of considerable interest to
investigators in many disciplines, including engineering, materials science,
evolutionary biology, ecology, comparative anatomy, mammalogy, and paleontology.
The research will also support the development of novel, sustainable materials
with improved wear and fracture behavior. Graduate students will be involved in
this truly interdisciplinary project and learn how the various fields can work
together to tackle challenging questions. This research will also introduce a
more effective, evolutionary approach for exploring nature for biomimetic
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this interdisciplinary research is to
specifically understand the biomechanical form, function and performance of
enamel lattices, known as Modified Radial Enamel (MRE), in the grinding teeth of
large herbivorous mammals. Samples will be obtained from numerous species,
including equines (horses), bovids (e.g. bison and cattle) and suids (e.g.
warthogs). This study will specifically focus on how these animals' teeth endure
tens to hundreds of millions of high stress contact loading cycles and impacts
while chewing tough and abrasive plant matter, such as grasses whose roots are
laden with hard, fracture-promoting sediment inclusions. The underlying
hypothesis is that MRE is an evolutionarily optimized compromise for: 1)
incredible fracture resistance due to prism arrangements that localize damage
and strategically control crack direction; 2) unexpected strength and toughness
made possible by compliant proteinaceous prism sheaths that circumvent
hydroxyapatite's inherent brittleness; and 3) wear resistance conveyed through
hard, hyper-mineralized, oriented enamel prisms. The project will investigate
this hypothesis through two objectives. First, the study will use an
evolutionary biology approach to identify the ancestral enamel fabric character
states to MRE that independently evolved in horses, bovids and warthogs. From
this information, it will be possible to readily identify the specific
evolutionary modifications to the enamel fabrics that enabled grinding and
identify living species that can be used to undertake comparative biomechanical
assessment. Second, the project will investigate the structure-property
relationships of the enamel across multiple length scales by comprehensively
characterizing the material properties using micro-and nano-mechanical tools,
spectroscopy, and advanced electron microscopy. Teeth of grinding species with
MRE will be compared with close relatives that retain the ancestral enamel
fabrics, thereby revealing the salient anatomical changes that enabled the
optimized combination of biomechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.