* 2029282
* EFRI DCheM: One-step conversion of CH4 and CO2 to liquid fuels with the use of a multi-functional pseudo catalytic system
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Liang-Shih Fan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Stranded natural gas resources are currently flared due to economic limitations
associated with prohibitive transportation costs and small reservoir sizes.
Successfully transforming these remotely distributed gas resources to useful
energy products will contribute significantly to the U.S. energy economy and its
energy security. The goal of this project is to develop a small-scale modular
chemical processing system to convert stranded natural gas and carbon dioxide
into value-added liquid fuel products. This technology as proposed is
transformative and environmentally sustainable as it will achieve both the
monetization of stranded gas resources and will consume carbon dioxide as a
feedstock in the gas conversion process. The researchers are Ohio State
University (OSU) faculty members who will use a data-driven approach to
integrate the reactor system components and will further the fundamental
understanding of the gas upgrading chemistry by identifying an efficient
catalyst to promote the reactions. This interdisciplinary OSU project team will
work with industrial partners Velocys, Inc. and Jan Lerou LLC. to leverage their
industrial expertise to optimize the system design using an advanced
manufacturing protocol and state-of-the-art computational tools. The proposed
project will advance fundamental understanding of liquid fuel conversion
processes as well as provide multiple learning experiences for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students. The project team will work with local high
schools to promote the inclusion of under-represented students in its research
activities. The foundational knowledge generated by this project will also serve
as a science, engineering, and technology-oriented learning resource for
undergraduate and graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
addresses the technological and scientific barriers to building a thermo-
catalytic flared-gas reforming (TC-FGR) system for monetizing stranded gas
resources. The TC-FGR system is a small-scale, modular GTL (gas to liquid)
process that intensifies syngas production from natural gas and integrates a
commercially demonstrated micro-channel F-T (Fischer-Tropsch) synthesis system
in one reactor vessel. Furthermore, a novel pseudo-catalytic metal oxide (PMO)
material will be developed to reduce the unit operations required for
conventional small-scale F-T systems. The research team will develop the PMO
material using first-principles computational methods and experimental
parametric testing. The team also will develop a machine learning-informed
integrated, flexible reactor design that intensifies modular GTL systems and
will assess the economic feasibility of the proposed technology. The PMO is an
iron-based metal oxide composite, capable of exhibiting several oxidation
states, that allows CH4 to react with the PMO, abstracting the lattice oxygen to
form partial-combustion products CO and H2. At the same time, CO2/H2O re-
oxidizes the PMO forming additional CO/H2. This unique activation with the PMO
acting as the oxygen mediator adds additional degrees of freedom for process
optimization, enhancing the production rate of syngas as well as providing a
means of controlling its composition. The unique microchannel design used by the
industrial partner of this project results in enhanced heat and mass transfer
capabilities; this coupled with a highly active catalyst allows for productivity
that is 10-15 times higher than conventional F-T systems. The project will
synergistically use multi-scale models and advanced optimization/control methods
at every project step to ensure that the intensified TC-FGR system is viable in
distributed applications with small economic margins. The resulting integrated,
modular TC-FGR system can be deployed over several wells, providing a
transformative alternative to the wasteful gas flaring that is current practice.
Widespread applications of the TC-FGR stranded gas process will further mitigate
greenhouse gas emissions through carbon dioxide conversion. Sustainable
technology such as TC-FGR constitutes a bridge towards reducing the carbon
footprint of fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.