* 2029286
* Mps1 and regulation of kinetochore-microtubule interactions in meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Dean Dawson, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 735,690.00

The ability to accurately move chromosomes within the cell is crucial for an
organism’s survival. Successful cell division depends upon first duplicating the
genetic material contained within each chromosome, then actively partitioning
the chromosomes into two exact sets, and finally dividing the cell so each
daughter cell contains just one of the two chromosome sets. Sexually reproducing
organisms have two types of cell division, mitosis and meiosis. Mitosis produces
most cell types, whereas meiosis produces gametes. In both types of division,
chromosome movement is achieved by attaching cables, called microtubules, to a
connecting site on the chromosomes, called the kinetochore, and then shortening
the cables to pull the chromosomes to their destinations. The cables grow as two
arrays from opposite sides of the nucleus. To become attached to a cable end,
the duplicated chromosome pair must first move towards the middle of the
nucleus. The two types of chromosome segregating events, mitosis and meiosis,
share several similarities, but the molecular basis for several of their
differences are not known. Mps1 is a conserved protein that is essential in both
mitosis and meiosis, but with meiosis-specific functions that may reveal
fundamental differences in these processes. This project aims to distinguish the
different roles and molecular mechanisms of Mps1 in mitosis and meiosis. Mps1
localizes to kinetochores and may control chromosome movements by activating
other proteins to enable chromosome movements to the middle of the microtubule
arrays, connections to microtubule ends and shortening of microtubules to move
the chromosomes. This Project will have a Broader Impact by providing an
opportunity for Oklahoma high school and college students to perform independent
hypothesis-driven basic research projects. Students from local urban high
schools will have the opportunity to perform year-long research projects in
which they will investigate candidate proteins that might interact with Mps1 to
control chromosome movements. Each summer in a residential research program, two
students from rural areas of Oklahoma will be able to participate in an eight-
week research internship investigating the mechanisms by which Mps1 controls
chromosome movement. This project has the combined goal of advancing
understanding of a sophisticated cellular process and introducing students to a
culture of basic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate segregation of
chromosomes on the mitotic or meiotic spindle depends upon a series of
sequential steps. First chromosomes move towards the spindle mid-zone, a step
called chromosome congression. Second correct kinetochore-microtubule (k-MT)
attachments are formed. Then kinetochore microtubules depolymerize to promote
poleward chromosome migration. But what are the signals that trigger these
events? MPS1 encodes a conserved essential kinase that has been shown be
involved in several key steps in cell cycle progression and chromosome
segregation in both mitosis and meiosis in several organisms. Experiments from
fission yeast and mammals suggest the hypothesis that Mps1 promotes chromosome
gliding, a process that moves chromosomes to the spindle mid-zone in early
prometaphase. In addition, in budding yeast meiosis, Mps1 is required for
forming stable k-MT attachments, and is then needed to trigger MT de-
polymerization to promote poleward chromosome movement. This project tests the
hypothesis that Mps1 is a critical regulator of multiple sequential events in
chromosome segregation in budding yeast meiosis. This project will elucidate
novel mechanisms that drive ordered meiotic chromosome behavior. This project
has three objectives. The first is to determine whether several functions of
Mps1 are conserved in meiosis, including the MT-dependent sliding of chromosomes
from the poles to the spindle mid-zone, termed chromosome gliding. This
objective will also test the hypothesis that Mps1 is necessary for regulating
this process and determine its regulatory targets. The second objective is to
identify the roles that several protein phosphorylation targets of Mps1 have in
the three sequential steps in the bi-orientation process: congression to the
spindle mid-zone in early prometaphase, attachment of kinetochores to MTs, and
depolymerization of kinetochore MTs to trigger poleward chromosome movements.
The third objective takes advantage of a separation-of-function allele of MPS1
(mps1-R170S) that exhibits very mild mitotic defects, but profound meiotic
defects. Suppressor mutations that improve meiotic chromosome segregation in
mps1-R170S mutants have been isolated. These mutants will be evaluated to
identify the pathways in meiosis that are extraordinarily sensitive to Mps1
function. Together these experiments will elucidate the manner in which Mps1
helps control and direct chromosomes at multiple steps, from congression, to
microtubule attachment, to bi-orientation on the spindle in
meiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.