* 2029104
* RAPID: Lattice-Defective Copper Oxides as a Biocidal Tool for COVID-19 and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Laura Lewis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic has generated tremendous
interest in how the virus spreads throughout populations as well as how it is
deactivated. New types of surface treatments that exhibit antipathogenic
“contact-kill” capabilities are urgently sought to protect public health and
welfare. To this end, cuprous oxide is reported as a highly effective
antimicrobial compound; while the origin of its antimicrobial property remains
unknown, it is hypothesized to be a consequence of atomic-level copper vacancies
in its crystal lattice that provide highly charged atomic environments. These
locally energetic regions in the lattice are thought to disrupt and destroy cell
membranes and/or the protein shell of viruses. Interdisciplinary research
quantifies connections between the cuprous oxide lattice condition and its
biocidal activity to permit rational engineering of this abundant, inexpensive
and easily handled material for incorporation into coatings for public
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Correlations between the cuprous
oxide lattice defect condition and its antipathogenic response to representative
organisms are quantified through structural and electronic probes, including
magnetometry and photoabsorption. Lattice-defective cuprous oxide, synthesized
by high-energy mechanical processing, is incorporated into coatings and
subjected to biological assays to quantify any reduction in viable bacteria and
viruses after prolonged exposure. Students and junior researchers involved in
this project work at the typically unfrequented intersection of inorganic
materials science and biology. These tests, which are designed to simulate
actual conditions where a pathogen might survive on a given surface, provide
enabling knowledge to engineer cuprous oxide, and perhaps other oxide materials,
for antipathogenic purposes to address the current COVID-19 pandemic and to
proactively confront future health challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is being funded by the CARES Act supplemental funds allocated to
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.