* 2029678
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Childhood Technical Skill Development
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Dietrich Stout, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2022
* USD 16,458.00

Although children existed and contributed to prehistory, much of the research on
human evolution still focuses on adult behavior. Children’s cognitive and
physical abilities differ from those of adults, and therefore, researchers can
expect to find variation in how individuals at different phases of development
engage in evolutionarily important tasks such as stone toolmaking. Stone
toolmaking is widely hypothesized to have played a role in human cognitive
evolution, with ties to higher order brain functions such as planning, executive
control, working memory, and language. Experimental archaeological methods are
particularly well-positioned to investigate questions of age-related differences
in learning stone toolmaking because it allows researchers to recruit living
subjects, as opposed to analyzing archaeological remains, and examine how
participants of different ages engage in a stone toolmaking task. Here, the
focus is not just on the tools, themselves, but also on participants’ behavior
in making the tools and what sort of processes and conditions contribute to
effective learning of the skill. This dual perspective promotes insight into the
behavioral context surrounding stone toolmaking and can inform future research
on the evolution of behaviors, such as teaching, that are fundamental to the
human experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project
investigates developmental differences in stone knapping (shaping) skill
acquisition between adult and child subjects. Using experimental archaeological
methods, 45 adult and 45 child participants will be trained in an Oldowan-style,
"least effort" flake production task and compared using metrics of flaking
success and individual differences in cognitive ability, physical strength, and
personality characteristics. Individual differences data will also be used to
investigate within group variation in behavioral correlates of successful skill
acquisition for both adult and child participants. Addressing an understudied
area of research on human origins, results of this project will have
implications for the evolution of the human capacity for cumulative culture and
may serve as a reference point for existing archaeological assemblages that show
evidence of skill differentials between lithic artifacts. Additionally, this
project will serve as a form of science education outreach as part of its design
is as an archaeology-themed summer day camp for the children participating in
the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.