* 2029209
* RAPID: Addressing Families’ Covid-19 Information and Education Needs Through Podcast Media
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Amy Grack Nelson, Minnesota Public Radio
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter related to
the COVID-19 pandemic. This award is made by the AISL program in the Division of
Research on Learning, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act. The goal of this award is to advance understanding of how
children’s science podcasts can provide families with information to help ease
children’s anxiety and fears during a pandemic. The project’s hypothesis is that
through listening to Brains On! coronavirus-related episodes, children will
increase their understanding of science concepts related to the pandemic. As
they gain this understanding, it is predicted that their overall fear and
anxiety about the pandemic will diminish, they will feel empowered to ask
pandemic-related questions and will engage in more science- based conversations
with their family members. The project will develop three Brains On! podcast
episodes focused specifically on the COVID-19 pandemic for kids aged 5 to 12 and
their families. The research questions include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How and
to what extent do Brains On!’s coronavirus-based episodes help children and
their families understand and talk about science-related pandemic topics?
&lt;br/&gt;What kind of conversations are sparked by these
episodes?&lt;br/&gt;2. What kinds of questions do children have after listening
to the Brains On! coronavirus episodes and what are the reasons for their
questions? What can the questions tell us about the impact of listening on kids'
science engagement and learning?&lt;br/&gt;3. What resources do parents need to
answer children’s questions and help them understand science topics related to
the pandemic?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between a
media producer, Minnesota Public Radio and researchers at The Science Museum of
Minnesota. Brains On! already has a large listening audience, with 7 million
downloads a year, and more than 200,000 unique listeners a month and these new
episodes are likely to increase listenership further. The research findings will
be quickly disseminated to a wide range of audiences that can immediately apply
the findings to create media and other coronavirus-related educational resources
for families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's prior NSF funded projects have
found that previous Brains On! podcasts with a range of STEM content increase
the number and sophistication of the science questions children ask and lead to
science-based conversations with family members. This project will study the
impacts in relation to a singular topic, COVID-19. Three online surveys of
Brains On! listeners (families with children ages 5 - 12 years old) will be
conducted. The first survey to be conducted as soon as the project begins will
focus on parents reflecting on what information is needed at that stage of the
pandemic. Two additional listener surveys will occur immediately after new
COVID-19 podcast episodes are released. These surveys will ask content-specific
questions to understand how well the episode conveys that information to
children and their families, what conversations were sparked from the content,
and what additional information needs families have. Prior to administering each
of the three surveys, video-based think-aloud interviews with 10 families will
test and revise survey questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survey participants will
be recruited using language in Brains On! episodes, social media, website, and
newsletters. A sample size of around 1,000 for each of the surveys is planned
(based on a 95% confidence interval and ±3% sampling error). Analyses will
include descriptive statistics and thematic coding of open-ended survey
questions. Subgroup samples, when large enough will look at differences in
responses by demographic variables (e.g. race/ethnicity, household income,
highest level of education in the household, an adult in the household with a
STEM career, gender of child, geographic location). The researchers and Brains
On! staff will work together to identify how the findings can be applied to the
development of subsequent coronavirus-related episodes and shared with the ISE
field to further support families’ education and information
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.