* 2029885
* RAPID IIBR Informatics Computational methods for utilizing SARS-Cov2 sequence and structure data in predicting host-pathogen protein-protein interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Miranda Lynch, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,816.00

The award to Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute supports research into
machine learning approaches to understand the interactions of SARS-COV-2
proteins. The researchers will combine information from the viral genome with
other data on protein structures to predict protein interactions. This research
affords significant societal benefits by providing important information about
the virus biology. The research may also contribute to the identification of
potential therapeutic compounds. An early stage researcher will participate
extensively in the project as part of training activities. Software and data
from the studies will be shared in public repositories, published in peer-
reviewed journals, and presented at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers supported by this award will develop
machine learning based computational tools for prediction of protein-protein
interactions (PPI) in the infectious disease setting involving host proteins and
viral pathogen proteins. Computational tools that can leverage immediately
arising data sources to advance experimental work on the virus can make a major
and immediate impact on pandemic response. Support vector machine classifiers
and Bayesian inferential methods will be used to develop machine learning models
that incorporate both genomic and structural information to better understand
and predict protein interactions. The goal in creating computational tools to
understand the host-pathogen interface is to contribute basic information on
protein interactions that dictate the mechanisms of virus entry into cells and
modes of transmission of viral pathogens. Methods developed in this proposal
will be valuable in future situations where rapid information development about
an emerging pathogen is required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made
by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.