* 2029749
* RAPID: Collaborative Proposal: Effects of Institutional Responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic on Undergraduate Faculty and Students Across STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kristin Horan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 113,316.00

The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has resulted in
unprecedented, nation-wide disruption of academic institutions. As a result,
there is an urgent need to understand the acute effects of this disruption on
undergraduate STEM education in the U.S. This project will examine experiences
of faculty and students resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent
institutional changes. Initiated during a time of uncertainty, this project
will: (1) capture the ephemeral nature of undergraduate education experiences
before national recovery milestones are achieved; and (2) inform efforts to
adapt undergraduate STEM education during crises. The project team will collect
data about institutional characteristics and crisis communication messages, as
well as about experiences of individual faculty and students. These data will be
analyzed to identify pathways through which the COVID-19 pandemic has influenced
teaching and learning within undergraduate STEM education. The findings of this
project will be used to develop actionable recommendations for institutions of
higher education, including crisis communication strategies, guidelines for
pedagogy in times of crisis, and checklists of resources. As the STEM workforce
plays a critical role in the economic health of the U.S. in normal and disaster
situations, this effort to rapidly collect data and learn from this situation
will contribute to the security and well-being of society. It is expected that
the results will also support a more resilient, globally competitive next
generation of STEM workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s specific aims
are to: (1) examine teaching and learning experiences of undergraduate faculty
and students in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; (2) examine the effects of
faculty and student reactions on undergraduate STEM teaching and learning; and
(3) leverage findings to develop actionable recommendations for colleges and
universities to best prepare and protect their faculty, staff, and students and
the integrity of undergraduate STEM education. The goal of these activities is
to answer key research questions: How do institutions’ COVID-19 policies
influence faculty and student attitudes, perceptions, and behavior related to
STEM teaching and learning? What teaching and learning resources were most
important for undergraduate STEM faculty and students? How do these effects on
undergraduate STEM education develop over time? Given the rapidly changing
nature of the situation, individual-level data that are needed to answer the
research questions are inherently ephemeral. Faculty and students are unlikely
to accurately later recall the extent to which they were able to adapt to
changes, the extent to which changes created distress, and how they coped with
events. Using the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, faculty and
students from a stratified random sample of representative institutions will be
recruited to participate in an online survey and semi-structured interviews
conducted across three time points. Grounded in the research literatures of
crisis communication, organizational science, and disaster management, this
project addresses gaps in undergraduate STEM education research related to
faculty and student reactions to disruptive contexts, characteristics of
institutions that make them resilient toward disruptive contexts, and
institutional learning from disruptive contexts. The findings will be
disseminated to institutions of higher education and through a public web site
relating to the resources most critical for fostering resilience among faculty
and staff when adapting to a disrupted educational context. In addition,
participating institutions and individuals will receive customized reports and
resources. By evaluating the immediate impact of COVID-19, this project aims to
enhance the undergraduate education infrastructure, improve the delivery of STEM
education during and after disruptions, and help to protect the well-being of
faculty and students collectively experiencing this crisis. This RAPID award is
made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program in the Division of
Undergraduate Education (Education and Human Resources Directorate), using funds
from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.