* 2029578
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Microliths and the Development of Cultural Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Sara Watson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2023
* USD 25,761.00

What was it that made Homo sapiens such a successful species and the sole
remaining hominin on the landscape? What enabled it to colonize the entire world
and survive in novel or extreme environments? Some researchers argue the
development of a new kind of technology, called "microliths," was a key adaptive
strategy in the success and global spread. Benefits of these small tools are
argued to include more efficient conversion of raw materials into usable stone
tools, creation of innovative and diverse tools, and have been linked with the
use of composite tools. Composite tools combine multiple components and are
often linked to the spread of mechanically assisted projectile technology and
hunting weapons. The appearance and spread of microliths is suggested to be part
of a global trend of technological reorganization during the late Pleistocene.
However, these associations, and even the definition of "microliths," are
problematic. Definitions tend to be contextual and oscillate between broad
considerations of any intentionally produced small flake and specific
manifestations of small tools. This has complicated understanding of the
development, spread, and potential benefits of what is considered a pivotal
technological innovation of modern humans. Rather than focusing on a typological
definition of microliths, researchers must systematically address how small
tools were made. By focusing on the technological system used to produce small
tools in different contexts, one can understand how each system varied and
whether technological systems for small tool production were convergent
solutions that were reinvented or cultural knowledge transmitted within and
between groups. This has implications for population structure and
interconnectedness during the late Pleistocene. This project will foster
international collaborations and provide opportunities for mentorship and
training of student participants, including first-generation students,
minorities, women, and students with disabilities to broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation project examines decisions related to systems of
provisioning, transport, and the use of composite tools and projectile
technology and how these affected the form and systems of production of small
tool technologies during the late Pleistocene. The archaeological record during
the late Pleistocene has provided early evidence for behavioral changes in
modern humans and has been vital to our understanding of the origin and
evolution of the species. The researcher will employ technological analysis of
stone tool assemblages and experimental archaeology to understand how systems of
raw material provisioning and transport influence on technological organization
and individual systems of small tool production during the late Pleistocene.
Results from this project will contribute to examination of the costs and
benefits of different strategies for composite tool manufacture and to provide
an independent line of evidence to evaluate the development and spread of
projectile weaponry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.