* 2029218
* Collaborative Research: IRNC: Testbed: BRIDGES - Binding Research Infrastructures for the Deployment of Global Experimental Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ciprian Popoviciu, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 463,257.00

The BRIDGES project is developing an innovative, dynamic, high-performance
trans-Atlantic network testbed that interconnects research communities and their
resources in the US with collaborating partners and facilities in Europe. It
explores advanced virtualized network architectures enabling rapidly
reconfigurable global cyber-infrastructure to address changing research
requirements of the collaborators to explore new concepts and to create new
project workflows securely and with consistent, predictable
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BRIDGES facility consists of two
geographically separate optical links spanning the North Atlantic and
terrestrial optical links in US and Europe to form an intercontinental optical
network ring topology, capable of carrying up to 200 Gbps of science data
between major nodes in Washington, New York, Paris, and Amsterdam. The BRIDGES
facility is a binding platform for research projects, providing a flexible
research-oriented infrastructure connecting laboratories and universities in the
US to their counterparts in Europe. Science applications in high energy physics,
deep space communications, and even biomedical programs are collaborating with
BRIDGES to leverage them investment in this technology to reach digital
resources such as globally distributed or remote sensors and instruments,
distributed data storage, analytical processing resources, to create new global
applications tailored to the science at hand. BRIDGES is led by George Mason
University and East Carolina University and is working with and connecting an
initial community of nearly 40 networking and science research projects across
the US and Europe. The project is expected to have a far-reaching impact beyond
the testbed or interconnect facility and lead to innovative use of cyber-
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.