* 2029990
* RAPID: Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic on Rural Attitudes about Federal Aid and Recovery
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Justin Farrell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 178,698.00

The scale of the COVID-19 pandemic necessitated historic action by the federal
government to stem social and economic fallout, as demonstrated by federal
relief programs exceeding $2.2 trillion. These and other federal interventions
in the U.S. economy and society represent a potential shift in the role of
government. Yet public opposition to federal programs is historically strong in
many rural areas of the country. Given the magnitude of the pandemic, how will
this crisis affect long standing attitudes towards federal aid programs and the
role of government in society in rural areas? Furthermore, how will public
attitudes towards federal aid in rural communities shape how much aid is
allocated, what form it takes, and how it is received by rural communities? This
project examines the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on public attitudes towards
federal aid and the role of government in rural U.S. communities. Findings from
the project will be useful to leaders at several levels of government as they
work with their communities to distribute aid to facilitate recovery. As such,
the findings will also be useful to leaders within the context of future
pandemics or other extreme events, thus promoting U.S. safety and security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has necessitated historic investment
in federal relief programs, and yet such programs have often been viewed
negatively in rural areas of the country. This project will address this
development through a new two-wave representative survey of residents in rural
communities across eleven states in the western United States (Arizona,
California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah,
Washington, Wyoming). Each wave will consist of 1,200 respondents and will be
conducted through a mix of telephone and online outreach by a professional
survey firm. The first wave will be conducted immediately, in the midst of the
pandemic, and the second wave in spring 2021. The survey will be supplemented
with 33 semi-structured interviews (three per state) with government staff,
elected officials, and NGO leaders, all based in counties sampled through the
survey. These interviews will augment information from rural communities and
will provide a macro-level picture of how communities have been impacted by the
pandemic. Findings from the project will inform sociological theories related to
changes in social ideology in the context of extreme events, as well as theories
explaining political and moral identities. In addition, the project integrates
findings and concepts related to heretofore largely distinct literatures, one
involving rural sociology and the other involving disaster
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.