* 2029747
* Collaborative Research:  Formation of Sulfur Aerosols in Fairbanks, Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Jingqiu Mao, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 316,576.00

This project is part of the broader effort, the Alaskan Layered Pollution and
Chemical Analysis (ALPACA) research initiative and will also contribute to the
NSF-funded SNAP-TEC (Sustainably Navigating Arctic Pollution through Engaging
Communities) project that includes an intensive field campaign planned for the
year 2022. The goal of ALPACA is to better understand the chemical processing of
air pollution during the cold and dark conditions in the wintertime in the
Arctic. The objectives of SNAP-TEC are to improve the understanding of
wintertime Arctic outdoor and indoor air pollution to assist in the sustainable
development of the Arctic and improve air quality for Arctic peoples. Data from
this project will become available to the public and other investigators who
will be able to utilize it in assessing how to mitigate poor air quality in the
wintertime in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional instrumentation will
be deployed to improve the understanding of sulfur oxidation chemistry in the
understudied high-latitude environment in Fairbanks, that is greatly impacted by
both climate change and poor air quality. The PIs will investigate the formation
routes and properties of hydroxymethane sulfonate (HMS) (HOCH2SO3-) in the
atmosphere of Fairbanks. The PIs plan to collect online measurements of
formaldehyde (HCHO) and PM2.5 inorganic sulfate and HMS with a PILS-IC
(Particle-Into-Liquid Sampler coupled to an Ion Chromatograph). Measurements of
gas and particle inorganic species that affect particle water and pH also will
be measured, since HMS is formed through aqueous phase reactions that are
sensitive to particle pH. Steady-state box model simulations will be conducted
utilizing the data generated to examine the main chemical drivers of HMS
formation in Fairbanks winter. This effort will examine the sensitivity of HMS
formation to ambient HCHO and SO2 concentrations, meteorological conditions,
aerosol liquid water, particle pH, and ionic strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.