* 2029907
* Scholarships to Support Undergraduate Student Success and Broaden Participation in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Lin Li, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Tennessee State University. The University is a Historically Black
University with a high population of students who are underrepresented in STEM
fields. Over its five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships to 45
unique full-time students who are pursuing a bachelor’s degree in engineering or
computer science. Scholars will be admitted in five annual cohorts and receive
up to two-and-half years of scholarship support. In addition to providing
financial support, the project will support student success through cohort
building activities, undergraduate research experiences, undergraduate student
support services, summer internships, graduate school preparation, and
participation in regional and national STEM conferences. Given the demographics
of the student population and the recruiting activities for transfer students
from regional community colleges, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in the engineering and computer science workforce. Results from
this project could inform other higher education institutions about effective
student support services that can help students persist in STEM programs and
help transfer students from community colleges make a smooth transition to a
four-year STEM degree program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project intends to help
students persist in STEM degree programs and to help transfer students make a
successful transition from community college to a four-year degree program by:
(1) improving students’ engagement; (2) boosting retention and academic
performance; and (3) enhancing student self-efficacy. Assessment and progress
monitoring oversight teams will guide Scholar cohorts from entrance to
matriculation. The project will create a living and learning community in which
the learning model includes mutual academic support, mutual emotional support,
social and community support, and industry involvement. Data from and about
Scholars will be collected using established survey instruments and
institutional records to determine how a student’s support network changes and
grows as the student is matriculated, retained, and graduated from the selected
STEM programs. By tracking and monitoring students’ academic performance,
retention rates, and graduation rates, this project will provide insights on how
to ensure student success in engineering and computer science. Project
evaluation will use a mixed methods approach to evaluate the impact of the
project activities on student success. The project results will be disseminated
to the STEM education community through presentations at professional society
conferences, publications in STEM education journals, and the project’s web
site. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.