* 2029278
* IRNC: Core Improvement: AtlanticWave-SDX: A Distributed Experimental SDX Supporting Research, Experimental Deployments, and Interoperability Testing on Global Scales
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2025
* Heidi L. Morgan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2025
* USD 5,254,543.00

Open Exchange Points (OXPs) serve as meet points for connecting and facilitating
the exchange of data between Research and Education (R&amp;E) networks. They are
critical cyberinfrastructure in the transit of data over long geographical
distances, switching data flows from one R&amp;E network to the next, to its
destination. For example, data from the Vera Rubin Observatory will transit 6
OXPs as it moves from the southern to northern hemispheres. Operationalizing the
transit of data flows across OXPs is increasingly important to minimize the
impact from events on network services (hardware failures and soft failures).
End-to-end network paths for these data flows are not under the control of any
individual organization. Multiple R&amp;E network operators must coordinate to
establish geographically distributed end-to-end paths – an effort that can take
days to weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida International University (FIU),
University of Southern California – Information Sciences Institute (USC-ISI) and
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill - RENCI are furthering AtlanticWave-
SDX: a distributed experimental SDX, supporting research, experimental
deployments, prototyping and interoperability testing, on national and
international scales. AtlanticWave-SDX leverages innovations from the initial
AtlanticWave-SDX project, introducing new capabilities, enabling OXPs to react
to unplanned network events by adding intelligent closed-loop control of network
services powered by in-band network telemetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AWAVE-SDX is
comprised of two components: An infrastructure development component with
optical super channels to reframe and reprovision network capacity between
R&amp;E backbone networks; An innovation component to build a distributed
intercontinental experimental SDX by leveraging OXPs in the U.S., Chile, Brazil,
and S. Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.