* 2029642
* RAPID: Addressing Equity when STEM Teaching and Learning Go Remote
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2020,03/31/2021
* Barbara Means, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 03/31/2021
* USD 199,997.00

A systemic and persistent digital divide exists between students with limited
resources and students with more resources. This project will investigate the
challenges students face with the unexpected migration of their STEM courses to
online environments due to COVID-19. Prior research on online learning suggests
that students with limited financial means and fewer academic experiences are at
a disadvantage when learning in online educational environments. To better
understand student experiences and consequences of teaching and learning in
digital environments, the project will address four questions: How do studentsâ€™
experiences in gateway STEM courses compare pre- and post the shift to online
learning? Which challenges to learning STEM online are more prevalent among low-
income, underrepresented minority, and rural students compared to other
students? What online instructional practices do students perceive as
contributing to their engagement and learning? To what extent do different types
of digital learning experiences or other variables mitigate the challenges
associated with the COVID-19-induced transition to remote STEM learning?

The mixed method research study will: (a) survey a nationally representative
sample of 1,000 undergraduate students from two- and four-year colleges who are
taking STEM courses that transitioned to remote delivery in spring 2020; and (2)
conduct case studies to examine pre- and post-COVID-19 student and faculty
experiences in gateway STEM courses at institutions serving underserved student
populations. The research team will prepare response distributions and
descriptive statistics for each item for the Student Survey and for key
subgroups. Additionally, exploratory correlational analyses will be conducted to
understand relationships between variables. To assess subgroups or before-and-
after differences on items and item scales, ANOVAs, t-tests, and Chi-square
tests will be used. Multivariate regression analyses will explore potential
causal relationships among the data. Thematic analyses of student and faculty
interviews and student focus groups will be conducted using a priori codes
derived from the literature and topics of interest, as well as thematic codes
that emerge from the data using an inductive approach. A hierarchy of themes
will be created to facilitate analyses that disaggregate themes and trends for
key subgroups. Results from this research will provide information to the higher
education community and policy makers that can inform plans to address the
current crisis, as well as how to incorporate lessons learned in STEM education
post-COVID-19. This RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education program in the Division of Undergraduate Education (Education and
Human Resources Directorate), using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.