* 2029320
* Collaborative Research: Microbial processes and carbon transformation in the thawing permafrost
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Ashley Shade, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 439,938.00

As a result of global warming, arctic ecosystems have reached a ‘new normal’
characterized by the loss of sea ice, retreating glaciers, and the beginning of
widespread permafrost thaw. Permafrost (i.e., permanently frozen soil) contains
an enormous amount of carbon, much of it in the form of detrital plant material.
Subzero temperatures have protected this plant-derived carbon from microbial
decomposition. Warming thaw removes this protection, exposing permafrost carbon
to the action of microbial communities that will degrade it and ‘breathe’
globally significant amounts of carbon dioxide and methane (greenhouse gases)
into the atmosphere. This release of permafrost carbon into the atmosphere could
lead to even faster and greater climate change. Details of how this will play
out are not well understood. The goal of this research is to understand how
microbial communities function and degrade carbon during permafrost thaw. To
achieve this goal, thaw will be simulated by transplanting permafrost into soil
that overlays the permafrost and thaws annually during the summer months.
Samples will be harvested at multiple time scales (weeks, months, and years).
Microbial communities and soil carbon chemistry will be evaluated before and
after transplantation to determine how communities change, function, and degrade
carbon during thaw. The knowledge that will be generated by this research
project is critically important to understanding how greenhouse gas production
from thawing permafrost will contribute to future climate change. In addition to
training a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher the project will also
implement a novel "adopt a microbe" program as part of an undergraduate lab
course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimates are that permafrost contains 25-50% of
the total global soil carbon pool. As a result of global warming, up to 40% of
northern latitude permafrost may disappear due to thaw by the end of the
century. Permafrost thaw will unlock previously frozen carbon making it amenable
to microbial community decomposition. Millennia-old organic matter will get
converted to CO2 and CH4. The resulting production of globally significant
quantities of CO2 and CH4 is likely to cause a positive feedback loop amplifying
the effects of climate change. The overarching goal of this research is to more
precisely determine the magnitude of this microbe-mediated feedback loop through
understanding the rules governing microbial community composition, function, and
carbon turnover in the thawing permafrost. To address this a series of novel, in
situ thaw experiments will be performed. Permafrost of different ages (from the
Holocene and Pleistocene) will be transplanted into the active layer (soil
overlaying the permafrost that freezes and thaws annually) to simulate thaw.
Prior to transplantation, soils will be sterilized and then inoculated with
microbial communities from the active layer, from permafrost of different ages,
or from a combination of communities and then sampled at different time
intervals. Community structure, (taxonomic marker genes), functional potential
(metagenomes), function (metatranscriptomes), and soil chemistry (FT-ICR MS,
physicochemical measurements) will be evaluated. The outcome of this research
will be an integrated conceptual model that relates community assembly and
function to carbon turnover during thaw at multiple time scales. The project
will include training in microbial ecosystem ecology research at the
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.