* 2029978
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SMALL: Learning-Efficient Spectrum Access for No-Sensing Devices in Shared Spectrum
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Cong Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,550.00

This project develops a novel online learning based framework for distributed
low-cost devices to efficiently and effectively access the shared spectrum
without spectrum sensing. It specifically focuses on no-sensing devices that do
not have the powerful radio-frequency (RF) components to enable wideband
spectrum sensing, and addresses the cross-technology spectrum access problem in
a decentralized setting. A pertinent application the proposed solution addresses
is the dynamic spectrum access of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices that are
deployed in either unlicensed or lightly licensed spectrum, in which the
distributed IoT devices need to coexist with other active systems. The no-
sensing spectrum access and sharing framework has the potential to revolutionize
the operation and management of modern and future wireless networks,
considerably enhance the spectrum utilization efficiency, and dramatically
alleviate the constantly increasing pressure on the limited radio spectrum. The
cross disciplinary nature of the research would naturally translate into case
studies and projects in a number of undergraduate and graduate level courses
taught by the PIs in areas of communications, machine learning, and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a suite of online
learning based spectrum access algorithms for no-sensing devices to coexist with
other active systems. The first study focuses on improving the learning
efficiency by introducing the best arm identification framework and proposing
meta-learning and good channel identification algorithms. The second thrust is
devoted to designing spectrum access mechanisms that can seamlessly integrate
hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ). Novel algorithms will be designed to
learn the optimal sequence of channels for possible retransmissions, and
enhanced for fine-grained control that captures the coding level behavior of
HARQ. The last thread of investigation considers multi-user multi-technology
coexistence and will develop implicit-communication based distributed spectrum
access algorithms. Finally, a thorough validation of the algorithms and spectrum
access schemes will be performed using a lab testbed and real-world
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.