* 2029357
* Enhancing Recruitment and Retention of Undergraduate Mathematics and Computer Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Yun Lu, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,758.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. The project will be led by Kutztown University, a mid-sized, regional,
comprehensive public university in rural Pennsylvania. Over its five-year
duration, the project will fund scholarships to 20 unique, full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in mathematics, computer science, and
information technology. Scholars will enter in two cohorts of first year
students and receive up to four years of scholarship support. The project aims
to increase student persistence in these STEM fields by linking scholarships
with effective supporting activities such as a living-learning community,
faculty and industry mentors, undergraduate research experiences, graduate
school and career preparation, and participation in discipline-specific
conferences. The project will generate important new knowledge on the
recruitment and retention of students, including Scholars who are from groups
under-represented in these fields. This information can advance the national
need for a diverse STEM professional workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. In
addition to scholarships, the project will provide Scholars with a suite of
support services that have been developed and refined through previous projects.
This project will extend its prior work by addressing gaps in the research
literature on ways to support the recruitment and retention of low income
students in mathematics, computer science, and information technology programs,
including students from populations that are under-represented in STEM. Mixed
methods will be used to investigate Scholar and faculty perspectives on the
pathways and obstacles that occur in the recruitment and retention of
mathematics and computer science undergraduate majors. The knowledge generation
activities also include an investigation of the differential effectiveness of
specific support services, including a living-learning community, faculty
mentoring, and targeted events, on the retention of underrepresented Scholars in
comparison to their peers. This new knowledge has the potential to be
transferable and applicable at other institutions of comparable size, which
could further diversify and strengthen the nation’s STEM workforce. An external
evaluator will evaluate the project from the context, input, process, and
product perspectives. Project findings will be disseminated through journal
publications, presentations at regional and local conferences, mass media, and
partnerships with local educational agencies. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.