* 2029854
* CIBR:BBSRC: PanOryza: Globally coordinated genomes, proteomes and pathways for rice
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rod Wing, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,769.00

The most serious issue facing the global human population is the 10 billion
person question. Can the world support production of enough high-quality,
nutritious food to feed a projected 10 billion people by 2050, against a
backdrop of climate change that will make fertile land more scarce and weather
more unpredictable (droughts, floods, temperature spikes). It is certain that
rice will play a central role in feeding much of the globe. At present, rice
provides the major daily caloric need for 50% of the human population. The genus
as a whole, including the two main branches of domesticated rice (Oryza sativa
Japonica and Indica), and a huge variety of wild relatives, has the capacity to
grow under an exceptionally wide range of environments. Research teams around
the world have been working closely with breeders to help identify desirable
traits present in local landraces (i.e. locally adapted varieties) and their
wild relatives, such as resistance to periodic droughts, flooding or high
temperatures, and perform crosses to transfer such genes/traits into high
yielding, and widely distributed varieties. Genomic science is now central to
research and development efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genome of one
reference variety of Japonica and one of Indica were sequenced around 15 years
ago. However, the genome sequence is just the starting point. For the data to be
useful for research, requires a process called genome annotation. Annotation
involves finding and defining the genes within the genome, and working out what
functional roles those genes code for. Annotation usually involves several
different software packages, which high error rates, followed by manual work to
fix errors and improve genes over many years. Rice gene annotation efforts have
unfortunately suffered from a lack of international coordination, leading to
several different independent efforts to annotate rice genes using different
methods, which persist in different databases today. New genomes for varieties
representing a wider pool of landraces and wild rice species are just coming
online, and thus without a major effort in international coordination, this
problem will get rapidly worse. Plant scientists and breeders will find it very
challenging to interpret and compare information collected from different rice
varieties. This project aims to solve this issue, bringing together six
international partners with a shared goal of creating consistency in the rice
gene set across all varieties. We will build new software and protocols for
sharing data, which will enable us to define what genes are present (and the
proteins they encode) in the genomes of all rice types, called a pan-genome or
pan gene set. The outcomes of our project will "future-proof" rice genomic
resources, so that researchers can focus their efforts on understanding the
biology of rice, and searching for desirable traits that span the genetic
diversity of cultivated Asian rice. This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and the
Infrastructure Capacity for Biology Program in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.