* 2029590
* RAPID: Bridging the Health Care Skill Gap
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Myk Garn, Eduworks Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 01/31/2022
* USD 199,114.00

The project aims to serve the national need of increasing the capacity to have
more qualified healthcare providers to address the challenge of the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19). By developing and deploying web-based tools that
individuals and employers can use to explore healthcare-related competency
frameworks, self-identify skill gaps, and find credentials and training, this
project seeks to fill gaps in the healthcare workforce. These tools will help
individuals identify healthcare areas where they have adjacent skill sets and
will also help companies identify employees who are candidates for upskilling
into healthcare. Once individual skills are inventoried, the tool will help
users identify where they can obtain the requisite healthcare skills and
credentials. The tool will be usable on desktop and mobile devices which
broadens the reach of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
address the COVID-19 crisis by providing end users with the ability to compare
their own skills with those required for available healthcare roles and
credentials and, in some cases, find ways to fill gaps. The frameworks and
related credentials will come from the Credential Engine and additional data
will come from the Open Syllabus Project. This project will apply artificial
intelligence (AI), specifically natural language understanding (NLU), to (a)
crosswalk competency frameworks associated with these credentials, (b) compare
skills entered by users to those required to earn those credentials, (c)
generate an "alignment score" that measures and quantifies the gap between the
two skill sets, and (d) suggest courses and credential programs with the
potential to close those gaps. This will contribute to research into
applications of NLU to competency-based credentialing and training and will
provide data in a concrete domain (healthcare). Including validation and sharing
of the underlying competency framework translation and alignment score services
via an open data infrastructure will improve our nationâ€™s healthcare talent
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track B: Future of Work and the Human-
Technology Frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.