* 2029765
* EAGER: CAS: Recyclable Polystyrene-Substitutes through On-demand Depolymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Sangwoo Lee, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is
to establish recyclable thermoplastics that are based on polystyrene-substitute
materials since plastics made of polystyrene itself are not commonly recycled.
Polymers are an essential material class used in nearly all modern products.
However, most of the used polymer products are landfilled, improperly discarded,
or incinerated and thus have environmental consequences. The high-cost problem
of polymer recycling suggests the desirability to develop new polymers with low-
cost and facile recyclability without compromising physical properties needed
for practical applications. This research aims to establish a new class of
recyclable thermoplastics that can effectively substitute polystyrene.
Polystyrene is one of the largest produced thermoplastic polymers used as a key
component for numerous commodity and specialty applications. However,
polystyrene has been barely recycled due to high cost. The proposed research
will replace non-recyclable polystyrene with new high-performance thermoplastics
that can be recycled from used products at low cost. This research will
significantly benefit society by establishing polystyrene-substituting
recyclable thermoplastics that could remedy the environmental problems caused by
polystyrene wastes. The planned work also includes educational activities for
K-12 and undergraduate students to enhance their exposure and understanding of
STEM fields with a focus on polymers and materials structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planned research aims to establish and study recyclable thermoplastic polymers
as polystyrene substitutes through implementing low-cost and facile
depolymerizability. The depolymerizability will be achieved by copolymerizing
monomer with a low-ceiling temperature and other monomer that controls the
properties of polymers. A library of recyclable copolymers will be synthesized,
depolymerization characteristics of the polymer library will be studied, and
optical and viscoelastic properties of the copolymers will be characterized for
evaluation of the new polymers as polystyrene substitutes and beyond. These
efforts will establish the correlations between the chemical composition of the
copolymers and the physical/depolymerization properties. The established
correlations of recyclable copolymers will serve as the design criteria of
polymers for target applications. The project will provide graduate and
undergraduate students with broad research training on polymers ranging from
synthesis to characterization and materials
properties.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.