* 2029928
* Understanding the role of conserved dynamic covalent junctions on block copolymer and network self-assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Charles Sing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 10/31/2023
* USD 655,171.00

Block copolymers are used in many applications such as epoxies, battery
electrolytes, and elastic clothing, and are valued for their ability to combine
two functions into one material. This ability comes from bonding two or more
polymer chains made of different chemical units called monomers. The differing
chemical monomers causes the different blocks of the polymer to separate, like
oil and water. However, because they are bonded together, the result is small
domains, consisting of one block or the other. Forming a regular, ordered
pattern of these small domains is challenging as the ordered phases often
exhibit defects, or deviations from the pattern, where the polymer chains become
trapped. The investigators propose to introduce dynamic links between blocks
that will allow some of the block copolymers to exchange their sections with a
nearby block copolymer. The investigators hypothesize that this additional
freedom will give the system as a whole greater flexibility to achieve long-
range order of the different phases. This faster assembly is expected to reduce
processing time, energy, and waste. The investigators plan to incorporate
lessons about dynamic polymer characterization and molecular simulation into
day-camp projects by partnering with the Girls Learning About Materials and the
CURIE Camp@Illinois organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
understand the effects of dynamic junctions in block copolymer self-assembly.
Including a fraction of exchangeable bonds is expected to increase chain
mobility, improve long-range order and reduce time, energy and waste during the
annealing process. To test this hypothesis, the investigators will synthesize
block copolymer systems that include both permanent and dynamic junctions. Both
polystyrene and polyisoprene block copolymers (PS-PI) and polyethylene oxide and
polydimethylsiloxane (PEO-PDMS) will be studied at various molecular weights,
using small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) to assess the morphology. The
investigators will also model this system using self-consistent field theory.
The investigators will also explore the role of additional chains at a dynamic
junction, by modeling and characterizing dynamic miktoarm star polymers and
contrasting with dynamic diblock copolymers, again using both experimental and
computational approaches. The expected outcome of this project are fundamental
insights into the role of dynamic on block copolymer self-assembly and
mechanisms to reduce kinetically trapped defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.