* 2029037
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Making Smart Use of SmartNICs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Scott Shenker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2021
* USD 90,003.00

Computing paradigms occasionally undergo rather dramatic shifts as underlying
technologies change, significantly modifying the dominant use cases. Some of
these revolutions are seen far in advance and are heralded by great fanfare,
with the hype long preceding the actual payoffs. Others are more opportunistic
in nature, leveraging a technology initially developed for another purpose, and
the adoption of this technology starts altering practice without much notice
from the broader community. Computing is now on the verge of such a “quiet
revolution” having to do with inserting computation on the devices that connect
computers to the network. This trend towards what are called SmartNICs (for
computationally enhanced network interface cards) shows great promise in both
making applications faster and in keeping data more secure. This project will
focus on how to best leverage SmartNICs in order to improve application
performance and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SmartNICs were originally
designed to offload packet-processing from the host CPU, which processing is
necessary in certain settings to perform encryption and other compute-intensive
tasks on the data path. SmartNICs combine this packet-processing power with
three other characteristics: (i) isolation from the host CPU, (ii) direct access
to memory, and (iii) general programmability. It turns out that this combination
gives SmartNICs the potential to play a powerful and unique role in the overall
computational ecosystem. In particular, by sitting on the boundary between the
network and hosts, they can change the interfaces being exposed to both,
allowing SmartNICs to substantially improve application performance while also
providing greater security and privacy. However, realizing these gains requires
making progress on three separate issues. First, the hardware design of
SmartNICs must combine several different units (a specialized packet-handling
unit, an remote direct memory access unit, and a general computation unit), and
provide fast interconnections between them and with the host memory. The design
space is vast, and there is little agreement on what designs represent the best
trade-offs. Second, these SmartNICs must offer applications a set of primitives
that can improve their performance and security. These primitives must be chosen
wisely to be feasible for SmartNICs to support while being easy for applications
to leverage for better performance and security. Third, verification tools are
needed to ensure that the programs on the SmartNIC are correctly executed and
that the overall system -- running on multiple hosts and their SmartNICs -- is
correct. This will require extensions to current verification
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.