* 2029848
* CCSS: Hyper-Graph Signal Processing for Multimedia Data Analysis in Cyber System Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Waves of research and development activities on Data Science (DS) and Artificial
Intelligence (AI) that are fueling some of the most exciting and game-changing
technological advances. The widespread applications of AI and IoT generate huge
volume of complex data incessantly. These new datasets are much bigger and more
complex than in traditional applications. To explore the underlying structure
and interaction of various datasets, important geometric signal processing tools
such as graph and hypergraph models can reveal new insights and have found broad
successes in sensor networks, IoT, cyber-physical systems, and multimedia data
analysis. This research project centers on a comprehensive investigation of
hypergraph signal processing (HSP). Capable of capturing multilateral
relationships and features among signals or data, HSP provides inherit analytic
strength in a wider range of practical applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project represents a systematic and comprehensive effort to broaden the
theoretical foundation of geometric signal processing and to develop innovative
solutions in response to the huge influx of real-life datasets. One goal is to
establish a well-defined and comprehensive HSP framework for data analysis,
compatible with traditional graph signal processing. The team rigorously pursues
analytical frameworks for HSP and demonstrate its superior performance in
specific applications. The PI and the team further present an integrative
framework to systematically exploit geometric data features in key practical
scenarios. The research team plans to develop innovative solutions for analyzing
and modeling large and complex datasets from a variety of new applications.
Addressing key data analytic topics, innovations arising from this work can
directly impact data compression and analysis in cyber-systems. HSP inspired
modeling of large data collections can transform learning outcomes in IoT and
sensor networks. This research outcomes shall contribute substantially to the
theoretical foundation of signal processing and modeling. The ability to explore
and discover new data structures and features will enable better understanding
and optimized decision making in various data science and artificial
intelligence application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.