* 2029847
* EAGER: Breath-Based Early and Fast Detection of COVID-19 Infection
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Pelagia Gouma, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,359.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project is to enable early and rapid
detection of infection COVID-19 by sampling human breath. COVID-19 disease is a
pandemic currently, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) caused by
the 2019-nCoV virus. Without innate immunity to the novel virus and with the
lack of therapeutic means to treat it, the only way to contain the spread of
this disease further is through early diagnosis. However, for many infected
individuals the disease remains asymptomatic, yet they can potentially transmit
COVID-19 and unknowingly infect more of the population. This project will lead
to new approach to diagnose COVID-19 infection from sampling human breath.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes to use a disruptive approach to
infectious disease diagnosis and to the detection of COVID-19 specifically. This
approach involves sampling the breath of human-- or animal in the proposed
work-- subjects for three gaseous signaling metabolites (i.e. COVID-19
biomarkers). The hypothesis of the project is that the magnitude of the relative
change in these biomarkers upon the subjectâ€™s infection with the 2019-nCoV virus
provides an early and distinct signal of this infection. The PI will test this
hypotheses by producing a three-sensor array, utilizing selective resistive gas
sensors based on binary metal oxides, and by testing the breath of swine
infected by a beta-coronavirus as well as the breath of humans infected by
COVID-19. Measurements will be made repeatedly on definitively or potentially
infected subjects to map the rise and fall of the biomarkers over time.
Correlating the measurements made with the relative concentration of pro-
inflammatory cytokines released in them is expected to produce a diagnostic tool
for the pandemic infection. The diagnostic prototype tool will be equipped with
wireless capability for rapid deployment as point-of-care, early detection
means. The proposed research and technology aim to set the stage for the
diagnostics of the future. Establishing the pathway for the effective diagnosis
of coronavirus diseases through biomarker monitoring and establishing the
specifications required for the early detection of COVID-19 before any symptoms
appear are expected to be the major outcomes of the proposed research. Promoting
breath analysis as a first response, on-site, point-of-care, personalized
diagnostics method is envisioned. Training students working on this project on
interdisciplinary research is an added benefit of this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.