* 2029799
* SBIR Phase I:  Recovery of Critical Metals from Lithium Ion Battery Black Mass
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Catherine Kollhoff, NUMIX Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the creation of a reliable, economically
viable, and cost-effective domestic supply of cobalt, nickel, and manganese by
harvesting critical metals from spent lithium ion batteries. These critical
metals are needed in modern infrastructure, transportation and communication.
Today, the United States imports 78% of cobalt it consumes annually but recycles
only 5% of cobalt-containing lithium-ion batteries. Replacing cobalt with nickel
and manganese in these batteries puts supply of those metals at risk. This
project proposes a straightforward recovery process to create supply chain
stability, more economic activity through recyclers and less landfilling of
potentially dangerous lithium ion batteries. The project aims to create
standalone processing units that can be added to existing battery processing to
create a refined source of these key metals for domestic
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to validate a new approach to lithium ion battery recycling by
integrating a metal sulfide sorbent technology into a capacitive deionization
(CDI) electrochemical system for scalable and efficient recovery of cobalt,
nickel, and manganese from spent batteries. CDI is an emerging process for
removing charged species from a feed solution using porous electrodes. This work
pairs CDI with efficient metal-sulfide sorbents by integrating the sorbent
material into the cathodes for efficient recovery of critical metals from black
mass leach solution. While CDI has typically involved carbon cathodes, metal
sulfide sorbents have been selected for surface doping owing to their remarkable
stability, adsorption capacity, and expected amenability to casting. The
proposed work will: 1) demonstrate viable cation uptake from black mass into the
sorbent material; 2) construct a capacitive deionization cell with the sorbent
material integrated into the cathode for increased recovery; and 3) demonstrate
recovery with appropriate selectivity toward cobalt, nickel, and manganese
separations from black mass using a novel CDI cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.