* 2029777
* 2021 Polar Marine Science GRC and GRS
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Patricia Matrai, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,180.00

This award provides funding in support of participation by U.S. graduate
students and early career researchers for the 2019 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS)
and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) Polar Marine Science meetings to be held in
Ventura, CA May 22-28, 2021. The 2021 GRC event is entitled “Integrating Ocean
Physics and Biogeochemistry to Assess Polar Ecosystem Sensitivity to Rapid
Change”. Gordon conferences on this topic are held every two years and provide a
key forum to discuss cutting-edge and cross-disciplinary marine research
highlighted as an international priority topic. The conference plan is designed
to provide powerful insights into the present and future states of polar marine
ecosystems, including the local and regional aspects of ocean circulation, sea
ice dynamics, biogeochemical fluxes, biodiversity, ecosystem health and human
well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This event will bring together an
interdisciplinary group of students and young researchers from many fields
working in Polar regions. Exchanges of this type are essential for ensuring that
U.S. scientists and engineers maintain international research leadership in in
polar regions. Participants will have an opportunity to present their work in
the form of oral presentations or posters while interacting with some of the
most eminent researchers in the field. The GRS and GRC will address fundamental
aspects, which are related to the grand environmental and sustainability
challenges facing mankind. Specific emphasis will be given to defining the next
generation challenges in polar region research. The unique format of the Gordon
Research Conferences with invited talks, limited attendance, and ample time for
interactions will provide early career scientists with ample opportunities for
discussions and networking. Particular emphasis will be placed on encouraging
student and post-doc participation from a broad range of institutions. The GRC-
PPS will be widely advertised in the community and the participation and
application for travel support by junior scientists will be strongly
encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.