* 2029552
* IIBR Informatics: An Efficient Pangenomics Graph Aligner
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christina Boucher, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2023
* USD 700,361.00

In the past decade, there has been an effort to sequence and compare the DNA of
a large number of individuals of a given species, resulting in not just a single
reference genome but a population of genomes of a given species. Enormous public
data now are available including the 1,000 Genome Project, the 100K Genome
Project, the 1001 Arabidopsis Genomes project, the Rice Genome Annotation
Project, and the Bird 10,000 Genomes (B10K) Project. Key software, called short
read aligners, align newly sequenced DNA fragments to one (or more) reference
genome(s) in order to identify genetic variation within the species. The
downstream analysis of this genetic variation finds causal relationships between
complex diseases and phenotypes. Existing short read aligners are unable to
align to a large number of reference genome(s), due purely to computational
constraints. Hence, using a small number of genome(s) to align to reduces the
memory and time constraints. Unfortunately, although there is a large percentage
genetic similarity between individuals of the same species, the differences are
also important and aligning to only a small number of genomes of a given species
can lead to some of the DNA fragments not aligning or aligning poorly. This, in
turn, makes finding genetic variation between the newly sequenced DNA fragments
and the reference genome(s) more challenging. One manner to overcome this
challenge is to develop new algorithms and data structures for short read
alignment that reduce the computational resources. This project realizes this
vision by developing a novel representation of a population of genomes, and
creating the algorithms and data structures needed to build, store and update
it. Thus, integrated into this project is the goal of advancing biological
science and knowledge of model species, and the ideas, and furthering the
development of an outreach program that supports first-generation university
graduates. An immediate outcome of the work will be research opportunities to
under-served students through the Machen Florida Opportunity Scholars program,
an organization that aims to foster the success of first-generation university
scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Short read aligners first build an index from
one or more reference genome(s) and subsequently use it to find and extend
matched subsequences between sequence reads and the reference(s). The bottleneck
of using these read aligners to index thousands of genomes is the space and time
needed for construct and store the index. To address the shortcomings associated
with using a single reference genome, the concept of graph-based pangenomics
aligners has been introduced and widely discussed in the community. Although
such methods have been shown to improve on the accuracy over standard sequence-
based aligners, their use has not been fully explored. The challenge that
prevents the realization a pangenomics graph alignment is that of scalability.
The goal of the project is to the developing algorithms that allow for the
construction of a pangenomic reference from datasets gathered from large
populations. In order to achieve this goal, novel means to build, compress, and
update a graph that encapsulates the variation found in the population will be
created and implemented. Thus, this work will require further advancements that
have impact beyond the stated application. More specifically, it is unknown how
to merge the r-index, represent a graph-model of references using sub-linear
space, or represent the graph using the r-index. This project will address these
open problems, and more broadly, connect two areas of research: succinct data
structures and pangenomics. Next, the project will minimize the conceptual gap
between compression and mutability. The research community has struggled with
the balance between compression and mutability since highly compressed data
structures are not able to be altered without reconstruction. This poses unduly
constraints when trying to apply these structures to biological datasets that
routinely get updated with new data. This project will make significant
developments in this area by developing compressed data structures that are
mutable for our realization of our pangenomics index. Project website:
www.christinaboucher.com/pangenomics-iibr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.