* 2029985
* COVID 19: RAPID: Informed Decision Making for Pandemic Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Joao Hespanha, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2022
* USD 146,274.00

The primary goal of the proposal is to develop a set of tools to inform and
advise decision makers to control large-scale global pandemics. Specific
research problems to be addressed include (1) Making reliable predictions for
the state of the pandemic in the next few days/weeks/months. (2) Estimating the
effect of governmental measures in the dynamics of the pandemic. (3) Designing
protocols for effective control of a pandemic to prevent overloading the
healthcare system. Efficient management of large-scale epidemics that are likely
to overwhelm the health care system on a national scale, which would surely lead
to a significant increase in the loss of human lives, including deaths not
related to the specific pathogen causing the epidemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make contributions to the fundamental
research on developing actionable models for epidemic estimation and control.
Specifically, the focus is on models that are amenable to (i) the estimation of
model parameters, (ii) the estimation of the state of the epidemic, and (iii)
computing optimal intervention policies; all three with high degrees of
confidence based on the relatively small datasets that are available while an
epidemic is evolving. The research includes data-driven techniques to determine
the impact of non-pharmaceutical social measures for epidemic management. A key
challenge in this area is to reliably infer causal relationships between social
measures and their effect in the epidemic dynamics. Methods will be developed to
determine intervention policies that minimize the loss of human life and
economic impact, without overwhelming the healthcare system. The existence of
delays from actuation (e.g., through social measures) to effects (e.g., in
changes of infection rates) and the large uncertainty in the actuation
mechanisms pose significant technical challenges that must be addressed through
robust decision policies. This project will also provide training opportunities
for students in the areas of system modeling, identification, and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.