* 2029756
* Biological Self Assembly: Tissue Mechanics of the Spongy Mesophyll in Flowers
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 10/31/2023
* USD 794,735.00

This research will improve our understanding of cells and tissues in flowering
plants. More specifically, this work will reveal how the structural properties
of the interior tissue, or mesophyll, of flower petals vary across species. This
is important because different species of plants use the same building blocks to
generate radically different structures. The knowledge gained from the
experiments and computational models created in this work can aid in the
development of new materials that self-assemble and have specific tunable
properties and mechanical responses. This work also includes several education
and outreach activities. These include mentoring under-represented minority high
school and first-generation low-income undergraduate students in summer
research, developing a course module on computational analysis of microscopy
images of plant tissue, and organizing mini-symposia at scientific meetings that
bring together plant biologists and engineers who study the structural and
mechanical properties of plant tissue. Because of the shared interests, funding
is split between the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(CMMI) and the division of Integrative Organismal Systems
(IOS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomimicry is the study of physiological traits in
the natural world to inspire the creation of novel materials and designs. While
biomimetic materials take advantage of a single biological property, designs
rarely focus on the tunability and diversity of biological structures. For
example, the angiosperms, or flowering plants, are one of the most dominant and
diverse existing terrestrial plant groups on Earth, and their success has
largely been attributed to the evolution of flowers as reproductive organs.
Flower petals in particular vary widely among the angiosperms, but how these
structures develop and differ from species to species is largely unknown. Using
high-resolution micro-computed tomography, the studies will show how the
structural properties of the interior tissue, or mesophyll, of flower petals
vary across species. Computer simulations of mesophyll self-assembly using a
novel three-dimensional deformable particle model will also be carried out to
determine whether changes in a few key biophysical parameters can generate a
broad array of different tissue-level structures. These combined experimental
and computational studies represent one of the first investigations into how
simple biophysical rules can explain the development and diversity of complex,
three-dimensional plant tissue. These results will reveal fundamental design
principles for petal mesophyll tissue, which in turn will enable the design of
novel, porous materials with tunable mechanical and structural
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.