* 2029518
* RAPID: Improving Transportation Equity to Enhance Food Security for Families Vulnerable to COVID-19
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* H Jagadish, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 159,955.00

This COVID-19 RAPID research program will investigate, and begin to develop
mechanisms to address, the lack of access to food (i.e. food insecurity)
associated with COVID-19 and the role of transportation challenges leading to
food insecurity. The pandemic has exposed some of the underlying inequities in
health outcomes in our society. The lack of smartphone and internet access has
cut off some families from food delivery services. Consequently, these
households are at higher risk of exposure to the virus due to more frequent
trips to the grocery store, often by public transit. The research objectives
address food insecurity at both the local level and nationwide. The research
team will provide research and technical assistance to the City of Detroit’s
pilot program to deliver school lunches to vulnerable families. At a national
level, the team aims to identify the geographical areas and people most affected
by both food and transportation insecurity. The research results will be made
available to the public via a nationwide website and database that captures
COVID-19 related food insecurity mitigation strategies and best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enable data driven
discovery and practical insights by linking the available data on food security
with information about when, where, how, and why people travel. The team will
accomplish this by ingesting the Food Security Index, and related information
scraped from tagged content on the Internet, into the teams’ Transportation
Equity Open Knowledge Network (OKN) developed under Convergence Accelerator
Phase I Pilot project 1936884. The OKN allows stored data, its relationship to
other data and to real-world objects and concepts to be understood at a semantic
level. This integration will support the development and evaluation of the
previously mentioned school lunch delivery program, as well as the
identification of people and places most at risk of food insecurity due to a
lack of access to transportation. The results are expected to contribute to the
response to the current COVID-19 pandemic and any future
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track A: Open Knowledge
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.