* 2029798
* Enhancing Growth Mindset Academic Experiences to Support Graduation of Undergraduate Students in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Michael Yacci, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 12/31/2025
* USD 999,909.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Rochester Institute of Technology. Over its five-year duration, this
project will fund two-year scholarships to 30 unique first-year, full-time
students. This funding will support the students as they pursue Bachelor of
Science degrees in Software Engineering, Computing Security, Computing and
Information Technologies, Web and Mobile Computing, or Human Centered Computing.
This project aims to improve Scholars' retention and graduation rates by
fostering a growth mindset. People with growth mindsets think that their
abilities are not talents that they are born with, but instead can be enhanced
through persistence and hard work. Faculty will gather as a learning community
to understand, examine, develop, and apply evidence-based growth-mindset
curricular enhancements. They will integrate these growth-mindset activities
into programming and career preparation courses. Each Scholar will be paired
with a faculty mentor and participate in an online mentoring community. In
addition, Scholars will engage as a cohort in a semester seminar focusing on
metacognitive approaches to fostering a growth mindset. This project is
significant in that it will broaden the mindset approach beyond a single
classroom intervention to a more comprehensive approach that addresses students’
success as they prepare for graduation and entry to the workforce. It also seeks
to advance the computing education knowledgebase around integrating a growth
mindset approach in post-secondary academic and career instruction. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree
completion of low-income, high achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Using implicit theories of intelligence as a framework for the
design and evaluation, this project aims to promote student success by infusing
a growth mindset throughout students’ academic and career preparation
experiences. Building on research suggesting that mindset can be influenced to
promote positive learning experiences, improved academic performance, and
reduced vulnerability to stereotype threat, this project will adopt a holistic
growth mindset approach for computing students. Metacognitive instruction around
a growth mindset will also be integrated into student mentoring with the aim of
promoting student success. Two goals guide the project: (1) increase the
completion rate of academically talented, low-income Scholars in earning
Bachelor of Science computing degrees at Rochester Institute of Technology; and
(2) advance the knowledgebase in computing education mindset theory. Research
findings will be disseminated through conferences and publications in computing
education and learning sciences, as well as to academic leaders across the
institution to promote extension of the successful approaches to other STEM
academic domains. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.