* 2029610
* RAPID: Measuring Information Consumption and Beliefs During the Covid-19 Pandemic.
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Richard Bonneau, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 199,596.00

In recent months, the global COVID-19 pandemic has been accompanied by a surge
in pandemic-related false information, exposing shortcomings in the diffusion of
high quality information through online networks and in our understanding of who
is most susceptible to false and misleading information during times of crisis.
Important questions remain about who is able to discriminate low-quality
information from high-quality information related to COVID-19 and who is most
vulnerable to low-quality information during the pandemic. This project
investigates susceptibility to false and misleading information both in the time
of, and related to, the COVID-19 pandemic. As government agencies, civic
organizations, and for-profit companies work together to combat coronavirus-
related false information, an understanding of who is most likely to believe
false information — and mistrust true information — is necessary for crafting
and distributing targeted public health communications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social and behavioral literature offer competing insights
into how the current epidemic might impact people’s ability to evaluate the
veracity of information. This project will test a series of theoretically
informed hypotheses about why we might expect people’s ability to correctly
identify the veracity of information to change in the time of COVID-19, and why
we might expect people’s ability to discern the veracity of COVID-19 related
information to differ from their ability to ascertain the veracity of non-
Covid-19 related information. By sourcing real time news articles to crowds of
ordinary citizens as well as professional fact checkers over a multi-month
period, this project will investigate the individual-level determinants of
susceptibility to false information in real time, whether ordinary citizens can
be employed to crowdsource the labeling of high- and low-quality information,
and whether crowdsourced fact-checking can reduce the prevalence of false
information in the information ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.