* 2029729
* EAGER Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of Tunneling, Heterojunction-based 2D-Hot Electron Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Joan Redwing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/29/2024
* USD 65,447.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Heterojunction bipolar transistors based on the gallium
nitride/aluminum gallium nitride {(Al,Ga)N} system have long been of interest
for compact high frequency power devices for telecommunications and sensing.
These devices are difficult to realize due to the inability to produce a thin,
highly conductive base layer that is essential for high current gain and
frequency of operation. Hot electron transistors (HETs) could circumvent this
problem. Carrier transport in HETs occurs via the injection of hot electrons
from an emitter to a collector modulated by a base electrode. An ultra-thin base
is needed to enable ultra-short transit time for high performance. Atomically
thin 2D materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides are ideal materials
to serve as the base electrode in a HET. This will, however, require
incorporating the 2D base layer within the nitride heterostructure while
retaining high quality interfaces. Previous studies have used layer transfer
methods to incorporate 2D layers in HETs, but this approach introduces
interfacial impurities and is difficult to scale to large areas. This project
will focus instead on direct epitaxial growth of ultra-thin TMD base layers on
an (Al,Ga)N collector via metal organic chemical vapor deposition along with the
use of ultra-wide bandgap hexagonal boron nitiride as the emitter layer.
Fundamental issues concerning the epitaxial growth, material characterization
and current transport will be investigated in a step-wise process focusing on
the emitter-base and base-collector interfaces. This will provide insight into
the overall HET device performance and suggestions for further optimization.
Research outcomes will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate course
curriculum. The project will also provide research opportunities for
undergraduates and high school students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;A Two-Dimensional (2D)
layer base Hot Electron Transistor (HET) is proposed for overcoming the
difficulties faced by III-Nitride-based Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors
(HBTs). These are severely handicapped in demonstrating good electrical
characteristics due to the limited doping values of their base. The 2D layer
used in the transistor base will lead to low base resistance due to its high
electrical conductivity while an ultrathin base should allow the electron
carriers injected into it to travel without transit time limitations. 2D
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as WS2 and WSe2, which are nearly
lattice-matched to GaN and AlGaN collectors will be explored for the base. To
avoid introduction of interfacial impurities and the difficulties involved in
scaling to large areas commonly encountered in 2D layer transfer techniques, the
research will focus on direct growth by Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition
(MOCVD). This will be employed for growth of Hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN)
emitters and TMD monolayer and few-layer base films on Aluminum Gallium Nitride
((Al,Ga)N) collectors. It will also allow high quality 2D/nitride interfaces.
The studies will allow understanding of the role of surface energy, lattice
mismatch and defects on the nucleation and epitaxial growth of 2D films on
(Al,Ga)N, as well as defects at the interfaces and their correlation to material
properties and growth. Basic material and device blocks will be investigated to
gain good understanding of the fundamentals of growth and transport mechanisms
and allow optimization of HETs. Of major importance is the understanding of
current transport through the various layers leading to HET devices and their
optimization. The knowledge obtained from the project will impact the fields of
telecommunications and sensing thereby contributing to improving quality of
life. Educational/outreach activities will be targeted at graduate,
undergraduate and high school students as well as K-12 and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.