* 2029168
* Mutualism and environmental stress: heavy metal tolerance in a mycorrhizal system
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2025
* Sara Branco, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 787,884.00

Virtually all plants are involved in mutualistic associations where partners
benefit from each other. Mutualists strongly influence plant growth and survival
and can be particularly important for plant establishment under sub-optimal
environments, however details on how mutualistic partners impact plant stress
tolerance are still lacking. The project seeks to fill this gap by studying how
mycorrhizal fungi (widespread obligate root-associated mutualistic fungi that
provide water and nutrients to their partner plants) enable tree survival in
heavy metal contaminated soils. Specifically, they will use a combination of
field and experimental approaches to detect naturally occurring mycorrhizal
fungal heavy metal tolerance, investigate the fungal physiological mechanisms
underlying the ability to withstand high metal levels, and ultimately test the
role of metal tolerant fungi in plant survival under soil contamination. Results
from this research will contribute for better understanding plant biotic
interactions and their role in stressful environments. The research will also
allow the development of technology and tools to enhance plant establishment and
productivity, as well as assist in mitigating the overall negative impacts of
soil contamination. In addition, an important component of the project is to
create opportunities for the participation of women and minority students in
science, including mentorship for Native American and underserved students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will thoroughly investigate the mechanisms by
which natural variation in the widespread mycorrhizal fungal genus Suillus
enables its pine hosts to persist in soils recently contaminated with Zn. The
research will build on previous research on the genus and use controlled
reciprocal transplant experiments, along with gene editing, and physiological
and transcriptomics approaches. The goal is to investigate how the fungus
ameliorates plant metal toxicity and allows pines to grow in toxic Zn
environments. This project will make unique contributions for 1) understanding
how mycorrhizal fungi persist in contaminated soils, 2) elucidating how
mycorrhizal fungi protect their plant mutualists from environmental stress, 4)
better predicting the effects of pollution on mutualisms, and 4) developing a
framework and protocols useful for mitigating the effects of soil contamination
and improving reforestation of contaminated sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.