* 2029775
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) resistance and resilience to fire and insect outbreaks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* David McWethy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 17,997.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate how a culturally and
ecologically important tree species, whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis), has
physiologically adapted to disturbances such as fire in high-elevation subalpine
forests in mountain environments. Wildfire, insect outbreaks and diseases play
an important role in creating conditions in which whitebark pine (WBP) forests
can persist in high-elevation ecosystems. Subalpine forest tree species have
developed different strategies to survive these disturbances including the
growth of thick bark to survive fires and resin ducts that expel insects such as
mountain pine beetles. This research will evaluate the different strategies used
by WBP trees to survive disturbances. The results will provide insights into
different growth and defense strategies that may be beneficial to increasing
survivorship and promoting WBP establishment and persistence. Better
understanding how WBP trees respond to disturbance will provide valuable
information for natural resource managers tasked with maintaining WBP stands
into the future. Furthermore, this project will support the training of a
doctoral student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fire, insect outbreaks and disease play
an important role in the long-term establishment and persistence of WBP forests,
however, research is lacking to understand the growth mechanisms that WBP trees
use to persist under different histories of disturbance. Our research will
assess the influence of wildfire and mountain pine beetle activity on WBP
physiology by examining growth (ring-widths) and defense characteristics (duct
anatomy and resin chemistry) for over 200 trees at three different high-
elevation forest sites. This research will provide important information on the
characteristics and conditions under which WBP respond to multiple disturbances
that are increasing in subalpine forests. This work is important for restoration
efforts to sustain ecologically important WBP forests into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.