* 2029092
* RAPID: Data-driven Multiscale Integrative Model of the Coronavirus Virion
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Gregory Voth, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 190,595.00

Gregory Voth of the University of Chicago is supported by this RAPID award to
develop and deploy multiscale models of the entire SARS-CoV-2 virus, the virus
that causes the novel coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19). Such
multiscale models, at both the atomistic and coarse grain levels, contribute
greatly to our understanding of how this virus replicates. Molecular simulations
of viral processes in COVID-19 are useful to identify possible weaknesses in the
viral life cycle. This research focuses on the dynamics of coronavirus
processes, including the conformational transitions that are required for the
virus to function. The project has three main foci: 1) all-atom simulations of
individual viral proteins that are essential to the viral life cycle; 2) a
coarse-grain models to a holistic understanding of entire virion (the virus
outside the host cell) and its large scale processes, such as fusion of virions
with host cells; and 3) machine-learning-based approaches to link the all-atom
and coarse grain models and further refine their accuracy. As part of a larger,
international community working on COVID-19, all data, models and analysis code
will be made publicly available as soon as they are developed, including through
the NSF-funded Molecular Science Software Institute (MolSSI). The complete
multiscale picture of virus structure and dynamics will be used to identify
potential target sites for drug development and other therapeutic
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this RAPID project
is for the development and application of multiscale computer simulation methods
to characterize key elements of large-scale viral processes in SARS-CoV-2
replication. To achieve this goal there are three main objectives: (1) to
characterize the dynamical behavior of essential viral proteins involved using
all-atom molecular dynamics simulations and understand the conformational
transitions necessary for their function; (2) to develop and model the complete
SARS-CoV-2 virion using coarse-grained simulation methods; and (3) to develop
machine learning based approaches that systematically link atomic-level and
coarse-grained simulation scales, and facilitate the generation of even more
accurate and descriptive coarse-grained models. This research focuses on several
biomolecular systems that are urgently needed to understand and characterize the
transmission and propagation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, including the spike
protein that mediates entry of the viral particles into host cells, the host
cell receptor, angiotensin-converting-enzyme 2, which binds the spike protein,
coronavirus protease which catalyzes viral processes, and other viral protein
components, especially as structural data and biochemical information are
released in the next few months. Coarse-grained simulations will focus on the
urgent need to develop a holistic model of the entire SARS-CoV-2 virion as well
as its large-scale processes such as the fusion of virions with host
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.