* 2029804
* Ionospheric Response to the 2020 South American Total Solar Eclipse: Observing Atmospheric Gravity Waves and Total Electron Content Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Demian Gomez, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 10/31/2022
* USD 144,187.00

Total solar eclipse has always been the most visible celestial phenomenon that
attracts public attention. It is also a unique opportunity for a broad range of
scientific research. The sudden shutdown of solar radiation can create
disturbances throughout the atmosphere, from the surface to the ionosphere, a
region of atmosphere with a high concentration of ions and free electrons from
about 50 to 600 miles above the Earth's surface. Observation of such
disturbances during a solar eclipse provides a unique opportunity to understand
ionospheric dynamics and energy transportation in the atmosphere. This 2020
South America solar eclipse is of particular interest because it will occur in a
region where atmospheric gravity waves (AGWs) are being generated by the Andes
below, which create perturbations in the total electron content (TEC) in the
ionosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the team will observe and
model the interaction between the total electron content (TEC) in the ionosphere
and AGWs during the December 2020 total solar eclipse in southern Chile and
Argentina. It will focus on AGWs known as “mountain waves” that are associated
with and anchored by the topographic front of the Andes. The team will collect
geodetic data at about 35 Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) sites and
weather observations at 6 sites before, during, and after the 2020 eclipse so as
to examine the mechanisms by which TEC is perturbed by eclipse-generated AGWs.
The sites of the existing sparse GNSS continuous network will be complemented
with temporary sites installed to observe the eclipse. Through the development
and application of novel techniques, the team will analyze the resulting dataset
to address unresolved questions about interactions between the ionospheric TEC
variations and the eclipse’s umbra. These new observations will allow the team
to build on observational data collected during the 2017 and the 2019 eclipses.
New observations will also help to perfect the data processing techniques and
interpretation of future eclipses, such as the 2024 North American eclipse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address specific scientific questions:
does the passage of the eclipse, through changes in atmospheric conditions,
trigger mountain waves or other troposphere-level AGW associated with
topographic features? Do these triggered AGWs propagate up to ionospheric
heights, perturbing the ionospheric TEC? Does the eclipse trigger AGWs not
associated with topography, as predicted by earlier theoretical studies? The
team will use a dynamic 3D model of the ionosphere (SAMI3) and singular spectrum
analysis (SSA), a non-parametric modeling technique, to separate TEC
perturbations from the background TEC affected by the obscuration of the Sun.
Eclipses generate two sets of distinct TEC changes within and around the
totality zone: a direct effect due to the reduction and shutoff of ionizing
radiation, and a set of more complex indirect effects, associated with both
cooling of the atmosphere and the weather, that propagate into the ionosphere
from the underlying atmospheric behavior. Perturbations related to the complex
interaction between eclipse-induced AGWs and the ionospheric TEC are poorly
understood due to limitations in current TEC analysis techniques. This project
will address both topics by collecting new data, applying new techniques such as
SSA to TEC time series, and modeling the AGW-TEC
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help to produce accurate
background TEC models to reliably detect anomalies in ionospheric time series
due to AGWs (and also acoustic waves) triggered by tsunamis and nuclear
explosions. It will also enhance the reliability of systems that depend on the
real-time state of the ionosphere, including telecommunications and real-time
positioning services. The project will be led by an early career Argentine-
American faculty member and further promote diversity in geosciences by
including a female Latin American geodesist in fieldwork and subsequent data
analysis. A graduate student from Ohio State University (OSU) will participate
in the field campaign and the analysis of the TEC
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.