* 2029049
* PPoSS: Planning: Inflight Analytics to Control Large-Scale Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of this project is to fundamentally reinvent the design of the system,
from hardware to application, using fast, novel inflight analytics to control
and optimize large-scale heterogeneous computer systems to meet the performance
and resiliency requirements of emerging applications such as data mining,
artificial intelligence, and individualized medicine. Towards that goal,
advanced machine-learning (ML) methods along with domain knowledge will be
employed to support real-time system-state estimation and decision-making,
including resource management, congestion/failure detection and mitigation,
preemptive intrusion detection, and configuration management. Innovations across
the system stack will be needed to achieve optimal results by taking full
advantage of contextual information collected from multiple layers of the system
and adapting rapidly to the deployment environment, workloads, and application
requirements. ML-driven inflight analytics methods, developed in this effort,
will be demonstrated on a heterogeneous “rack-scale” computing system, with the
ultimate future objective of scaling up the framework to a warehouse-scale
computing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be organized around the
following research activities. (i) Work with noisy and incomplete telemetry data
(e.g., hardware telemetry, OS-level logs, and application-level traces)
available from monitors across the system stack to perform system-state
estimation (e.g., resource utilization). Telemetry data are often noisy and
inconsistent in terms of semantics, modalities, and time granularities, making
systems only partially observable. Bayesian deep-learning models will be
developed to accurately capture system states and cope with data noise and
incompleteness. (ii) Design models and algorithms for practical inflight
analytics that make decisions (e.g., on scheduling or failure mitigation) based
on the estimated system state to enhance system performance, reliability, and
security. Such a framework will consist of an ensemble of interdependent ML
models based on partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs)
augmented with domain knowledge (e.g., interconnect topology) and trained in
real time. (iii) Synthesize hardware accelerators for fast, low-cost inflight
analytic. Toward that end, a compiler and a runtime framework will be developed
that take high-level declarative probabilistic programs (i.e., the POMDPs),
automatically compile them onto accelerators, and plan their execution across
heterogeneous hardware (FPGAs, ASICs, and CPUs/GPUs). (iv) Assess the
trustworthiness of inflight analytics. For that, a trust-assessment framework
will be created to evaluate resiliency to failures and attacks due to residual
imperfections of heterogeneous components, input uncertainty, and the use of
stochastic ML algorithms. While in the planning stage, this project will focus
on design of inflight analytics in the context of rack-scale systems. The
methods and algorithms developed will be useful in helping smaller-scale sites
with limited resources manage their systems more efficiently. Students involved
in this project will have a rare opportunity to participate in the design of
heterogeneous ML-driven systems with broad applicability. The integration of ML
methods and algorithms into real systems can be attractive to a diverse range of
individuals, including underrepresented minority students. The goal is to raise
awareness of scientific and engineering challenges in design and deployment of
next-generation computing systems to support emerging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.