* 2029059
* GOALI: Stabilizing Additively Manufactured Superalloys at High Temperatures through Engineering Defect and Precipitate Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Keivan Davami, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2024
* USD 341,869.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will
investigate manufacturing techniques for high temperature materials used in
critical components such as turbine engine blades in the aerospace and energy
industries. This research will generate new knowledge related to the
understanding and implementation of a novel technique in which 3D printed
materials are treated with cycles of laser peening and heat treatment. Laser
peening is a well-established surface engineering process that is known to
enhance strength, but its use has been limited to parts that are used at
temperatures below 100C. The novelty of this new manufacturing technique is the
ability to enhance the stability of processed materials at much higher
temperatures. This GOALI collaboration between the University of Alabama and
Curtiss Wright Surface Technology will uncover the strengthening mechanisms and
enable control of the process, allowing for a smooth translation to the
industrial sector. The award will support graduate and undergraduate students,
providing them with internships and the opportunity to learn about an advanced
technology. It will also support a faculty member and a student from Tuskegee
University to visit and collaborate in the research. Outreach to high school
students will further familiarize them with engineering majors, and the research
results will be used to develop a new university
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative techniques that enhance the
stability of materials when exposed to high-temperature conditions have
potential to increase energy efficiency while simultaneously reducing pollutants
and carbon emissions. This is achievable through engineering properties via
precise manipulation of grain structure, dislocation structure, texture, and
dispersion of precipitated phases. Recently the PI and GOALI partner Curtiss
Wright Surface Technology developed a thermal-mechanical technique, using cyclic
laser peening and annealing stages, to stabilize the microstructure of
additively manufactured nickel-based superalloys even after exposure to high
temperatures. All previously-studied peening processes had been unable to
produce robust materials for high temperature applications, and the mechanisms
that control the stability in the new process are unknown. The research
objective is to understand the stabilizing mechanisms through techniques such as
spectroscopy, microscopy, and mechanical testing. The preliminary data shows the
potential of this technique for use in both traditionally-fabricated and
3D-printed nickel-based superalloys. While the focus of this research will be on
additively manufactured Inconel 718, a wide range of other superalloys as well
as other materials such as Ti6Al4V will also be studied. The insights gained
will help with fabricating parts from advanced materials, which can enable
energy savings in energy-intensive applications such as jet engines and gas
turbines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.