* 2029327
* EFRI E3P: Massive Microplastics Remediation using Novel Microcleaners and Microbiome Processing Accelerated by Artificial Intelligence
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The removal of the polymeric microparticles (microplastics) that pervade the
Earth’s oceans and waterways, and their conversion to value-added products, is
an unresolved societal challenge. The scale of the problem prevents use of
conventional chemical process technologies. To address this challenge, this
Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (EFRI) team will establish the
intellectual foundations of a new technology platform aimed at addressing
microplastics pollution. The platform includes efficient collection of
microplastics from water bodies using self-propelled microcleaners that navigate
complex environments and selectively capture/remove dispersed microplastic
particles. The scavenged microplastics are then processed, using engineered
microorganisms, into simple and versatile chemical building blocks that can be
recycled into value-added products. A key goal of the project is to implement
artificial intelligence methods to achieve the level of scalability and
circularity necessary to enable the deconstructed microplastics products to be
used for further microplastics capture. The team assembled to address these
goals will create an outstanding interdisciplinary environment for training the
next generation of scientists and engineers versed in the challenges of
developing a circular economy. New educational opportunities centered on
sustainability for K-16 and graduate students from diverse and underrepresented
backgrounds will be offered. Public outreach efforts, which include development
of research-inspired portable experimental kits, interactive games, and online
maps, are to be disseminated by partnering with educational programs at museums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the frontiers of fundamental
knowledge related to active colloidal and soft matter systems, computational
design of molecular recognition processes, directed evolution of biocatalysts,
and process intensification using artificial intelligence, all in the context of
developing innovative technological solutions to the massive problem of
microplastics pollution in marine and freshwaters. EFRI team members will
integrate these advances to provide the intellectual foundations of a circular
and scalable technology platform in which captured microplastics are processed
into deconstructed products that can be used for the capture of additional
microplastics or converted into other value-added products. Specific
intellectual challenges to be addressed include (i) the design of next-
generation "active" particle microcleaners that have fibrillar coronas and/or
move autonomously in aqueous environments thus providing efficient capture of
microplastics, (ii) the discovery of genetic pathways enabling efficient
depolymerization of microplastics and their implementation in rapidly-growing
marine bacteria, (iii) the computational design of peptides that recognize
specific polymeric surfaces for capture and sensing of microplastics and (iv)
the development of liquid crystal-based sensors for microplastics and deep-
learning algorithms that will be used to intensify the overall capture and
deconstruction processes. This project will also provide an outstanding
interdisciplinary environment for training the next generation of engineers. The
team’s broadening participation plan is committed to providing interdisciplinary
education and research opportunities centered on sustainability to K-16 and
graduate students from diverse and underrepresented backgrounds. Research-
inspired portable experimental kits, interactive games, and online maps will be
developed and disseminated through partnerships with public educational
programs. Thus, this project will not only introduce technologies for
remediation of microplastics but will also train a diverse engineering cohort to
solve grand engineering challenges, such as the "circular plastics economy."
This project is supported by the Directorate for Engineering and the Directorate
for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.