* 2029091
* RAPID: Decentralized Telephonic Triage System for Charitable Clinic COVID-19 Crisis Response
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Joseph Agoada, SOSTENTO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2020
* USD 125,074.00

Due to COVID-19, the demand on charitable clinics, the nation’s health care
safety net, is now greater than ever, and additional capabilities are needed to
help combat the impact of the pandemic on their communities. But unlike hospital
systems and large clinical networks, charitable clinics lack the human or
technological infrastructure to manage the tremendous demand, specifically the
increased volume of telephonic requests for information, referrals, clinical
care related to COVID-19, and clinical care unrelated but impacted by COVID-19.
The influx of patient calls has led to unnecessary high-risk visits to the
clinic for issues appropriate for telemedicine, and increased emergency room
utilization due to clinic overload. In addition to exposure risk, health and
financial outcomes are impacted when staff cannot appropriately triage and
manage telephonic requests. The goal of this research is to assess the efficacy
and feasibility of an innovative technology tool, HelplineSOS, to offer a
decentralized telephonic triage solution so that charitable clinics can rapidly
answer non-emergency calls related to COVID-19. The project will be conducted by
Sostento Inc., a 501c3 nonprofit whose mission is to help organizations on the
frontline of public health emergencies in ways that will save more lives, with
the support of a local research manager and experts with specialization in
telephonic triage systems.

The critical research questions of this project are 1) to explore the ability
for the technology to produce the patient and system behavioral outcomes (reduce
high risk clinic visit, burden staff with questions better answered elsewhere,
and triaging away from ERs), and 2) to determine the acceptability and
adoptability of a new technology such as this. The research follows a successful
pilot and proof of concept deployment of HelplineSOS. The Georgia Charitable
Care Network, a charitable clinic network, has identified additional clinics to
adopt the tool and participate in a study to determine efficacy of the
technology and feasibility for a state-wide deployment. It is expected that
project outcomes will enable approaches that mitigate the negative effects of
COVID-19 on public health, society, and the economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.