* 2029673
* RAPID: Exploring Causes and Cures for COVID-19 through Improved Access to Biomedical Research
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Jan Youtie, Search Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 186,227.00

Resolving the COVID-19 pandemic, and future crises, demands rapid and
comprehensive access to pertinent research knowledge. This project promotes the
progress of science to advance national health and welfare by enhancing the
nationâ€™s capability to understand the related global research literature and to
identify findings in disparate fields that are relevant for combating the virus.
This body of relevant literature comprises tens of thousands of biomedical
articles and is growing explosively each week. This project will provide means
to access vital findings and to develop tools to discover connections across
disciplines and among causes, biomarkers, conditions, and treatments for
COVID-19. The project will provide bi-weekly summaries of key findings in the
biomedical literature pertaining to COVID-19 on an open website. The information
will be arranged by topic, country, and organization, so that it can be easily
accessed by researchers and clinicians. The project will also uncover
connections across research domains that could identify novel treatments. Both
approaches strive to connect disparate research findings and innovative
developments. The first approach profiles the directly relevant research
literature to make findings more accessible and allow researchers to discover
complementary knowledge. Literature Based Discovery methods, using machine
learning and related methods, help bridge distinct research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make available a spectrum of research
knowledge to help develop prevention and treatment for corona viruses.
Literature Based Discovery methods serve to extract key components of a target
domain and then explore other distinct domains for potential causes, vital
biomechanisms, and treatments that could be repurposed. This approach seeks to
discover previously unrecognized commonalities in research on other viruses that
affect key physiological systems susceptible to the target viruses (for example
respiratory and immune systems). Such commonalities, such as in ways that
different viruses affect particular biosystems, may open doors to recognition of
co-morbidities or development of novel treatments. The project will advance
understanding of text mining and scientific discovery. The work will employ
human judges to classify a moderate number of abstract records on multiple
dimensions (such as virus type, physiological mechanisms addressed, causes, drug
types, and other treatment modalities), then use software to auto-classify the
30,000 and growing COVID-19-related research articles. Clues emerging from such
classification could open windows into other biomedical research and clinical
studies to seek novel approaches. By making these data immediately and publicly
available, the project will serve the community of those researching and
practicing in the area and accelerate scientific discovery around the
coronavirus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.