* 2029139
* EFRI DCheM: Distributed Manufacturing of Personalized Medicines
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,220,000.00

On a dollar per mass basis, active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) are perhaps
the most valuable chemicals in the world, and yet much of the mass of APIs in
drugs taken is not absorbed in the body, entering the water supply and
potentially harming human health and the environment. At the same time, despite
rapid advances in the science of personalized medicine, and digital, additive
manufacturing, the trillion-dollar-per-year pharmaceutical industry retains its
century-old manufacturing processes and uses supply chain and distribution
models that are potentially prone to tampering, contamination, and disruption.
To address this problem, researchers and drug manufacturers have begun
developing 3D printing approaches, as well as techniques borrowed from other
industries (e.g. thin-film coatings) for drug formulation, dose customization,
and release profile engineering. However, fundamental challenges remain with
material compatibilities, ingredient dispersion in solvents or matrix materials,
process control, and scalability. This fundamental research project aims to
address these challenges by converging several new breakthroughs in additive
manufacturing, molecular and crystallization modeling, surface science and
engineering, and patient-specific in vitro disease models. This project will
train students of diverse backgrounds, including women and minorities, and those
concerned with patient care and safety, public health, drug costs, regulatory
law and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research project will
introduce a radically new approach to drug formulation and distributed
manufacturing, offering new means of controlling crystalline structure,
cocrystallization, and adaptation to different delivery vehicles. Currently,
predictive model-based process design for organic crystallization processes is
still in relative infancy. Likewise, processes for cocrystallization require
further work to systematize coformer selection and prediction of conditions for
cocrystal formation. The novel, solvent-free process used here offers
possibilities for developing novel pharmaceutical cocrystallization research
tools, as well as a path to scalable cocrystal manufacturing. The technology
platform of controlled surface wettability patterns to enable low-cost
dissolution assays, combined with the organoid assays will create new paradigms
for on-site validation and control of product quality, which will be
particularly beneficial in a distributed manufacturing setting. The organoid
assays used could enable rapid testing of new medications in more realistic
cellular microenvironments prior to human trials. This research will facilitate
the path to accelerating the time from drug development to manufacturing and
distribution, and help prevent potentially dangerous by-products or contaminants
from reaching patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.