* 2029974
* EAGER: Light Integrated novel multimodal microscale transdermal drug delivery biosystem
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 170,000.00

Cutaneous leishmaniasis is a skin disease caused by a parasitic infection, which
affects up to one million people each year. There are many shortcomings to
current drug treatments for this disease, including hearing loss and kidney
damage. The goal of this joint North Carolina State University (NCSU) and Ohio
State University (OSU) project is to understand the unique functionality of a
microscale biosystem containing microneedle array that (a) emits light from an
optical component and subsequently (b) provides local release of a drug with
antiparasitic activity. This project seeks to better understand a new type of
microscale device technology that both (a) uses focused light to treat the
parasitic infection and (b) uses a small pump to deliver an antiparasitic drug
directly to the site of infection. Functionality of the novel device that
provides both light therapy and drug therapy will be compared with devices that
provide either light therapy or drug therapy alone. Goal of the project is to
evaluate the feasibility of the multimodal technology to enhance treatment
efficiency by comparing with different types of therapies. Graduate students
will be trained in fiber optics and microfabrication of functional biosystems
technologies and will be mentored in effective methods for teaching large
groups. The PI will disseminate results from the project through quarterly
Science Saturday lectures and hands-on activities at the North Carolina Museum
of Natural Sciences. The technical benefit of this project lies in forming the
basis for multimodal technology that will have significant impact on new types
of precise treatments for cancer and other diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit associated with this project involves developing a better
understanding of multimodal technologies, which include two or more types of
pharmacologic therapy and/or device-based therapy; this technology is considered
an emerging area of engineering research. Objective 1 will involve fabrication
of a microscale biosystem containing optical fibers, a pump, and a microneedle
array. Objective 2 will involve testing and validation of the microscale
biosystem. Objective 1 and 2 will be performed at NCSU. Objective 3 will involve
evaluation of the efficacy of the microscale biosystem in which optical
functionality and drug delivery functionality are provided together; comparisons
of this multimodal approach to drug therapy alone and light therapy alone will
be performed at OSU. The feasibility study supported by this project will enable
submission of a full proposal on comprehensively understanding the design of the
microscale biosystem. It is anticipated that this microscale biosystem can
provide a more effective treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis than conventional
drug therapy, which is associated with repeated dosing, long treatment times,
and toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.