* 2029336
* RAPID: Science and Social Networks: COVID-19 in an Urban Epicenter
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kavita Sivaramakrishnan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,995.00

The primary objective of this RAPID research project is to further our
understanding of the influences that shape policy making concerning public
health during the COVID 19 pandemic with a focus on New York City as a global
epicenter. The researchers plan to provide a time sensitive, living record and
analysis that documents the unfolding of social and political aspects of the
present crisis. They will study relational encounters in social and political
realms during the pandemic that shape multiple interpretations of events,
images, and broadcasts in a networked world; and how they in turn affect public
responses, programmatic decisions, and policies that relate to public health in
an urban context. The results of the project will be disseminated to policy
makers, community members, media spokespersons, public health and medical
experts in New York City, and global health stakeholders through publications in
policy journals, newspapers, access to radio and news programs, and online
platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to integrate insights from
STS studies, history of global public health, and cultural and media studies to
analyze political responses, public health communications, and policy decisions
concerning COVID-19. It will contribute to STS frameworks by arguing that
COVID-19 needs to be understood not only in terms of epidemiological and
biological evidence-building regarding its contagiousness and virulence; it also
needs to be understood in terms of social and political virality and
transmissibility of social modes of thought that shape its interpretations. To
achieve these ends, the researchers will draw from media studies of social
susceptibility, diffusion, and differential impact. They will engage in content
analysis of traditional media and social media, and they will conduct interviews
with 50 key actors. They will produce an initial account of policymaking in a
time of health and social crisis while generating critical material for future
scholars of COVID-19. Their interview materials are to be donated to the
Columbia University Center for Oral History Research; their print/digital
materials are to be donated to the Special Collections division at the
Universityâ€™s Health Sciences Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.