* 2029142
* Collaborative Research: Particle Reinforced Ice as a Tunable Acoustic Couplant
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Christian Peco Regales, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 348,742.00

The prosperity of the US manufacturing industry is dependent upon the ability to
remain at the forefront of new material technologies and manufacturing
processes. In this context, 3-D printing of metallic components has emerged as a
game changer in many industries where the potential to build geometrically
complex components promises to increase the performance and life-cycle
sustainability of high value products. However, utilization of these components
in safety-critical applications is hindered by the lack of suitable methods to
detect manufacturing defects or subsequent damage that develops while a
component is in service. If left undetected, these defects can lead to
catastrophic failures and result in great financial losses or even loss of life.
This study seeks to bridge this gap by expanding the range of applicability of
ultrasonic testing, a widely used method for the noninvasive inspection of
simple shape components. The goal is to introduce a new material specifically
designed to couple ultrasonic signals with the bulk of geometrically complex
components. The material will be a new form of ice loaded with solid particles
to yield tunable rigidity and mass density which are critical for the
effectiveness of ultrasonic testing. This project will develop educational
modules for three different courses at Penn State and the University of
Cincinnati and train graduate and undergraduate students supported by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the progress of science
by creating novel models of wave propagation in particle composites that enable
the design of these tunable coupling solids (i.e., reinforced ice). This study
will investigate the effects of microstructural modifications in ice composites
on wave propagation and scattering through experimentally validated multiscale
models. The project will create a new mathematical framework to model wave
propagation in particle reinforced composites that lies at the convergence of
physics-based analytical approaches and numerical unit cell methods. By merging
analytical and data-driven strategies, this work will uncover innovative
multiscale approaches to the study of wave propagation in media with complex
microstructures. Understanding the impact of particle addition on the dynamic
response of ice will enable the analysis of wave propagation in generalized
particle composite structures, which will extend far beyond the described
application. The increased efficiency in the joint numerical and analytical
approach combined with the proposed optimization algorithms will fundamentally
change the fields of elastodynamic modeling and ultrasonic nondestructive
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.