* 2029374
* EFRI E3P: Reincarnation of Polymers for the Circular Economy
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Eric Hegg, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The United States recycles less than 10% of generated plastic waste. Low
recycling rates create problems including: 1) leakage of waste plastic into the
natural environment and accompanying fragmentation into microplastic particulate
pollution that negatively affects ecosystems and human health, 2) depletion of
our oil and natural gas supplies - the need to use lots of energy to make new
plastics, and 3) increased greenhouse gas emissions compared to using recycled
materials. The microplastics pollution problem is particularly concerning
because these small plastic particles are entering the human food chain, and the
effects of microplastic consumption of these very small plastic particles is
currently unknown. Furthermore, several analyses have shown enhanced recycling
will lead to dramatic job growth; upwards of a million jobs could be created. In
this Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation project an interdisciplinary
and diverse team will work to transform the plastics industries to eliminate
end-of-life waste. Revolutionary approaches to sorting, cleaning, and
transforming waste plastics enables a transformational outcome; present “end of
life” thinking becomes holistic “end of cycle” thinking as more plastics are
repeatedly used rather than thrown into a dump. The knowledge and technologies
developed through this research will enable greater rates of plastics recycling,
more recycling creates jobs while helping to protect the environment and human
health. Investing in improved recycling technologies will help the USA remain
competitive in the ever-changing global economy. Participation in programmatic
activities is inclusive and fostered by novel cross-disciplinary interaction
with Community Sustainability programs and through delivery of outreach programs
for K-12 and undergraduate college students. A Diversity Team will work in
partnership with the tribal colleges of Michigan, which are Minority-serving
institutions, to support meaningful participation in STEM research by the Native
American community. A deep and culturally diverse awareness of sustainability
issues will be fostered through incorporation of traditional learnings into
program pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop and
demonstrate new approaches to recycling plastics. The scope of the project
includes novel ways to depolymerize polymers and repolymerize the products into
valuable materials. Controlled experimentation complemented by chemical kinetic
models, molecular-scale simulations, and machine learning are the primary
methods used. Specialized expertise in life cycle analysis (LCA) will be used to
assess and establish the utility of the new and innovative approaches. Chemical
recycling through depolymerization is accomplished through cascading of
chemically and biochemically catalyzed transformations. Consistent with a
rapidly emerging innovation trend in the chemical sciences, synergistic
combinations of chemically and enzymatically catalyzed transformations will be
demonstrated through the case study of chemical oxidation followed by
enzymatically catalyzed decarboxylation to create naptha (mixed alkanes). The
resulting low-temperature cascaded approach will be compared to the present
state-of-the-art of thermal pyrolysis; LCA will guide process improvements and
be used to assess if this new cascading approach provides improved
sustainability metrics. A direct comparison of a high-temperature pyrolysis
process with a low-temperature cascading pathway can substantially advance
knowledge in the plastic recycling field; to date, no such comprehensive
evaluation is available. However, the implications regarding which of the two
pathways deserves future emphasis are profound. The innovative use of combined
reactor-separators will be demonstrated and is expected to be a superior
approach to producing monomers from waste plastics. Repolymerization will be
pursued as a means of “reincarnating” end-of-life plastic into brand new, high-
value, specialty polymers for use in their next life. Oxidation of waste
polyethylene will be used to produce dicarboxylic acids, and the innovative use
of ammonolysis on waste polyethylene terephthalate will provide aromatic
diamines. Resulting monomers are to be incorporated into newly formed polymers
including polyesters, polyamides, polyaramids, polyesteramides, and
polyesteraramids. These resulting polymers are considerably more expensive
(2-3x) than the reclaimed waste plastic, providing an economic incentive that
can effectively increase recycling rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.