* 2029425
* EFRI DCheM: Engineering Interfaces between Plasma, Catalysts, and Reactor Design for Natural Gas Conversion to Liquid Products
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yiguang Ju, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Traditional large-scale chemical plants and refineries rely heavily on high-
temperature catalysis to transform hydrocarbon feedstocks to fuels and
chemicals. Such processes carry high energy demands, which are typically
provided by natural gas combustion with a large associated generation of CO2.
This project investigates an alternative approach – plasma catalysis – that can
be powered by renewable electricity and engineered to enable distributed
production of chemicals and liquid fuels from otherwise stranded and flared
natural gas. This project combines researchers at Princeton University,
University of South Carolina, and Stanford University with expertise in
catalysis, plasma physics and chemistry, and nanomanufacturing with national
laboratories and industry to provide a variety of research and educational
initiatives that will nurture future U.S. leaders and innovators in energy and
engineering sciences and technology. The project is supported by a broadening
participation plan to attract underrepresented minority (URM) students (e.g.
high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students) for summer on-campus learning
programs, industrial internships, and thesis research. Such emphasis aligns with
the team’s educational goal of creating a pipeline in science and engineering
for students from high school through college and advanced degrees. Further,
collaborations with national laboratories and industry and the formation of the
Center Advisory Board and Industrial Consortium will facilitate the innovation
and technology transfer to market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renewable electricity
from solar and wind provides unprecedented opportunities for distributed
reactors using low-temperature, non-equilibrium atmospheric misty plasma
catalysis. The overarching project goal is to investigate the plasma-assisted
catalytic conversion of methane to higher-order liquid hydrocarbons and
oxygenated fuels and chemicals. Key challenges addressed are: (i) understanding
non-equilibrium energy transfer and transformation of matters in plasma
catalysis; (ii) identifying methods to stabilize plasma without impacting its
efficiency; (iii) coordination between plasma properties and catalytic activity,
selectivity, and stability in chemical conversion; (iv) development of
experimentally validated, predictive kinetic and transport models for novel
plasma catalysts and reactor co-design; and (v) elucidating reactor design and
manufacturing criteria that optimize plasma and catalyst integration. The
studies will advance fundamental understanding of plasma catalysis by conducting
advanced laser diagnostics of non-equilibrium plasma properties, excited states,
and chemistry, and by developing experimentally validated predictive multiscale
modeling tools for plasma chemistry and transformation of matter in plasma
catalysis. Moreover, elements of hybrid plasma control, catalyst design, and
additive manufacturing will be employed to develop an innovative micro-aerosol
plasma catalytic reactor (MAPCAR) as a modular device to enable efficient and
selective conversion of abundant feedstocks such as stranded natural gas and
CO2, to liquid fuels and oxygenated chemical precursors. Time-resolved
simultaneous plasma properties and chemistry diagnostics will be employed to
enhance fundamental understanding of the non-equilibrium plasma states, energy
transfer, chemical kinetics, and transformation of matters in plasma-catalysis.
The data will be used to develop and experimentally validate models and
multiscale plasma catalysis modeling tools for MAPCAR optimization. The research
will not only advance the scientific understanding of the elementary physical
and chemical processes in plasma catalysis, but also develop a new predictive
tool for plasma catalysis design, new control methods for achieving uniform
atmospheric plasma, and new techniques to manufacture distributed plasma
catalytic reactors for chemical processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.