* 2029685
* RAPID: Collaborative: Location Privacy Preserving COVID-19 Symptom Map Construction via Mobile Crowdsourcing for Proactive Constrained Resource Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Yuanxiong Guo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The recent pandemic of COVID-19 has caused a public health crisis to US and many
other countries in the world. Since there is currently no medication to treat
COVID-19, the most challenging question is how to effectively allocate
constrained healthcare resources to the next potential outburst communities or
areas, so that we can halt or even prevent the virus' further spreading. The
current reactive efforts of relying on people to visit their doctors or testing
stations for collecting infection data may not work in an efficient and timely
manner due to the limited coverage, high cost, and increased exposure risk for
people to be congested at those places. This project develops a fine-grained and
location privacy-preserving COVID19 symptom map (CSM) via mobile crowdsourcing,
where the symptoms may include fever, cough, or shortness of breath. The
proposed CSM is promising in its ability to identify the potential outbreak
areas and facilitate the proactive and dynamic allocation of healthcare
resources. Meanwhile, the location privacy preserving feature will protect the
mobile crowdsourcing participants from bias or discrimination, encouraging them
to participate for the public good. The project involves synergized efforts from
mobile crowdsourcing, public health science, data analytics, privacy, and social
science. Education and outreach activities are designed to increase the
participation of women and minority in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an interdisciplinary framework for
location privacy preservation, mobile crowdsourcing, data analytics, social
science, and public health science, and contains a research plan with four
interconnected thrusts. First, a novel location differential privacy
preservation mechanism named differentially private hexagonal hierarchical
geospatial indexing system (DPH3) will be developed, which can well represent
physical community structure in the map, guarantee mobile crowdsourcing
participants’ location differential privacy, and provide high mobile
crowdsourcing utility for CSM construction in terms of map coverage and
accuracy. Second, a coverage-aware crowdsourcing participant recruitment scheme
based on DPH3 and approximation algorithm will be designed to guarantee the
crowdsensing coverage while preserving participants' location differential
privacy. Third, a quality-assured CSM will be constructed by using virus
propagation model as the prior knowledge for detrending in ordinary kriging and
robust estimation for mitigating the impact of location privacy preserving
noises added by DPH3. Fourth, a strategic communication approach to community
engagement from the perspective of social science will be used to motivate
community members’ activeness in information seeking and sharing about COVID-19
symptoms, facilitate crowdsourcing needed for the CSM, as well as empower the
community members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.