* 2029575
* RAPID: Older adults’ learning and adaptation as resilience processes to counter social isolation during the COVID-19 pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Rachel Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2024
* USD 132,474.00

The mental health and well-being of older adults are being threatened by the
COVID-19 social distancing requirements that have limited social connectivity.
For older adults, long-term social isolation predicts cognitive decline
trajectories, reduced subjective well-being, and increased mortality. Thus, the
COVID-19 global pandemic could intensify negative aging trajectories, even for
healthy older adults. The proposed research will investigate factors that lead
to or mitigate against social isolation and loneliness amid the current physical
distancing restrictions. The primary hypothesis is that resilience across
adulthood is dependent on two theoretically-derived factors: engagement in novel
skill learning and positive personal beliefs. The results of these studies could
guide the design of future interventions, such as supportive learning
opportunities through technology. The unknown duration of the physical
distancing restrictions, and the potential for future waves of infection drive
the urgency of this research to develop enhanced resilience pathways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID proposal seeks to examine social distancing in
older adults and other potentially vulnerable populations through three aims: 1)
Investigate how and to what extent different demographic groups (e.g. age, SES)
are staying socially connected despite physical distancing; 2) Evaluate how
learning and adaptive behaviors, and personal beliefs about age/abilities,
predict successful social connectivity, higher subjective well-being, and lower
levels of isolation and loneliness during the pandemic; and 3) Conduct match
pair-comparisons with older adults who previously participated in a learning
intervention promoting adaptation and positive beliefs. Integrating beliefs and
behaviors to predict outcomes is central to Social Cognitive Theory. The current
research will collect data before and after restrictions are revised to assess
an extended conceptual model of this theory that focuses specifically on novel
skill learning for adaptation. Findings from this project will inform
development of infrastructures to better support older adults under social
distancing practices of COVID-19 and other future
crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.