* 2029751
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Augmenting Mucosal Gels with Associating Brush Polymers to Prevent COVID-19 Infection
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Bradley Olsen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The SARS-CoV-2 causes the novel coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19).
A key challenge with the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic is developing protective
countermeasures that can slow the spread of the disease. With funding from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professors Stephen L. Craig and Michael Rubinstein of Duke University
and Bradley D. Olsen of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are developing
macromolecules for use as inhaled countermeasures to reduce the rate of
infection with SARS-CoV-2. Mucus clearance is an essential defense mechanism in
mammalian lungs. It is used to capture and clear inhaled infectious agents, such
as SARS-CoV-2 virus, from airway surfaces. The team prepares macromolecules or
polymers consisting of many repeating units linked with covalent bonds. These
large molecules are constructed in order to mimic properties of mucins in the
human body. Additionally, the synthetic mucin mimics are tagged with binders
that are specific for SARS-CoV-2. The prepared mucus-mimicking polymers are
designed to blend efficiently with natural mucus in the body once introduced.
This allows the polymers to act as effective decoys that bind to viral receptors
in SARS-CoV-2. As a result, the pathways by which the virus enters the lungs and
infects cells are blocked. Apart from synthetic chemistry, computational
modelling is also used in this research to guide and speed up experimental
design. Scientific advances associated with this research could be particularly
useful for health care workers who are exposed to a heavy dose of SARS-CoV-2,
but may also be scaled to the civilian population. The project also contributes
to the training of postdoctoral students in a highly interdisciplinary research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is developing an inhaled
polymeric countermeasure that will reinforce mucosal layers, enabling
individuals to demonstrate a substantially decreased rate of infection from
SARS-CoV-2 after exposure or to tolerate a larger dose without developing severe
symptoms. In the first project goal, new bottlebrush polymers functionalized
with readily available luteolin-, quercetin- and cepharantine-based binders for
SARS-CoV-2 are synthesized using ruthenium catalyzed ring opening metathesis
polymerization. Systematic studies are then conducted to explore how the ligand
and polymer design affect their multi-virus binding using both theory and
experiment. The second goal focuses on understanding how mucin-mimetic
bottlebrush polymers incorporate into supramolecular networks formed by native
mucins and how they can maintain key mechanistic properties of these natural
systems while reducing viral penetration. The probability of association,
network formation, microphase separation, and macroscopic phase separation is
predicted using modified molecular models. Cell sheet testing is used to
quantify the impact of the mucin-mimetic polymers on infectivity. This research
has the potential to advance the design of bottlebrush polymers by expanding new
ligand conjugation schemes that enable SARS-CoV-2-specific ligands to be
attached to bottlebrush polymers. Novel methods of theory and simulation are
also developed for both viral diffusion and blends of synthetic bottlebrushes
and natural mucins, which could be applicable to other biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.