* 2029632
* SaTC: EDU: LIGERLabs: Educational Modules for (Anti-)Reverse Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Christian Collberg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Attacks against endpoints of our interconnected cyberspace, such as laptops and
mobile devices, are becoming more prevalent. Attackers can steal data-processing
capacity and/or leak user data from a user's web browser, automobiles can be
commandeered by violating the integrity of safety-critical software, virtual
currency can be stolen by corrupting mobile games, critical infrastructure can
be subverted by manipulating electrical meters, and Internet-of-Things devices
in our homes can be hijacked. Reverse engineering and anti-reverse engineering
are important topics in cybersecurity. Malicious actors may seek to reverse
engineer software and hardware to find vulnerable points to attack. Conversely,
these concepts can be used defensively by cybersecurity professionals to
identify and strengthen vulnerabilities in hardware and software, and to prevent
exploitation. This project will develop a collection of educational resources
for teaching reverse engineering and anti-reverse engineering concepts to
undergraduate and graduate level computer science students. These resources will
stress the interplay between reverse engineering and anti-reverse engineering,
and how progress in one drives progress in the other. As a result of this
project, computer science students will enter the workforce with a better
understanding of how to defend against endpoint attacks, which will benefit
national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is threefold:
to give students the mental tools necessary to understand the low-level nature
of many of the cybersecurity issues seen today, to increase student proficiency
in dissecting and analyzing different forms of executable code, and to ensure
students are familiar with techniques for protecting against attacks. Particular
emphasis is placed on the interplay between reverse engineering and anti-reverse
engineering. Over time, the design of more powerful program analysis techniques
has driven the development of new software protection techniques to counter
them, and vice versa. It is the goal of this work to provide students with the
intellectual tools and practical skills to appreciate this ongoing struggle and
to prepare them for future developments throughout their careers. To accomplish
this goal, the project team proposes to develop a structure termed "LIGERLabs"
to foster undergraduate and graduate computer science students' abilities in
reverse engineering and anti-reverse engineering. LIGERLabs will include a
collection of recorded video lectures and animations, virtual machines with pre-
installed attack and defense tools, write-ups and answer-sheets for paper-and-
pencil homework exercises and in-class collaborative exercises, take-home
programming assignments, and generators and auto-graders of reverse engineering
exercises. To generate appropriately calibrated reverse engineering exercises,
this project will conduct studies of students from different backgrounds to
build up a schedule of exercises of appropriate
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.