* 2029039
* RAPID: Coronavirus Risk Communication: How Age and Communication Format Affect Risk Perception and Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Susan Joslyn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,133.00

On March 11, 2020 the coronavirus officially became a global pandemic. In the
United States the suggestion to practice “social distancing” was replaced by
official “stay at home” orders from at least 30 states, and numerous counties
and cities. Despite these official orders, people continued to gather in outdoor
spaces and in private. Why do they do so? Are they “risk seeking” in the sense
that they understand the risk but have decided to take it anyway? Or do they
misunderstand the risk of contracting the disease, becoming seriously ill, or
spreading it to others? Given the complexity and variability of the information
about coronavirus available to the public, misunderstandings are likely. It may
be difficult for individuals to assess their own risk of contracting and/or
dying from the disease, and particularly difficult to understand the risk of
passing it on to others. Nonetheless, one thing is clear: older people are at a
greater risk for fatality. The risk for contracting the disease, however,
appears to be more evenly distributed across age groups. It is possible that
people use an unconscious simplifying strategy focusing on the more dramatic and
widely publicized death rates and assume that if they are younger, all risks,
including those that they pose to others, are less. The first goal of this
project is to assess the perceived risks associated with coronavirus across age
groups and determine how risk perception impacts the decisions people make. The
second goal is to design and test risk expressions that are understandable to
members of the public. Thus, this project makes significant contributions to our
understanding of how people make risky decisions in context, based on complex
risk information, as well as to the development of communication strategies
tailored for different users.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful risk
communication strategies depend upon first understanding how people process
complex risk information. In the context of the coronavirus, decision makers
must take into account both the risk to themselves as well as the risk to others
they may infect if they contract the coronavirus. There are numerous cognitive
issues associated with this process that at present are not well understood. In
particular, how do people understand related but differing risk estimates? How
do they use that information to make precautionary decisions that impact
themselves as well as others? This project conducts a series of online studies
to determine how people perceive coronavirus risks, separately and in
combination, as well as how risk perception impacts their precautionary
decisions. Perhaps more importantly, based on preliminary surveys,
understandable risk communication expressions are developed and tested
experimentally to establish causal links between information expression and risk
perception, trust, and decisions. Finally, using a few relevant individual
difference measures, the researchers determine whether specific abilities are
necessary to process complex numeric risk expressions and whether simplified
expressions are better in some cases. The results of this work provide
invaluable advice with the potential to save lives. This research can inform
best practices in risk communication that have important implications for
communicating risks in future outbreaks. Understanding how best to communicate
risks to the public and whether communication should be tailored to specific
subgroups is critical to avoiding future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.