* 2029098
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Variability in the Frequency of Fire Use in the Archaeological Record
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Theodore Schurr, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 21,212.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the use of fire, an
important adaptation in human prehistory, and its relationship to fluctuating
environmental conditions. Burned stone artifacts will be quantified
(frequencies) as measures of fire use in several stone artifact assemblages from
Paleolithic archaeological sites selected from a wide range of temporal,
geographic, and climatic conditions. Other evidence of fire use, such as
hearths, is often qualitative (presence/absence) and therefore of limited
utility in documenting the intensity or extent of fire use at these sites. The
project will advance knowledge about human behavioral plasticity with respect to
changing environments. It will also leverage available, but often neglected,
data from museum collections, and will make these data accessible to a range of
scholars through publications and databases. Public presentations about the
findings will be made in museum settings to engage wider audiences, and
background information and results of the project also will be shared through
public archaeology podcasts and social media. Outreach activities will promote
the participation of women and adult learners in scientific inquiry, and foster
interest in archaeological and paleoanthropological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frequency of burned stone artifacts will be
compared across strata using three different sampling strategies (two types of
counting methods, as well as weight) based on a size-grade distribution.
Integrating the resulting data with other direct and geoarchaeological evidence
of fire use will help to document the extent to which fire was used during the
period of occupation associated with each cold and warm interval during the
Paleolithic period. In addition, a controlled experiment using an ultra-low
freezer will be conducted to assess the impact of the natural process of frost
weathering on stone artifacts, to increase the level of accuracy and reliability
in the identification of burned flints by distinguishing surface alterations
that are caused by frosting exposures from those of burning. Petrographic and
scanning electron microscopy, as well as Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy, will be used to detect macro- and microscopic alterations on the
surface of experimentally frost-weathered artifacts. The results of this project
will contribute to the field of Paleolithic archaeology by advancing sampling
methods and experimental designs for the analysis of burned stone artifacts, as
well as documenting burned artifacts from an extensive geographic
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.