* 2029699
* The Role of Percolation in the Hydrogel-to-Tissue Transition for Cartilage Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Stephanie Bryant, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2024
* USD 584,235.00

The encapsulation of living cells in a three-dimensional hydrogel offers
tremendous potential for tissue engineering by providing instructive cues to
cells and a structural support for new tissue formation. A critical barrier to
success is the need to couple the degrading/breaking down of the hydrogel to the
synthesis of new tissue in order to maintain mechanical integrity during the
transition from hydrogel to tissue. This project combines computational modeling
and experimental studies to identify the underlying fundamental principles that
govern tissue growth in a hydrogel. The outcomes from the project will enable
hydrogel designs for a wide range of cell populations including those that have
poor tissue synthesis capabilities (e.g., older adults), thus enabling a more
personalized approach to tissue engineering. Planned activities include active
learning modules for K-12 and undergraduate students, the involvement of these
students in research, and unique training opportunities to graduate students at
the interface of materials, tissue engineering, and mathematical modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to gain fundamental
insight into the mechanisms that govern tissue growth in hydrogels. A functional
requirement in the process of tissue growth is a seamless transition from
hydrogel to tissue that retains mechanical integrity of the three-dimensional
(3D) construct. One way to maintain connectivity during the transition is
through the co-existence of an interpenetrating network made of hydrogel and
tissue, a concept described by the theory of mechanical percolation. To this
end, this project introduces mechanical percolation into a physically-driven
multiscale mathematical model to capture the mechanisms responsible for hydrogel
degradation and neotissue growth. Applying an integrated experimental and
computational approach, the overall research objectives for this project are to
(a) demonstrate rational control over the gel-to-tissue transition at the
cellular level, (b) build mesoscale heterogeneities to control the mechanical
transition from gel-to-tissue, and (c) apply a model-assisted approach to
designing hydrogels that achieve a seamless gel-to-tissue transition across
different types of donors whose tissue synthesis capabilities vary. The
knowledge gained from this research will fill a critical gap in our current
understanding of tissue growth in hydrogels and will aid in the successful
translation of hydrogels for use in tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.