* 2029044
* RAPID: Active Tracking of Disease Spread in CoVID19 via Graph Predictive Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,449.00

Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has emerged as a public health crisis of
global proportions. As of April 10, 2020, there are approximately 1.7 million
confirmed COVID-19 cases in more than 180 countries, with over 100,000 deaths.
In the US, there are more than 500,000 confirmed cases and nearly 20,000
fatalities, and these numbers are continuing to rise sharply. There is a clear
and acute need for ensuring the availability of infrastructure and critical
services as the epidemic progresses. Current plans for controlling the epidemic
are based on forecasts from well established “compartment” models for epidemic
prediction. These models rely on differential equations based on assumptions of
homogeneous populations, homogeneous mixing, and knowledge of several
critical hyperparameters such as the base reproduction rate. It is well known
among experts in infectious diseases and epidemic management that fitting
observed data to the parameters of such models is an exercise in characterizing
the epidemiology as opposed to generating valid and actionable predictions.
Consequently, there is an urgent need to significantly update these models to
account for the data collected on the ground from multiple data sources and
locations. This is especially relevant in engineering preemptive interventions
to check disease spread. Current COVID disease data are organized in a
geospatial format, i.e., infected, deceased, and suspected cases indexed by
geolocation, which can range from city-, county-, or state-level coarseness.
This project aims to develop and demonstrate techniques that use the geospatial
nature of the data, the temporal evolution of disease statistics (along with
predictions), and synthesis of multiple sources of data to help rapidly and
preemptively allocate available medical resources toward the areas of greatest
need. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modeling the COVID-19 epidemic and designing
interventions are significant challenges. This project looks at the problem
through the lens of graph analytics. In particular, it seeks to use similarity
information between geospatial regions of interest to improve epidemic
predictions and to design effective interventions. As a first step, the problem
of epidemic prediction is being modeled as the reconstruction of a high-
dimensional dynamical system from low-dimensional observations. The estimates of
a model thus learned will be enhanced by leveraging similarity information
between the localities of interest. While the geospatial proximity graph is a
natural candidate for the graph of similarities, it fails to capture long-range
statistical dependencies between geographical regions based on other factors
such as the sociological and biological features of a population. Using
techniques from graphical modeling, this project will develop new techniques
for learning statistically meaningful graphs for epidemic modeling during
an ongoing pandemic. Furthermore, the accurate time-series prediction generated
will be combined with the graph-based similarity measures to design effective
interventions to check the spread of the epidemic. This is being approached
using a stochastic formulation and emerging methods for anomaly detection on
graphs with time series observations; optimal policies based on these paradigms
will be translated into interventional strategies for an evolving pandemic. The
project leverages partnerships with local community stakeholders in Maricopa
County and the State of Arizona through the Knowledge Exchange for Resilience
(KER) to implement the methodologies developed, and to ensure its technical
advances can produce meaningful insights that can generalize nationally and
globally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.