* 2029707
* SBIR Phase I:  Machine Learning for Early Detection of COVID-19 Plaques in Cells
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Ilya Goldberg, ViQi LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,571.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the development of vaccines and
anti-virals with artificial intelligence (AI) techniques. This project will
develop technology to detect changes in virus-infected cells days or weeks
before they can be detected manually. This will accelerate studies for novel
anti-viral compounds characterizing their effectiveness on rapidly mutating
viral strains, such as influenza and SARS-CoV-2. This will impact COVID-19
research and general virology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
will investigate AI techniques to accelerate testing of anti-viral agents in
plaque assays for the development of vaccines and anti-virals. These assays
measure the number of infectious viral particles in a sample by observing the
effects of infection on a culture of susceptible cells. Currently, the assay
takes 2-14 days because several rounds of infection are necessary to ensure an
accurate reading. This project will advance AI techniques to automatically
detect infected cells in microscopy images without human intervention or time-
consuming preparations, thereby increasing the throughput for these assays. To
achieve this goal, this project will: 1) Collect a time-course of microscopy
images of infected cell cultures for training an AI model to measure virus
infections automatically on large cell culture plates; 2) Investigate microscopy
image acquisition approaches with respect to ease of integration in existing
workflows and image quality; 3) Evaluate the suitability of various AI
techniques; 4) Determine the detection accuracy and compare it with traditional
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.