* 2029442
* EFRI DCheM: Electrifying CO2 From Point Sources into Pure Liquid Fuels
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* T. Alan Hatton, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The project supports research toward development of an electrochemical modular
system to directly convert waste carbon dioxide (CO2) into pure liquid fuels.
The resulting technology will provide a sustainable, negative-carbon, low-waste,
and point-source manufacturing path preferable to traditional large-scale
chemical process plants. This alternative and distributed route will further
extend the wide range applications of liquid fuels as energy carriers and
chemical feedstocks, and, more importantly, shift a significant portion of
energy consumption from fossil fuels to renewable electricity while reducing
carbon dioxide emissions. Beyond the direct research thrusts, the project
includes broadening participation activities with the goal of increasing access
to science of diverse groups, establishing a community of researchers focused on
electrochemical solutions to carbon dioxide remediation, and building a
competent and engaged workforce of engineers and scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Converting waste CO2 into valuable chemicals and fuels,
with the input of renewable electricity, can distribute the way we produce
chemical feedstocks, while making significant contributions to establish an
anthropogenic carbon loop. Nevertheless, significant challenges still need to be
overcome before this renewable route can be applied practically on a commercial
scale. Typically, the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) - to
generate C1 to C3 liquid fuels - involves use of solutes mixed with liquid
electrolyte, which subsequently necessitates energy- and cost-intensive
separation processes to recover pure liquid fuel solutions. In addition, there
is still a lack of highly selective and efficient CO2RR catalysts for target
products. To address these challenges, the project integrates interdisciplinary
expertise including catalysts and novel electrolyzer design, polymer
engineering, density functional theory simulations, and CO2 capture to build an
electrochemical modular system as a platform for a continuous conversion process
of simulated flue gas to pure liquid fuels. The project addresses both materials
level design and device level engineering, with topics ranging from molecular
scale simulation to mesoscopic mass diffusion to macroscopic system integration.
Experiments and simulations are closely integrated in each component of the
project, forming a systematic feedback loop to accelerate design and
understanding of CO2 capture and conversion systems tailored for small-scale
distributed chemical manufacturing. Beyond the immediate target of CO2
valorization, the project will establish a knowledge base and system platform
for point-source manufacturing of liquid products from a range of low-value
gaseous feed sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.