* 2029441
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Developing Pandemics and Healing Models for Coronavirus COVID-19 to Assist in Policy Making
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Payam Sheikhattari, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 40,000.00

The current pandemic has stimulated a strong response on the part of local,
state, and federal government, with containment largely achieved through
stringent lockdowns, effectively quarantining nearly every household in the
country. Given the enormous socio-economic impacts of this approach, it is
imperative to understand how to minimize the spread of the epidemic while also
minimizing deleterious effects and maximizing the availability of critical
health resources. This project seeks to address this challenge by devising a
better and scalable alternative to lockdown under suitable
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing models for
the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular looking at neighboring community spread,
mitigation measures, and optimal distribution of healthcare resources in that
context. This project aims to (i) devise a better and scalable alternative to
full lockdown; (ii) devise a cognitive solution that can be applied to various
demographics having heterogeneous connectivity and population distribution with
minimal information regarding previous epidemic spread; and (iii) minimize the
impact of epidemic model uncertainties on the confinement and medical resource
allocation strategies. The PIs will employ a collection of novel mathematical
techniques to the problem that can handle heterogeneity and are scalable. The
interdisciplinary team includes Johns Hopkins University, which has been a major
Center for the collection of COVID-19 data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.