* 2029889
* PlantSynBio: Development and application of a versatile CRISPR platform for simultaneous gene editing and transcriptional regulation in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yiping Qi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 923,590.00

Plant synthetic biology is an emerging field that combines engineering
principles with plant biology. To speed up the design-test-build-learn cycle in
synthetic biology, new tools need to be developed in plants. In recent years,
gene editing tools for altering gene sequences and gene regulation tools for
altering gene expression have both been developed in plants. However, tools that
allow for achieving gene editing and gene regulation at the same time are not
yet available to the plant research community. To fill in this major technology
gap, a toolbox capable of inducing simultaneous gene editing, gene activation
and gene repression will be developed. These tools will be demonstrated in rice,
a major crop that feeds a third of the world population. Demonstrations will
include the development of high-yield Golden Rice, which provides a promising
solution for treating vitamin A deficiency in humans, and the development of
herbicide-resistant proanthocyanidin-biofortified rice with high nutrition
value. This project will ignite and amplify community interest in applying new
synthetic biology tools for next-generation metabolic engineering to make better
crops that are high-yield, more nutritious, disease-resistant and more resilient
in a changing climate. Training future scientists, especially from under-
represented minority groups, is a core mission of this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of CRISPR-Cas based genome engineering
tools has greatly accelerated crop breeding and metabolic engineering. To
unleash the potential of plant synthetic biology and systems biology, innovative
tools are required for simultaneous manipulation of the plant genome and
transcriptome. This proposed project aims to develop and apply an easy-to-use,
highly efficient and multifunctional CRISPR-Cas9 platform for simultaneous and
orthogonal gene editing, transcriptional activation and repression in plants.
The platform will be demonstrated by generating biofortified rice with
concurrent engineering of other desirable traits. The project aims are to (1)
develop novel CRISPR systems for simultaneous gene editing and transcriptional
regulation in plants, (2) apply a simultaneous gene editing and activation
system to engineer high-yield Golden Rice, and (3) apply a simultaneous gene
editing, activation and repression system to engineer herbicide-resistant
proanthocyanidin-biofortified rice. Although rice is used for technology
development, the tools are compatible with applications in other plants. The
vectors developed for this multifunctional CRISPR-Cas9 platform will be made
available to other researchers so that they can be widely adopted by the plant
research community for basic and translational research. The broader impacts of
this project include training for undergraduate students at University of
Maryland at College Park, University of California at Davis and Howard
University at Washington. The project also provides STEM training to students
from Montgomery Blair High School and Eleanor Roosevelt High
School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.