* 2029817
* RAPID: Identifying the Determinants of Household Emergency Preparedness and Responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Michael Lindell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 04/30/2021
* USD 47,500.00

To manage and contain the devastating COVID-19 pandemic, medical scientists are
racing to understand how the virus spreads, how it attacks the body, and how to
treat its symptoms. It is equally important for social scientists to understand
how the threat of coronavirus infection affects human behavior, so that public
health strategies to predict and contain the spread can be improved. The
COVID-19 threat has been eliciting dramatically varying psychological and
behavioral responses throughout the country. Some people comply with medical
experts’ protective action recommendations (PARs) to limit their exposure
through actions such as social distancing (maintaining a six-foot distance),
others exceed those PARs by self-imposing more extreme isolation, and still
others disregard PARs, continuing their normal activities or congregating in
close proximity without respiratory protection. The objective of this Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) project is to identify determinants of varying
behavioral responses to COVID-19 threat, including compliance with official PARs
(e.g., social distancing, frequent hand washing) and stockpiling of household
supplies (e.g., nonperishable food, cleaning supplies). With a better
understanding of the determinants of COVID PAR compliance and stockpiling,
public health authorities can develop more effective messages to help reduce the
threat of COVID and other pandemic diseases. In addition, for factors that
public health authorities cannot change (e.g., people’s demographic
characteristics), the project will examine audience segmentation strategies that
can be used to guide the tailoring of communication to specific population
groups.

This research project builds on data gathered during a 2019 survey of Portland
(Oregon) Metro area residents’ seismic preparedness intentions and actual
preparedness in anticipation of a future earthquake, as well as on a 2020 survey
of Boise State University students, staff, and faculty emergency preparedness
and response for a variety of hazards, including COVID. It also builds upon a
set of 2013 studies of risk perceptions and preparedness related to H7N9
influenza in China and seasonal influenza in Texas. This new project will
involve a mail survey of 1000 Portland Metro area regarding their perceptions
of, and responses to, the COVID threat. The questionnaire will repeat some of
the same items about seismic emergency preparedness as in the 2019 survey,
adding new items specific to COVID and to household stockpiling in the face of
the pandemic. Also as part of this project, Boise State students, faculty, and
staff will be surveyed with a number of the new, COVID-specific survey items.
With the new survey data, the research team will be able to draw meaningful
conclusions about how perceptions and preparedness behaviors vary across
different types of anticipated disasters and across disease threats with
different profiles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.