* 2029961
* I-Corps:  High Lubricity Biomimetic Meniscus
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Noshir Pesika, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a fabrication of synthetic meniscus or cartilage and other
medical devices. Approximately one million knee arthroplasties are performed
yearly in the United States, with an expected yearly increase of 50% by 2025.
Given the average cost of knee replacements ($40,000) and the rising number of
surgeries, the estimated market for knee replacement surgeries is over $40
billion per year in the US alone. The proposed technology represents the first
synthetic meniscus. This meniscal implant may provide a safe, less invasive,
less costly, and superior alternative to conventional knee arthroplasty and
competing technologies. This technology might apply to other devices, such as
syringes and catheters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a textured polymer surface that promotes lubricity. The
technology was inspired by the lubrication mechanism of natural articular
cartilage. When a load is applied onto cartilage, synovial fluid within the
cartilage matrix generates a hydrodynamic repulsive force as the fluid drains
out. This in turn shifts the mode of lubrication from the boundary lubrication
regime (where friction is typically high) to the hydrodynamic lubrication
regime, resulting in ultra-low friction (i.e., high lubricity). The same concept
can be applied in the fabrication of synthetic polymer surfaces by the judicious
choice of the polymer engineered to hold a fluid that extrudes when a load is
applied. The novel lubrication mechanism can operate over a wide range of shear
velocities and applied loads. Such an artificial cartilage may offer shock
absorbency (since the polymer is elastic), high lubricity in aqueous
environments, and low surface wear rates, which are all desirable properties for
an effective artificial meniscus replacement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.