* 2029480
* Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Interacting Bacterial Communities in Compact Colonies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Jiajia Dong, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 223,919.00

Bacteria are the simplest and most abundant living organisms on our planet, and
often exist as complex microbial communities in otherwise homogeneous
environment. This project proposes to address the question of how bacterial
communities survive, expand, and maintain their diversity. The main goals of
this project are to: (1) uncover rules that generate and maintain the complex
biochemical and mechanical environment inside growing bacterial colonies, which
serve as the fountain that breeds both genetic and ecological diversity; and (2)
produce a set of well-tested mathematical models and computational tools for
investigating the interplay between activities of individual cells and the
collective bacterial behaviors at the community level. The PIs will engage in a
number of activities aimed at development of the next generation workforce
trained at the intersection of mathematical and biological sciences including
the development of a new undergraduate major in mathematical biology at UCSD,
development of courses in mathematical biology at UCSD and Bucknell and the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in this interdisciplinary area
at all 3 collaborating institutions. A series of public lectures on mathematical
biology will also be arranged in California State University - Long Beach, a
large public university with 43% Hispanic/Latino
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a combination of
experimentation and multiscale modeling to address the spatiotemporal dynamics
of growing compact bacterial colonies on the air-agar interface. Non-
extracellular matrix producing bacteria will be used as a simplified
experimental system to address the interrelationship of mechanical properties
and metabolism on bacterial grown. Cross feeding between multiple bacterial
species will be used to explore the impact of bacterial diversity on colony
growth. A discrete-continuum 3D simulation model will be developed in this
project that will be able to integrate mechanical and metabolic interactions as
well as its couple treatment of individual cells and with a continuum
description of environmental factors. The results of this project should shed
light on the rules that govern bacterial grown and diversity. In addition, the
proposed research provides many opportunities and challenges in new mathematical
studies on topics ranging from nonlinear partial differential equations,
interface dynamics, multiscale modeling, and high performance scientific
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.