* 2029095
* RAPID: A fast and scalable method to improve epidemiological models for COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Andrew White, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The current COVID-19 pandemic is prompting the scientific community to improve
the epidemiological models currently employed to understand the spread of
infectious diseases. Current models divide a population of individuals into
compartments, such as, susceptible, exposed but non-infectious, asymptomatic but
infectious, symptomatic and infectious, recovered, and deceased. To simplify the
mathematical modeling of infectious diseases, the prevailing assumption is that
individuals in the same compartment behave identically. One way to add
sophistication to these so-called compartmental models is by categorizing
individuals in a more fine-grained manner, thus adding more compartments. This
results in more parameters added to a model. Estimating these parameters
requires more data, and more data increases the computational cost of estimating
the parameters. In addition, as this pandemic is showing, our access to data is
varied. Within each country and municipality, different sampling strategies are
being pursued. This project lowers the computational cost of setting up and
updating complex, compartmental epidemiological models as more data becomes
available. By doing so, the project improves the ability of the scientific
community to make more accurate predictions on the spread of the virus and
inform on the effectiveness of local policy decisions on mitigation strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators adopt a category of model fitting that
has seen recent success in molecular dynamics simulations in molecular modeling
â€” maximum entropy biasing methods. These methods replace model parameter
optimization with a minimal biasing term that is independent of the model
parameters. This makes the runtime complexity of model optimization linear with
the amount of data and independent of the unknown number of parameters. The
activities will enable rapid optimization of complex models that additionally
consider spatial resolution and sampling biasing. The improved cost of the
optimization process will permit frequent updates of compartmental models
without the need for full parameter optimization each time new data is observed.
The investigators will collaborate closely with others in the rapidly coalescing
COVID-19 research community by releasing code, data, and
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.