* 2029932
* Palladium-Catalyzed Transient Directing Group-Enabled Functionalization of Aliphatic Amines and Aldehydes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/13/2020,07/31/2024
* Haibo Ge, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 448,320.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Haibo Ge of the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at
Indiana University-Purdue University. Amines are organic compounds derived from
ammonia by replacement of one or more hydrogen atoms by organic groups. Amines
are very common in biology such as in amino acids and neurotransmitters
including epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and histamine. The
goal of this research is to convert simple amines into other, more valuable or
useful amines. To solve this challenge, Professor Ge and his students are using
"directing groups" that attach reversibly to the amine group and force the
reaction to occur on a specific (desired) site. The summer undergraduate
research program attracts college students, especially women and
underrepresented minorities, to the STEM areas, training potential future
leaders in scientific research. The engagement of high school teachers provides
an active learning environment and enables them to deliver in-depth knowledge of
key scientific ideas and practices to their classes. This educational effort, in
turn, triggers high school students' curiosity, inspires their interest in
chemistry, and attracts more high school students into the STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the project by Professor Haibo Ge of the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis (IUPUI). Professor Ge is developing new methods to construct
carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bonds. This reaction chemistry allows for
various common organic compounds to be readily accessed in an efficient manner
via a C-H bond functionalization process. It also enables rapid late-stage
functionalization (LSF) of complex organic molecules. When compared to
conventional cross-coupling reactions, the C-H functionalization process does
not require pre-functionalized starting materials and can avoid the use of
stoichiometric organometallic reagents, making it more environmentally and
economically beneficial. The new type of C-H functionalization reactions allows
for the use of readily-available organic molecules as starting materials, and
thus improves the potential applications of the process. The principal goal of
the project is to develop novel transition metal-catalyzed C-H functionalization
reactions in order to provide powerful, valuable, and straightforward synthetic
approaches to access common organic frameworks. A variety of medically important
(hetero)cyclic skeletons are expected to be efficiently accessed from readily-
available aliphatic amines and aldehydes via this strategy. The asymmetric
functionalization of these strong sp3 C-H bonds is also designed with the use of
chiral catalysts. The project focuses primarily on synthetic organic and
organometallic chemistry with potential integration of computational and
medicinal chemistry. Thus, the project is well-positioned for the education and
training of all levels of scientists. Additionally, an outreach program with
high school teachers is designed to enable them to deliver in-depth knowledge of
key scientific ideas and practices to their classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.