* 2029474
* RAPID: Development of an ultrasensitive thermal contrast amplification lateral flow immunoassay for rapid, point-of-care COVID-19 diagnosis
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* John Bischof, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Innovative and unique thermal contrast technology will be used to detect heat
from laser irradiated gold nanoparticles to vastly improve the sensitivity of
rapid diagnostics tests (i.e. lateral flow assays) designed to detect and
diagnose COVID-19. This technology, which has been used to significantly improve
lateral flow assays for HIV, malaria, Strep and influenza, will enable
widespread, inexpensive (&lt; $1/test), rapid (≤ 10 minutes), point-of-care
detection of COVID-19. Such detection does not exist and cannot exist using the
current methodologies for detecting both early (i.e. viral protein) and late
(i.e. antibody) stages of COVID-19 infection. These new, thermal contrast
lateral flow assays, along with new thermal contrast “reading” technology, will
accelerate effective and targeted testing and surveillance of disease spread and
management and bring enormous benefits to both national and global society.
While first deployment will be in clinical settings, it is envisioned that this
technology can eventually be used at schools, airports, sporting and
entertainment events and even at home to assess the infection and spread of
COVID-19 and other infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop new lateral flow assays to be used with innovative thermal
contrast technology for highly sensitive, inexpensive, point-of-care detection
of COVID-19. This new paradigm will, in the long term, be applied to a wide
variety of diseases. Lateral flow assays are arguably the cheapest, fastest and
easiest to use rapid diagnostic assays in the world. While they are used
qualitatively for numerous diseases, they have weaknesses that include lack of
sensitivity and quantification of disease burden. Both of these issues are
addressed through our novel Thermal Contrast Assay technology. To address this
specifically for COVID-19, two approaches are proposed: 1) optimizing gold
nanoparticles and lateral flow assays for binding either COVID-19 protein or
COVID-19 antibody analytes, and 2) the use of a new quantitative figure of merit
called the “Binding Ratio” to rapidly identify reagents and components for
optimized thermal contrast lateral flow assays. This project is part of a larger
effort with industry partners to scale up the manufacturing of a proprietary
thermal contrast reader so that it will be affordable for point-of-care clinical
settings such as doctors’ offices, urgent care settings, emergency rooms, and
field hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.