* 2029557
* RAPID: A Platform for Mitigating the Impacts of COVID-19 on the Healthcare System
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Shu-Ching Chen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 159,300.00

This COVID-19 RAPID research program will focus on addressing the shortage of
essential medical supplies, Personal Protective Equipment, and crucial medical
technologies. A surge in demand for specialized healthcare has also created a
shortage of skilled medical professionals capable of operating highly technical
machines while protecting themselves and others against this dangerous virus.
Thus, providing rapid training for caregivers and increasing the supply of
Personal Protective Equipment and medical technology is an immediate priority
for combating this unprecedented pandemic. This project will leverage the
research and technology currently under development in a National Science
Foundation Convergence Accelerator project to provide an easy to use and access
training application for caregivers, as well as networking capacity for problem-
solving among stakeholders. This project will also build and foster partnerships
among the healthcare community, medical equipment manufacturers and
distributors, and grassroots efforts to rapidly deploy prototypes as it strives
to create awareness of the project and its novel
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to provide
training support, problem-solving resources, and professional networking for
idea exchanges for healthcare professionals, caregivers, and technologists that
are on the frontlines in the fight against COVID-19. Artificial Intelligence
techniques such as deep learning and self-adaptive autonomous systems will be
used to develop an intelligent knowledge network to support virtual communities,
as well as, create Augmented Reality technologies for delivering efficient and
engaging virtual training. Thus, the research objectives of this project
include: 1) development of an Augmented Reality training mobile application for
caregivers and technologists responding to the COVID-19 pandemic; 2) deployment
of an online repository for equipment problem-solving resources; and 3)
development of a professional networking application to disseminate research and
best practices in the fight against COVID-19 for all stakeholders engaged in
addressing the pandemic. The project's overarching focus is to create a web
application with mobile Augmented Reality capability for training healthcare
professionals at any location and time, in order to improve access to training
with the medical equipment and increase the efficiency and reach of safety
training. The project team will advance the knowledge base in computer science
and spatial computing as it creates its Artificial Intelligence-powered
Augmented Reality training. The team will disseminate its findings and
technology through relevant scholarly conferences and
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track B: Artificial Intelligence and Future
Jobs and National Talent Ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.