* 2029186
* RAPID: SEAN COVID-19 Survey Archive
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* James Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2022
* USD 548,570.00

In this project, U.S. and international surveys on COVID-19 are compiled, these
materials are made publicly available, and weekly summaries of key research
findings are disseminated. U.S. social science research critically informs
government and scientific responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Accurate
measurement of the public’s attitudes and behaviors in the crisis, including its
impact on physical and emotional health, economic well-being, and daily
activities, is essential in decision making, implementation and assessment. This
project addresses key challenges in advancing this basic knowledge by assembling
available survey data from myriad sources; assessing which data are of the
necessary quality for use; making these data and associated research materials
available to decisionmakers, researchers, and the American public in a highly
functional single-source location; summarizing and communicating key findings on
an ongoing basis to ensure that important survey findings on COVID-19 are
available to the widest possible audience; and doing this all in a highly
accelerated time frame. This resource supports decisionmakers concerning public
health and social and economic conditions; assists researchers in their efforts
to investigate, analyze and replicate existing studies; and serves the public
good by providing open access to COVID-19 social, behavioral, and economic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses publicly and professionally
available sources to compile U.S. and international surveys on COVID-19 and
deploys rapid methodological assessments to identify probability-based studies
among them. Producers or sponsors of such surveys are asked to share their
topline data reports, scripted questionnaires, datasets, banner books of
crosstabulated data, analytical reports and any related analyses and
documentation. All available materials are posted to the open-access Societal
Action Experts Network (SEAN) COVID-19 website, making use of the PARC knowledge
management platform for survey research. Users can full-text search to retrieve
individual survey questions and results, individual scripted questions, and all
associated materials. Weekly summaries of key research findings released in the
previous week are produced, linking back to data sources. These summaries are
disseminated to a 1,000+-member email distribution list, the listservs of the
American Association for Public Opinion Research and the World Association for
Public Opinion Research, SEAN stakeholders, and visitors to the SEAN archive
site who sign up for weekly notifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.