* 2029028
* Bioinspired, Adaptive, and Self-Deploying Flaps for Distributed Aerodynamic Flow Control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Aimy Wissa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 474,990.00

Next-generation micro- and avian-scale unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) must
navigate unsteady environments and undergo rapid maneuvers. During the same
operational conditions that may render UAVs inefficient and unstable, birds and
insects are not only able to remain aloft, but can also maintain their
aerodynamic efficiency. Inspired by a system of feathers on a bird’s wing, this
work will enable a flow control technique that can passively adapt to and alter
unsteady flow phenomena. Current flow control strategies involve relatively
heavy devices that must be actively powered and require costly, complex
information about the flow. In contrast, the proposed feather-inspired effectors
do not require additional power to be deployed, and their ability to passively
respond to unsteady flow phenomena offers a compelling low-weight, adaptive, and
simple flow control paradigm. The fundamental flow physics that govern this
effector system will be explained to enable its use in future aerodynamic
vehicles. The bio-inspired nature of this work presents a prime opportunity for
STEM training, recruitment, and outreach. Broader impacts of this work include
university level training (via undergraduate and graduate student mentoring as
well as course development) and K-12 outreach (via summer engineering workshops
targeted towards underrepresented minority students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-
fidelity simulations and detailed experiments of a canonical system involving an
airfoil with effectors hinged at the root via a torsional elastic spring will be
performed. This effector system constitutes a poorly understood fluid-structure
interaction (FSI) problem. The flap dynamics will be related to the shear layer
and wake dynamics and quantify the impact of this interplay on aerodynamic
performance for different flap parameters, airfoil angles of attack, and
Reynolds numbers. Simulations will be carried out at low Reynolds numbers, Re =
1,000, relevant to micro UAVs and insect flight. Experiments will be conducted
at higher Reynolds numbers, Re ≈ 200,000, relevant to avian-scale UAVs and bird
flight. Over this range of Reynolds numbers, a single flap hinged with a zero-
stiffness torsional spring will be first studied and the passive flap dynamics
to the shear layer dynamics, near-body and wake vortex dynamics, and aerodynamic
forces will be corelated. Then, it will be examined how these FSI physics are
affected by a finite stiffness torsional spring and relate any changes to
resonant and non-resonant mechanisms associated with the elastic flap system.
Finally, a multi-flap system will be studied to determine how multiple flaps
interact in this FSI setting to alter the resultant aerodynamic
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.