* 2029354
* EFRI DChem: Next-generation Low Global Warming Refrigerants
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Edward Maginn, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,999.00

This EFRI DCHEM Distributed Chemical Manufacturing Project, named EARTH
(Environmentally Applied Research Towards Hydrofluorocarbons), will use high-
fidelity experiments, advanced computer simulations, and rigorous analytical
methods in a coordinated framework to discover, synthesize, and test a new type
of fluid called an ionic liquid that can be used to separate, recycle, and
convert high global warming potential (GWP) refrigerant mixtures into safe
products. The research will be conducted by a team of researchers located at the
University of Kansas, the University of Notre Dame, Texas A&amp;M University,
and Rutgers University in collaboration Brookhaven National Lab, Oak Ridge
National Lab and the National Institute of Standards and Technology and two
industry partners (Chemours and Iolitec). The technical, economic, and
environmental impacts of the project are considerable, given the large inventory
of high GWP refrigerants that must be removed from the market. The market for
recycling refrigerants is valued at more than a billion dollars and preventing
the release of high-GWP refrigerants into the Earth’s atmosphere is equivalent
to eliminating 175 million metric tons of CO2 (or annual emissions from 50
million cars). The project has the potential to economically benefit the
refrigerants business and provide a distributed chemical manufacturing process
for over 100 EPA certified recyclers in the U.S. A multi-faceted strategy will
be employed to maximize dissemination and knowledge sharing with the broader
scientific community. The four lead institutions are committed to providing a
safe and inclusive environment and will recruit five PhD students, one post-
doctoral researcher, and eight undergraduates. These researchers will be
provided with cross-disciplinary training in science and engineering, attend
STEM workshops and safety meetings, and intern in partnering universities,
companies, and national labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the
fundamental knowledge and innovation required to recycle and repurpose high-GWP
refrigerants. The project is built upon the tunable solvation properties of
ionic liquids (ILs) to realize the separation of azeotropic HFC mixtures that
are not possible with other materials. The two primary goals are (1) designing
chemical separations with high selectivity and capacity for complex systems and
(2) understanding temporal changes that occur in chemical separation systems.
Six fundamental aims will integrate property measurements and equation of state
modeling (Aim 1), molecular simulations and design (Aim 2), advanced materials
development (Aim 3), spectroscopy, scattering, and molecular interactions (Aim
4), process modeling and optimization (Aim 5), and design and implementation of
lab-scale separation systems (Aim 6). Using proven experimental methods, the
team will measure the thermophysical properties and vapor-liquid-equilibria
required for designing an extractive distillation, absorption, or membrane
process. High-throughput molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations will be
used to calculate the solubility (phase equilibrium), selectivity, and transport
properties of a large number of refrigerant-IL systems using molecular force
fields validated by experiment. New ILs with fluorinated ions will be
synthesized to explore the “chemical” space connecting refrigerants and ILs. The
team will utilize a number of techniques to determine refrigerant-IL
interactions including: pulse-gradient-spin-echo (PG-SE) NMR experiments for
measuring self-diffusion, nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) experiments for
studying intermolecular interactions, synchrotron X-ray scattering experiments
for providing liquid structure factor S(Q), inverse Fourier sine transform for
radial pair distribution function g(r), and quasi-elastic neutron scattering
(QENS) for dynamical specific length scales as examples. The efficacy of the
novel ILs designed in this work will be demonstrated via design optimization and
a set of simulations and experiments for extractive distillation, absorption,
and membrane separation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.