* 2029295
* IRNC: Testbed: COSMOS Interconnecting Continents (COSMIC)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Daniel Kilper, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,000,000.00

The project enables the use of unique programmable wireless, optical, and edge-
cloud network testbed infrastructure for international collaborative
experiments. It builds on the interfaces of the PAWR COSMOS (NYC) and ORBIT (NJ)
testbeds with the PEERING (US/International) and FABRIC (US) testbeds, and adds
connections to international testbeds, including CPQD (Brazil), Kyutech/StarBED
(Japan), OneLab/NITOS (EU/Greece), and CONNECT (Ireland). To support cross-
layered international experiments, unique capabilities are developed, including
optical and BGP extensions to the Mininet network emulator, and PEERING testbed
tools for cross-layer BGP functions and controlled public Internet
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates a powerful
international experimental platform for networking research from applications
down to the optical and radio physical layers. A few distinct example
experiments that demonstrate various capabilities and motivate further
experimentation include: (i) Artificial Intelligence for multi-layer Quality of
Service over disaggregated infrastructure during remote scientific
experimentation; (ii) cloud processing of latency- and capacity-sensitive mobile
applications across network domains and testbeds; and (iii) interdomain routing,
data security, and privacy across national boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
strong outreach component aiming at broadening participation in computing
involves local Harlem middle and high school teachers in research and in
development of educational components. Finally, the development of emulation-
based sandbox capabilities for international experiments promises to make such
large-scale experiments more accessible to a wide range of researchers.
Therefore, and due to the availability of a unique international infrastructure,
the project has the potential to support experimentation that enhances the
performance of future networks and helps bridge the digital
divide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.