* 2029387
* EFRI E3P: End of Life Plastics as Starting Materials for Filtration and Barrier Applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Tibor Szilvasi, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,262,778.00

Polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC), and
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) are types of plastic that make major
contributions to the amount of pollution the environment. In this project, the
investigators aim to “upcycle” (rather than recycle) plastic wastes into value-
added products for filter and barrier applications through three approaches.
They will design waterproof, thermally and electrically insulating elastomers
through controlled PVC degradation and crosslinking to transform the waste PVC
into Neoprene®-substitute materials that can be 3D printed to form seals,
gaskets, and a variety of other products. This provides a new pathway to
valuable rubbers, prevents the release of toxic compounds, and reduces reliance
on the hazardous feedstocks currently used in rubber manufacture. The
investigators will engineer new green solvents to overcome the challenges of
dissolving and reprocessing PP and PET, which will allow for safer
handling/processing of polymer solutions, drive process intensification, and
reduce health and safety risks posed by the current processing conditions. They
will make non-woven fabrics commonly used for household air filters and
mechanical supports for water treatment membranes, from waste PP or PET which
will improve the environmental impact of air and water filtration to help ensure
clean air for buildings and drinking water. Additionally, field sampling of
plastic in the aquatic ecosystems will provide real waste samples for the
upcycling methods, and an estimate of the capacity for these approaches to
reduce plastic pollution. The proposed research will be carried out by graduate
and undergraduate students, who will collaboratively develop research plans,
mentor local HBCU students through a summer immersion experience, and perform
STEM outreach to local K-12 students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create transformative new
avenues for converting common waste plastics, specifically PP, PVC, and PET,
into value-added products. The investigators hypothesize: (1) if waste PVC is
chemically processed in a controlled manner via partial dehydrochlorination and
subsequent crosslinking, then valuable elastomers with tunable properties can be
directly produced without relying on new petroleum-based monomers, (2) if a new
approach to molecular design using combined experimental and computational
methods is developed around molecules with glycerol skeletons, then PET and PP
can be dissolved and reprocessed under safer handling/processing conditions, and
(3) if PET and PP fibers recovered from waste are used in non-woven fabrics,
they will not change air filter performance properties and performance of
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes synthesized on top of these fabrics
compared to those on top of commercial non-woven fabrics. A fundamental
understanding will be gained on how solvent choice, additives, plasticizers,
dyes, fillers, etc. impact PVC dehydrochlorination, PVDF membrane separation
properties, and household air filter properties. New knowledge will be gained
about the effectiveness of these processes on eliminating waste plastic from
entering aquatic ecosystems. A techno-economic analysis will generate knowledge
on the commercial feasibility of these new ways of upcycling plastics and
provide guidance for further improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.