* 2029245
* The effects of delayed auditory feedback on speech sequencing: acoustics, physiology, and computational modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Jason Bohland, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2022
* USD 393,444.00

Healthy individuals continuously monitor their sound output while speaking,
allowing them to perceive and correct errors quickly. When the content or timing
of this auditory feedback signal is experimentally altered, most speakers
rapidly modify their speech. This project will primarily address how the timing
of auditory feedback impacts the speech production system and will assess
individual differences in the use of auditory feedback. Results will guide
development of a computational model of speech planning and production that has
the potential to accelerate the design of new therapeutic approaches to
developmental and acquired disorders of speech. Additional benefits to society
will accrue from a series of teaching modules that will be developed that
explore the role of auditory feedback in normal and disordered speech. The
project team will also develop educational materials that bridge neuroscience
and communication sciences and that provide formative experiences for
undergraduate and K-12 students, including those from disadvantaged backgrounds
and with disabilities, to attract them to future study in this area. All project
materials will be made available as a public database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will use a combination of experimental and computational studies.
The first research goal is to determine the role of delayed auditory feedback
(DAF) on speech sequencing using multimodal experimental techniques. Acoustic
data will be collected and analyzed to determine the impact of DAF on the
production of non-word syllable sequences and sentences. These data will be used
to assess the types of errors elicited by DAF and the relationship between these
effects and responses to rapid shifts in the frequency content, rather than
timing, of the feedback signal. The collected data and perceptual evaluations,
obtained via a crowdsourcing platform, will enable the study of individual
speaker variability. Data will also be made available as a large public database
of speech under altered feedback conditions. The second research goal is to
develop a computational model, informed also by kinematic measures of speech
from a subset of participants, that can capture the interaction of auditory
feedback with speech sequence production. The model will simulate a series of
hypotheses about the interactions among speech perception and planning and
production components and assess their ability to account for the patterns of
errors observed in the experimental data. The model will also assess the sources
of individual variation in susceptibility to the effects of DAF, as observed
experimentally.