* 2029511
* RAPID: Coronavirus, new patterns in electricity demand, and energy inequality
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Yueming Lucy Qiu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,996.00

The aim of this project is to advance national health and welfare through
investigating the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on electricity demand. The
pandemic has resulted in widespread stay-at-home policies meaning that,
vulnerable populations such as those with low income, ethnic minorities, and the
elderly might face a disproportionally higher increase in electricity
expenditure. The likely inequitable energy impact on these groups could be a
result of less energy-efficient homes, increased need for electrical appliances
(i.e. school computers), and larger household sizes. The resulting higher energy
expenditure burden might imply constraints of these groups to create a
comfortable indoor environment, which is particularly vital to maintaining good
health during a pandemic. This project will (1) quantify the electricity
expenditure re-distribution and uncover how this relates to the wealth
redistribution as lay-offs increase; (2) develop a deeper understanding of the
pandemic's impact on the electricity grid for different consumer types. This
work will inform policies that can reduce the energy burden of the most
vulnerable populations whose job security, educational development, and mental
health are linked to their ability to satisfy their energy demand, particularly
during an international crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pursuit of this research
the research team will conduct consumer-level statistical and machine learning
analyses using large samples of individual-consumer-level hourly smart meter
electricity demand data in the residential, commercial, industrial, and
agricultural sectors in Phoenix metropolitan, Arizona, and Chicago metropolitan,
Illinois, as well as electricity and heating gas consumption data in New York
City, New York. This will be combined with detailed socio-demographic and
building attribute information for residential consumers which will allow for a
more detailed analysis of electricity impacts, and impacts on energy
expenditure. We will also conduct a consumer survey examining the changes in
electricity consumption behaviors due to the pandemic. The pandemic has also
highlighted the need to improve the measurement of energy inequality and
poverty. We will develop an index based on the distance in energy consumption
levels to measure the inability of households to obtain sufficient energy
services. Once developed this index can then be used by the utilities and
policymakers to identify the consumers suffering from energy poverty in a timely
and precise fashion. We will examine energy poverty in the context of load
profiles so that our findings can inform utilities regarding what types of
demand-side management practices such as time-of-use pricing can help or hurt
the consumers suffering from energy poverty. The consumer-level analysis on the
load profiles will provide heterogeneous impact estimates and thus can better
help utilities forecast future impacts on load and evaluate the uncertainties.
This is especially important because there might be long-term structural changes
in the demand patterns so that the load curves may not rebound back to the
original patterns when the virus is gone. Lastly, our consumer-level analysis
will quantify the heterogeneous changes in the temperature-response functions
(how consumers change their electricity consumption in response to temperature
change) due to the crisis. Quantifying the impact of such a complex
redistribution of electricity demand on the load shape will help utilities
better plan for capacity and portfolio management. This will be particularly
important if coronavirus is persistent throughout the summer when cooling loads
are high, or when there is a possibility of more waves of
coronavirus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.