* 2029516
* RAPID: How Do Small Businesses Cope with the Impacts of COVID-19? From A Community Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Qingfang Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 53,196.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines the impacts of COVID-19 on
small businesses, and how they and their communities react to and cope with
associated challenges. Small businesses currently account for 99.9 percent of US
firms and employ 47.5 percent of all US workers. Yet, small businesses are more
likely to be economically vulnerable, be under-insured, and less likely to have
contingency plans. In particular, small businesses in underrepresented
communities and peripheral areas face formidable barriers and challenges in
preparing for and responding to emergencies and social or natural disasters.
This study’s interdisciplinary approach and analytical results will help public
policy address disparity and inequality issues, in particular the opportunities
and challenges facing small business owners. In addition, it unpacks one facet
of community recovery – the importance of businesses’ ability to continue
operating and employing people. Therefore, the study will enhance knowledge
about how empowering local businesses, increasing diverse employment
opportunities, and enhancing private sector enterprises' adaptive capacity
contribute to broader community-level resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines small business vulnerability and resilience through small
businesses’ responses to COVID-19 and their adaptation practices within
communities, drawing upon data gathered from business surveys and in-depth
interviews. It also explores different approaches to risk mitigation and
business preparedness intended to enhance their future resilience. This study
goes beyond the traditional lens of physical and financial resources,
emphasizing the strength of community-based networks in helping small businesses
promptly respond to disasters, and how these networks influence the links
between economic and social, and between individual and community resilience. It
examines a broad spectrum of businesses under the impacts of social and public
health crisis, and particularly highlights the role of social inequalities,
unemployment, and low income as a critical source of vulnerability and lack of
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.