* 2029555
* Engineering Bioinspired Multifunctional Microbial Polymeric Fiber (BioFiber) for Concrete Self-Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2025
* Ahmad Najafi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 11/30/2025
* USD 618,589.00

This research will investigate a new self-healing concrete enriched with
bioinspired multifunctional microbial polymeric fibers to improve durability and
resilience of civil infrastructure. Concrete, the most commonly used manmade
material on earth, suffers from long-term durability issues due to formation of
cracks under sustained loading and in harsh operating environments. Using
nature-inspired concepts of self-healing and microbial calcium carbonate
precipitation (MCCP) coupled with principles of fracture mechanics, this project
will investigate science-based design strategies for a new bioinspired fiber
reinforced concrete composite (BioFRC). BioFRC can intelligently and
autonomously heal its cracks at early stages and prevent formation of major
defects, thereby increasing durability of concrete structures. The research
outcomes will be integrated with diverse educational and outreach activities on
sustainable bio-engineered solutions for civil infrastructure. K-12,
undergraduate, graduate and underrepresented students will be engaged in
research workshops on self-healing infrastructure and interdisciplinary teaching
modules, and lectures will be developed during the course of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to discover
process-structure-property relationships for autonomic microbial self-healing
concrete. The research will investigate (1) damage control mechanisms to limit
crack growth, (2) autonomic self-activation near damage zones for damage-
responsive healing activation, and (3) effective materials to heal the damage.
By coupling principles from polymer/fiber engineering, fracture mechanics and
microbiology, and through integrated experimental and numerical work,
fundamental understanding of two crucial mechanisms and their interactions will
be achieved: harmonizing fracture processes, and balancing MCCP with crack
volume creation. The research activities and methodologies will pursue three
specific objectives: (i) to understand mechanical, bridging, and breaking
mechanism and morphology of microbial polymeric fibers, (ii) to understand
microbial polymeric fibersâ€™ performance and bacterial survivability before
occurrence of cracks, and MCCP activation/kinetics after occurrence of cracks in
BioFRC, and (iii) to test the robustness of the research approach and potential
durability and resilience enhancements in concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.