* 2029584
* RAPID: Increasing Healthcare Credential Open Data in Response to COVID-19
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Jeffrey Grann, CREDENTIAL ENGINE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 03/31/2021
* USD 54,250.00

The project aims to serve the national need of making more healthcare
credentials and competencies publicly available to increase the nation’s
capacity to fill jobs in the healthcare sector due to Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19). Leveraging partnerships with state, national healthcare, and other
associations and accreditors will aid in the collection, organization, and
analysis of healthcare credentials and competencies. This project aims to
publish thousands of additional healthcare credentials with competencies to help
healthcare employers utilize credentials for hiring and upskilling workers. By
enabling individuals to secure and advance their health career via credentials,
the project aims to aid in finding qualified workers with the needed skills and
competencies to fill open healthcare positions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Due to
COVID-19, this project will address the increased need for publicly available
healthcare credential and competency data to advance healthcare workers and help
employers fill high-demand jobs in the healthcare sector. The project will
develop (1) a nationally scalable infrastructure and a customizable web
application to view and compare credentials, (2) partnerships with state,
national healthcare and other associations and accreditors to collect, organize,
and analyze healthcare credentials and competences, and (3) a foundation to
build upon to gather additional healthcare credentials. This project will use
the open knowledge network infrastructure developed by Credential Engine to
advance the development and availability of healthcare credential and competency
information as machine actionable data. The credential and competency data will
be encoded as linked open data and published to the Credential Registry and the
Web. Having the credential and competency data available online allows the
metadata to be consumed by web applications and systems, and ingested by
artificial intelligence applications. The project work will leverage,
communicate, and be extended through Credential Engine’s partnerships with
various organizations and associations to further embed the value of credential
and competency transparency to meet labor market needs in the healthcare
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track B: Future of Work and the Human-
Technology Frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.