* 2029512
* RAPID:Working Parents and Childcare during the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Mary Noonan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 66,375.00

In March 2020, most public schools and day care centers across the U.S. closed
in an effort to stem the spread of COVID-19. Non-essential businesses and
organizations also closed their on-site buildings, requiring many employees to
work from home. Essential workers (e.g., health care providers, grocery clerks)
continued working on-site. This created a unique situation in which working
parents needed to find – or provide themselves - childcare coverage for a large
portion of the day for an unknown period. The purpose of this project is to
examine how working parents managed the care of their children in the context of
day care and school closures associated with the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S.
Findings from the project will inform policies for several levels of government
and many businesses related to child-care provisions during extreme events, but
also during economic recovery and beyond. As such project findings will provide
information to support economic competitiveness, health and well-being in our
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How families with children manage
child-care ties to issues of labor supply, which is important during the current
pandemic as well as key to economic productivity generally. The project has two
objectives. First, the project will collect nationally representative survey
data on a sample (n=2,500) of working parents during early May 2020,
approximately two months after most day care centers and schools closed.
Importantly, the data will include detailed information on parents’ childcare
arrangements (e.g., type, hours, cost), work lives (e.g., hours worked, location
of work), family lives (e.g., number of residential parents and employed
parents), and time spent on core daily activities (e.g., childcare, helping
children with schoolwork, leisure, sleep) both pre- and post-day care center and
school closure. Married and cohabiting respondents will also be asked to report
on their partners’ work lives and time spent on daily activities. Second, the
project will use these data to provide a rigorous understanding of how this
childcare “shock” altered working parents’ daily lives. The project will use
STATA to perform a variety of statistical analyses, including t-tests,
correlations, and regression analyses. The project will inform sociological
theories regarding the effects of family structure, gender and job requirements
on household decision making, including labor supply and tradeoffs between work
and family activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.