* 2029260
* Collaborative Research: IRNC: Testbed: FAB: FABRIC Across Borders
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Kirtman, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 509,952.00

Global science relies on robust, interconnected components - computers, storage,
networks and the software that ties them together - collectively called the
scientific cyberinfrastructure (CI). Improvements to individual components are
made at varying paces, often creating bottlenecks in the flow of information -
the scientific workflow - and slowing down scientific discovery. FABRIC Across
Borders (FAB) enables domain scientists and CI experts to jointly develop a more
tightly integrated, flexible, intelligent, easily programmable workflow that
takes advantage of rapid changes in technology to improve global science
collaboration. FAB enables domain scientists to perform global, end-to-end
experimentation of new CI workflow ideas on a platform with one of a kind
capabilities. The project expands the NSF-funded FABRIC testbed to encompass
four additional, International locations, creating an interconnected resource on
which an initial set of scientists from High Energy Physics (HEP), Astronomy,
Cosmology, Weather, Urban Science and Computer Science work with
cyberinfrastructure experts to conduct cyberinfrastructure experiments. In
addition to domain scientists, FAB collaborates in the area of Internet freedom
and maintains strong partnerships with human rights groups, which serve to
expand the results beyond domain sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FABRIC nodes
contain programmable networking hardware, storage, CPUs and GPUs, measurement
devices and software in a single, integrated rack. FAB enables placement of four
additional nodes in partner data centers in Tokyo, Amsterdam, Bristol and the
particle physics lab CERN in Geneva and connects them via NSF-funded
International networks, on which itâ€™s possible to conduct experiments without
impacting production science. FAB offers programmable peering with production
networks and specialized testbeds, allowing experimenter topologies to be joined
with production networks, vastly expanding the possibilities for the types of
resources and users that can utilize the infrastructure. FAB creates new
software services and tools for researchers at the facilities, and interfaces
with existing and evolving data delivery services to efficiently move and
process scientific data globally and test novel data analysis approaches that
scale to massive volumes. Metrics of success are driven by the science
experiments themselves: more efficient handling of both high energy physics data
from CERN experiments to worldwide collaborators and Cosmic Microwave Background
data collected in South America and the South Pole; successful proofs of concept
for the sharing of Smart City sensor data for urban planning as well as the
establishment of global, private 5G networks. All software associated with FAB
will be open source and posted in a publicly available repository:
https://github.com/fabric-testbed/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.