* 2029359
* EFRI DCheM: Precise but Tunable Reactions Through Tunably Precise Surfaces
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Teixeira, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The use of geographically distributed resources such as biomass, stranded
natural gas, biogas and municipal solid waste for localizable, clean chemical
manufacturing has the potential to transform the U.S. domestic manufacturing
landscape. However, those resources are typically produced in relatively small
quantities that make their collection and transport to large centralized
chemical plants impractical and often uneconomical. In addition, the centralized
plants – because of their size – are constrained to operating under steady
conditions with little flexibility with respect to process conditions, feedstock
variability, and end products. In contrast, small-scale reactor systems relax
such constraints and therefore, the smaller scale of distributed chemical
manufacturing (DCheM) systems offers new opportunities to change operating
conditions rapidly to increase processing efficiency and respond to feedstock
variability. The overarching goal of the project is thus to develop a radically
new approach to catalytic reactor design by modulating reactor operating
parameters to achieve improved rates, product selectivity, and catalyst
lifetime. The project focuses on valorizing methane and ethane, the main
components of natural gas, but the concept of transiently-operated, flexible,
small-scale reactors that can convert distributed feedstocks of different
qualities to higher-value liquid products is broadly applicable. The development
of such reactors opens the door to point-of-source chemical processing of
abundant resources distributed throughout the U.S., thereby transforming
regional economies as well as the overall chemical manufacturing
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces a new dynamically-
oscillated catalytic reactor that periodically modulates the reacting gas
environment about a catalytic site. The goal is to identify – at a fundamental
level – catalytic reactor design and operating parameters that improve rates,
selectivity, and catalyst longevity beyond levels accessible in steady-state
operation. Methane oxidative reforming (MOR) and ethane oxidative
dehydrogenation (EODH) are chosen as two probe reactions, both having tunable
reaction chemistry between exothermic/endothermic operating conditions. To
demonstrate the enhanced performance, the coverage dependence of fundamental
surface processes during the oxidation and reduction catalytic half-cycles for
MOR will be characterized via density functional theory (DFT), ab-initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD), and kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) methods. This will be
coupled with ultrasensitive experimental temporal analysis of products (TAP) to
reveal surface transients that diverge from classical steady-state reaction rate
kinetics. The resolution of the temporal steps will describe operation through
new reaction pathways that utilize externally induced periodic feed modulations.
The effect of modulation will be demonstrated experimentally in micro- and
monolithic-reactors coupled with in situ techniques to demonstrate pathways to
rate/selectivity and longevity enhancements. Finally, a reactor-scale model will
be built to unify the experiments and theory by describing reactor performance
and predicting optimal dynamical operating conditions. Collectively, the
combined experimental-computational approach pro-posed here will establish a new
strategy for heterogeneous catalysis and push beyond the conventional steady-
state thermodynamic/kinetic limits manifested in the Sabatier volcano by using
innovative reaction engineering concepts. The project will include education and
outreach activities emphasizing opportunities for underrepresented student
groups. To this end, the project will engage a collaborator to coordinate
diversity workshops that will engage all of the project researchers. The
collaborator will also recruit underrepresented minority students through
attending conferences targeted at promoting diversity in STEM education and
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.