* 2029943
* RAPID Enhanced SARS-CoV-2 High-Throughput Crystallization for Structural Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Sarah Bowman, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

An award is made to Hauptman-Woodward Institute to extend its structural biology
services for researchers working with SARS-CoV-2 related samples and to
accelerate knowledge production about SARS-CoV-2 virus proteins. Structural
biology methods help in understanding fundamental principles at the base of how
biomolecules work by enabling visualization of those molecules at a high level
of detail. Since SARS-CoV-2 emerged as a pathogenic threat in late 2019,
structural biology methods have already been critical in providing details about
how the virus enters human cells and how viral proteins interact with human
proteins. One difficult step in achieving these structural maps is locating
experimental conditions that allow the protein samples to be studied, and this
project is geared toward addressing that bottleneck. The Crystallization Center
provides state-of-the-art robotic equipment and specialized imaging to
structural biology researchers worldwide who are studying protein structures.
This project will provide immediate access to these resources and enable
enhanced services to be developed for researchers working directly with SARS-
CoV-2 related samples. This project will also develop new experimental pipelines
to accelerate response time in the face of the current and future pandemics. The
number of viruses that impact human society continues to rise, as evidenced by
recent outbreaks of SARS, MERS, Ebola and Zika virus, among others. Viruses have
the potential to damage national health and prosperity, and efforts such as this
research therefore have potential to contribute to solutions to these global
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the appearance of the novel pathogen SARS-
CoV-2, over 100 structures of viral proteins have been deposited to the Protein
Data Bank, including 92 recent depositions of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease in
complex with different ligands (as of April 15, 2020). Close to 95% of the
structures deposited thus far are derived from macromolecular X-ray
crystallography (MX) experiments. One of the major bottlenecks in MX experiments
is determining the conditions in which a protein will crystallize, and this
hinders the rapid response needed in the current pandemic. The Crystallization
Center is a high-throughput crystallization facility that facilitates rapid,
efficient crystallization of biomolecular targets and is the only resource in
the world available to external users that makes high-throughput crystallization
screening accessible with 1,536 conditions in one experimental plate and
provides state-of-the-art imaging methods capable of detecting protein crystals
very rapidly. These resources are being made available to researchers working
with SARS-CoV-2 samples. Additionally, crystallization pipelines are being
expanded with 1) increased state-of-the-art imaging in the experimental
pipeline, 2) optimization and scale-up experiments at the facility, and 3)
expedited crystal sample harvesting and shipping. This project will have a
profound impact on the scientific community’s ability to quickly solve SARS-
CoV-2 protein structures, facilitating a better understanding of the basic
science underlying coronavirus biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is
made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.