* 2029682
* Selenium recovery from wastewater based on exclusively extracellular selenium nanoparticles production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Gang Chen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,978.00

Selenium (Se) is critical element to the US economy and national security. It is
also a contaminant in wastewater that must be removed to meet strict discharge
limits to the environment. Bacteria have been used previously to remove Se from
wastewater by converting dissolved Se to Se nanoparticles that can be separated
from the water. However, this process is not efficient for Se recovery because
the Se nanoparticles are typically inside the microbial cells and thus difficult
to recover. The goal of this project is to enable both Se removal and recovery
from wastewater using novel biocathode reactors. In these systems, specific
bacteria grow on electrodes and produce Se nanoparticles outside microbial cells
for efficient Se recovery. Successful completion of this research will improve
our understanding of the mechanisms of Se nanoparticle production in biocathode
reactors. Additional benefits to the environment and society result from
improving Se recovery from wastewater. The potential economic benefits of this
process are significant, as Se recovery just from coal-fired power plant waste
streams alone could meet all the US demand for this element. Broader impacts to
society will result from an education and outreach plan focused on the role that
bacteria play in the process. This will improve the scientific literacy of the
Nation by correcting misperceptions that all bacteria are human
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
biocathode reactor system to recover selenium (Se) from wastewater at coal-fired
power plants and other Se-rich waste streams. This research is driven by new
Environmental Protection Agency regulations greatly reducing the Se effluent
limit from coal-fired power plant wastewater. Additionally, increased demand for
Se in many different products and industries makes recovery and re-use a more
sustainable means of meeting this increased demand. Microbial Se reactors
exploit the microbial conversion of dissolved selenate to elemental Se
nanoparticles. Previous research on Se bioreactors has not been able to
demonstrate efficient recovery of Se because the elemental Se nanoparticles are
produced intracellularly and thereby difficult to separate. Preliminary
experiments in our laboratory using novel biocathode reactors have demonstrated
the ability of specially enriched mixed cultures to produce extracellular Se
nanoparticles on the biocathode regardless of inoculum. The first objective of
this project is to determine the mechanisms of extracellular Se nanoparticle
production on the biocathode. The effect of potential interferences like nitrate
and sulfate that are commonly present in Se-laden wastewater will also be
investigated. Techniques to prevent the negative effects of nitrate and sulfate
on selenate reduction will be developed through integrated mathematical modeling
with experiments on microbial community structure, function, and kinetics.
Successful completion of this research has potential to be expanded for the
recovery of other minerals of US national interests such as Cr, Pd, Sb, and U.
Broader educational impacts to society result from an education and outreach
plan focused on the production of an educational video of beneficial versus
harmful bacteria, outreach efforts to attract students from underrepresented
groups in STEM research and education, and a competition-based design project to
accelerate knowledge transfer to engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.