* 2029920
* RAPID: Teaching field geology without classes in the field - providing a robust capstone experience through digital resources
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Kurtis Burmeister, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 89,945.00

Geoscience educators are facing a number of unexpected challenges as campuses
transition to distance learning in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Principal
among these is the realization that opportunities for experiential learning
during spring and summer 2020 – including traditional, field-based geologic
courses and camps used as capstone experiences for undergraduate majors – must
rapidly make an unprecedented shift to distance learning or be cancelled
altogether. The need is urgent: these experiences are critical opportunities for
students to apply what they have learned throughout their undergraduate career.
With most field-based capstones scheduled to begin in early May, 2020, there is
not enough time for instructors to gain the expertise needed to develop and
implement suitable virtual alternatives. A much more effective approach for
addressing this crisis is coordinating a collective action to share expertise
and activities. This project is helping our community develop and organize this
collective momentum through an integrated series of professional, curricular,
and digital infrastructure development initiatives. The project team is: (1)
building avenues for sharing expertise within the community to enhance capacity
for designing and implementing virtual field experiences; (2) collectively
outlining the desired learning outcomes and skills that are developed during
capstone field experiences; (3) constructing and populating a new online
collection of activities, resources, and materials designed to meet those
learning outcomes; and (4) reviewing and disseminating the products of this
community-wide effort as a foundation for an educationally robust, virtual field
camp. Resources being developed through this project will be freely available to
the geoscience community. Activities are being tied to the community-derived
learning outcomes and integrate cutting-edge technologies to accelerate
geoscience students’ exposure to digital learning tools, resources, and
strategies that are rising in the profession (e.g., GoogleEarth, StraboSpot,
ArcGIS PRO, etc.). The outcomes of this project will also help address the long-
standing challenge of building field experiences that promote inclusivity,
accessibility, and equity for those who are commonly marginalized by traditional
field learning methods and experiences. Indeed, this effort will foster the
creation and expansion of curricular tools and opportunities that can help
geoscience students overcome barriers to participation (e.g., physical
disabilities, financial concerns, cultural stigmas, or family obligations), help
to reduce the novelty space associated with traditional, field-based
experiences, and ultimately allow students to build relevant skills and
confidence before going to the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach
to facilitating a rapid transition to virtual alternatives for traditional field
camp in response to the COVID-19 pandemic is to support groups of faculty in
developing high-quality, peer-reviewed virtual/online activities that can be
easily discovered in an online clearinghouse and integrated into an alternative
capstone experience by any instructor. The first step in this process is to
develop a community of expertise through a series of webinars involving field
instructors. With help from the National Association of Geoscience Teachers,
these webinars explore the challenges associated with the growing number of
cancelled summer field courses, confirmed the urgency of the situation, and
gauged interest in collaboratively developing new modules for virtual field
instruction. The project team is coordinating with the National Association of
Geoscience Teachers to establish web-based work spaces for nine working groups:
(1) Learning objectives &amp; assessment for field experiences; (2) Virtual
class-related field trips; (3) Developing a community-based, virtual field camp;
(4) Virtual hydrogeology/environmental field experiences; (5) Virtual
geophysical field experiences; (6) Marine geology/sedimentology field
experiences; (7) Working with virtual world technologies; (8) Digital tools for
enhancing virtual field experiences; and (9) Non-field camp capstone
experiences. The project team is hosting a one-day workshop based on the
successful On the Cutting Edge (a cooperative professional development program
run by the National Association of Geoscience Teachers and the Science Education
Resource Center) Building Strong Geoscience Departments Program to distill a new
set of community-derived list of learning outcomes using a backward design
approach. These new learning outcomes satisfy both virtual and field-based
capstone experiences and provide a basis for arguing the equivalency of these
programs to graduate school programs, professional licensure boards, and
potential employers, that students affected by pandemic-related program changes
will encounter in the future. With these new learning outcomes in hand, working
groups quickly develop new high-quality curricular materials for virtual
capstone experiences to meet the needs of distance learning pedagogies put in
place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The new learning outcomes will then
guide working groups in the compilation, development, and review of a new
collection of online activities. The project team and working group leaders can
engage a broad range of instructors through these working groups, match
instructors with efforts to develop activities within their expertise, and
collect feedback from potential users of the material. New activities will
include the learning outcomes and skills they address and be uploaded to a
searchable collection on the Teach the Earth website, the National Association
of Geoscience Teachers' portal to Earth education resources that is hosted by
the Science Education Resource Center. This website has well-established
protocols for activity submission and the infrastructure needed to build
searchable collections. Two levels of peer review using established rubrics will
assess scientific accuracy; alignment of goals, activity, and assessment;
pedagogical effectiveness; robustness (usability and dependability of all lesson
components); and completeness of the web page for the activity to ensure
successful implementation. Each activity will be connected to an overview page
that introduces the learning objectives, associated pedagogical tips and
strategies, and other resources as needed. These pages will help instructors to
quickly select sets of activities that satisfy the learning outcomes of their
particular capstone programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds to support
this project are provided by the EAR Tectonics Program and the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.