* 2029738
* EAGER: Diatom Programmed Cell Death at Single-Cell Resolution
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Monica Orellana, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,712.00

Diatoms are important primary producers in sunlit oceans and lakes across the
globe. They are key players in spring phytoplankton blooms, which in turn
support food webs that include productive fisheries. In addition, these
photosynthetic diatom cells are known to capture enormous amounts of carbon,
which are exported to depth as blooms die off. In oceanic systems, this process
effectively removes carbon from the atmosphere for thousands of years. However,
the biological mechanisms that lead to carbon sequestration, the transfer of
carbon from the atmosphere into the deep ocean, are not well understood. As
diatom populations reach the end of the bloom cycle, individual cells start to
deteriorate and undergo cell death. The collapse of diatom populations is
regarded as a critical point (or tipping point), which can be predicted by
understanding the genetic activity of the population. This project seeks to
elucidate how environmental change influences diatom cell-death processes. A
mechanistic understanding of these cellular processes will elucidate how climate
change could alter carbon-removal from the atmosphere and affect ocean
productivity. The knowledge and methods developed during this study are
applicable across organisms from all domains of life. The broader impacts of
this project are focused on high school education and new ideas and approaches
for three-dimensional learning opportunities in support of Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS). Specifically, researchers are working with high school
educators and partners to teach concepts of systems approaches, tipping points,
and carbon sequestration in the marine environment through educational
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to determine the structure of diatom
populations during the transition of actively growing cells towards population
collapse by identifying the point of commitment (tipping point) at the level of
individual cells. The model system is the diatom, Thalassiosira pseudonana,
which is widespread and a common bloom-forming species. The random decision
process of individual diatom cells is being characterized by establishing a
genome-wide gene expression space through the physical and biochemical
characterization of the cells. Implementation of the project is focused on
measuring the phenotypic responses in the diatom to environmental factors
including severe stress. Transcriptomic analyses during the transition of cell
proliferation towards culture collapse include bulk (RNA-Seq) and single-cell
(scRNA-Seq) high-throughput sequencing. Using a systems biology approach, the
genetic information obtained from the samples is incorporated into predictive
models to identify genetic transitions that occur prior to population collapse.
The systems approach can detect changes in transcriptomic state that precede a
critical point in the cell death process leading to predictions of how diatoms
respond to environmental change. This work opens new vistas for the elucidation
of mechanistic pathways of diatom cell populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.