* 2029892
* Polarization-dependent thermal emission from plasmonic metasurfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 348,000.00

In the past two decades, the control of thermal radiation has attracted immense
attention due to its importance in advanced energy systems, manufacturing,
remote sensing, thermal management, and high-resolution thermal imaging. Thermal
emission from bulk materials is typically broadband and largely diffuse.
However, significant development has been made lately to construct directional-
selective and wavelength-dependent emitters and absorbers using
micro/nanostructured materials. The polarization state of an electromagnetic
wave is determined based on how its electric field varies as the wave
propagates. It is well known that polarized light detection has important
applications in space and atmospheric remote sensing, target detection, surface
characterization, and biomedical diagnostics. However, the polarization effect
in thermal radiation has not been extensively examined. This combined
theoretical and experimental project aims to model, design, fabricate, and
characterize micro/nanostructured material surfaces with unique polarization-
dependent thermal radiation. The study will enable a fundamental understanding
of the nature of thermal emission in terms of the state and degree of
polarization. The knowledge obtained will potentially benefit applications
ranging from energy harvesting and surface imaging, to object recognition and
biomedical sensing. Significant efforts will also be devoted to advancing
student-centered pedagogy and expanding international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials made of thin nanostructured
layers, or metasurfaces, hold promise for controlling the polarization state of
thermal emission. This project will employ the finite-difference time-domain
method and the matrix formulation to model the reflection and absorption of
metasurfaces, considering both linearly and circularly polarized incidence.
Emphasis will be given to circularly polarized emitters using plasmonic
metamaterials with asymmetric metallic micro/nanostructures. The localized
fields will be analyzed for both linearly and circularly polarized incident
waves to explore the resonance mechanisms and plasmonic local heating at the
micro/nanoscales. Furthermore, the fluctuation-dissipation theorem will be
employed to directly model the field components and their correlations using
anisotropic dyadic Green’s functions. Both the direct and indirect methods will
be used to predict the emittance components defined based on Stokes’ parameters.
The results will be compared with the measured infrared reflectance and
emittance of fabricated plasmonic metasurfaces. In the emittance measurements,
combined retarder and polarizer arrangements will enable a characterization of
all of Stokes’ parameters. The nature of thermal radiation will be explored by
studying the degree of coherence, degree of polarization, directional and
polarization dependence, local density of states, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.