* 2029973
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Overcoming Propagation Challenges at Millimeter-Wave Frequencies via Reconfigurable Antennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/21/2020,09/30/2021
* Vida Vakilian, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 95,155.00

Wireless communication systems are in increasingly high demand among industry,
government, and the public, even while a large swath of the radio spectrum in
the millimeter-wave (mm-wave) band goes underutilized. Such network systems
support diverse uses such as smart grid electrical infrastructure, homeland
security, military applications, environmental monitoring, and medical and
transportation advances. To meet demand, cellular providers need access to more
bandwidth, which also happens to be their primary capital expenditure. By making
better use of available spectrum in the 30-300 GHz, i.e., mm-wave band,
providers not only could offer less costly service, but also could potentially
make transformative cellular access and coverage improvements for current
customers and the underserved. This project addresses a number of stubborn
technical obstacles limiting mm-wave band use. To overcome these challenges, a
multidisciplinary team will extend signal processing, communication theory, and
electromagnetics knowledge to develop novel reconfigurable antennas and
communication technologies for this band. Further, strong industry connections
among team members will help facilitate commercialization. The project also
includes goals to share a mm-wave testbed with industry and the public for
remote testing, and to educate students at several universities--notably at
California State University, Bakersfield, which primarily serves
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to leverage
the additional degrees of freedom provided by a new reconfigurable antenna
design to establish new beamforming and beamsteering methodologies that overcome
substantive propagation challenges at mm-wave frequencies. The project can also
significantly impact electrical engineering, computer and information science,
and the mathematical and physical sciences. Outcomes will include: (1) NEW
ANTENNAS. The proposed reconfigurable antennas have various states, each with
varying and predefined radiation patterns. Hence, they will support simultaneous
transmission of multiple radiation patterns, each with large directional gain.
The former provides beam diversity to overcome mm-wave frequency shadowing,
while the latter reduces power amplifier design constraints; (2) NEW METHODS.
More degrees of freedom will enable new precoding, beamforming, and beamsteering
approaches to overcome pathloss, shadowing, and channel sparsity; (3)
VALIDATION. Outcome validation on the Boise State University testbed will ensure
that researchers can realize projected gains in realistic hardware and
propagation settings at mm-wave frequencies; (4) NEW FRAMEWORK. A new framework
for state division multiple access will use various reconfigurable antenna
states and their corresponding known radiation patterns to serve multiple users;
(5) EXPERTISE. Investigators across four academic institutions in Idaho,
California, and Wisconsin share complementary expertise, and academic and
industry experiences.