* 2029800
* Unveiling intrinsic functionality of two-dimensional organic-inorganic ferroelectrics for energy storing/converting devices: integrated computational-experimental approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Sergey Lisenkov, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,992.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskites are an important class of
materials that have shown promise in devices such as light-emitting diodes and
solar cells. Some inorganic perovskites simultaneously exhibit the exotic
properties of ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity and pyroelectricity. These
phenomena are of great scientific interest as well as technologies for
conversion of mechanical and thermal energy to electrical power. This allows for
diverse applications such as sensors, actuators, energy harvesting, data
storage, and optoelectronics. Current technologies are based heavily on
inorganic perovskites, but these materials have shortcomings. These include high
temperature processing, lack of mechanical flexibility, high costs, and the
presence of toxic elements in some cases. Very recently, a new class of hybrid
perovskites with organic and inorganic components has emerged with intriguing,
but often controversial, evidence for ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity.
This project aims to achieve a fundamental understanding of hybrid perovskites
through an integrated experimental-theoretical approach. The focus will be on
ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity, associated phase transitions and emergent
device functionalities of bulk and low-dimensional hybrid perovskites. The
research could lead to the discovery of novel forms or manifestations of
ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity and how these phenomena are affected by phase
transitions. These studies have the potential to transform our current
understanding of organic materials and reveal if they exhibit properties and
device functionality on par with or even exceeding those of inorganic materials.
This in turn could create a route to devices with novel functionality and energy
converting properties, and push their technological applications to a new level.
The project will also contribute strongly to the training of the STEM workforce
with a focus on including students from underrepresented groups. The project
will involve undergraduate students in research and enrich the Physics and
Chemistry curricula. Outreach will be conducted through organized field trips to
local elementary and middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to address the following specific objectives. Objective 1: to establish the
mechanism for ferroelectricity and uncover the nature of the associated phase
transitions in hybrid three-dimensional organic-inorganic perovskites through a
combination of multiscale first-principles simulations, synthesis and
comprehensive structural and electrical characterization of single crystalline
samples. Objective 2: to reveal how ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity
mechanisms and manifestations in these materials change at the nanoscale through
a combination of state-of-the-art computational and experimental approaches.
Objective 3: to explore mechanical tunability of ferroelectric and piezoelectric
properties of these novel materials and reveal the possibility of their
integration in energy storing and converting devices. Objective 4: to engage in
a wide range of educational and outreach activities in order to contribute to
creating a world-class diverse materials science and engineering workforce that
is trained for careers in academia or industry. The expected outcomes of the
project include: potential discovery of novel forms of ferroelectricity and
piezoelectricity in bulk and two-dimensional hybrid perovskites, establishment
of mechanisms for ferroelectricity and piezoelectricity in these materials,
their comprehensive structural and electric characterization, elucidation of the
nature and origin of associated phase transitions, computational methodology and
software for their exploration and design, predicting their functionality in
energy storing devices, and prototypes for nanocapacitor and/or
force/displacement (nano)sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.