* 2029299
* IMAGINE: Adaptation of cyanobacterial light harvesting and metal homeostasis traits to environmental change.
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2024
* USD 836,102.00

Cyanobacteria are photosynthetic microorganisms at the base of aquatic food
webs. They occupy different types of environments from pristine ocean waters to
high nutrient, sometimes metal-polluted bays. The investigators have found that
one cyanobacterial species has transitioned from a marine environment into the
San Diego Bay, which would require it to adapt to different conditions such as
light quality and polluted waters. They will examine if specific genes in this
cyanobacterium changed in response to the new environment or if the
cyanobacterium picked up new genes from DNA in its environment to help it adapt
to the San Diego Bay environment. Since the earth’s environment is changing
rapidly, it is important to understand the mechanisms of how organisms such as
cyanobacteria will change in response, and what might be the limits on their
ability to adapt. The main goal of this research is to determine how
cyanobacteria are able to adapt to different environments. In addition, the
project will train a post-doctoral fellow and undergraduates in techniques in
molecular ecology. The PIs also propose to develop, in collaboration with the
Living Coast Discovery Center in south San Diego Bay in Chula Vista, a program
for a Wildlife Day Camp focused on microbiology. Campers will discover how the
San Diego Bay is filled with, and dependent on, the world of plankton, microbes,
and other small species. This program will be unique in that students will have
an opportunity to participate in sampling on the Bay and use microscopes to view
photosynthetic microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic microbes can adapt and
diversify to occupy new ecological niches. For cyanobacteria, the complex traits
of light-harvesting and metal homeostasis are examples of traits that adapt to
new environments with differences in light quality (color) or amounts of trace
metals. Environmental sequence data show that a normally oligotrophic “species”
of marine cyanobacteria, the Synechococcus clade II, has crossed over the
coastal zone (dominated by other clades) and adapted to the conditions inside
eutrophic San Diego Bay. This phenomenon is an ideal case study for
understanding how microbial adaptation of complex traits occurs at the molecular
level. Using isolates and single cell genomes of flow-sorted cells, the
investigators will determine if positive selection has been operating on
specific genes in the Synechococcus genome. In addition, Synechococcus clade II
strains may also be acquiring novel genes in San Diego Bay through horizontal
gene transfer. Gene knockouts/knockins will be used to test the functional
advantage of specific genes. The PIs propose to develop, in collaboration with
the Living Coast Discovery Center, located on San Diego Bay, a program for a
Wildlife Day Camp focused on microbiology. Campers will discover how the San
Diego Bay is filled with, and dependent on, microbes. This program will be
unique in that students will have an opportunity to meet scientists, visit
working labs, participate in sampling on the Bay and utilize light and
epifluorescence microscopes to view microbes. The project will also train a
post-doctoral fellow and undergraduates in techniques in molecular ecology and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.