* 2029371
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Detection and analysis of airborne coronavirus with bioinspired membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Jessica Schiffman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2022
* USD 75,317.00

The spread of biological pathogens via aerosolized droplets continues to be of
primary concern during the current COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, the ability to
capture and analyze aerosolized pathogens is critical to understand and mitigate
the potential for reoccurring outbreaks of COVID-19 or other novel pathogens. To
address this need, an interdisciplinary research team from the University of
Maine and the University of Massachusetts Amherst will engineer a bioinspired
technology that facilitates the efficient collection of viruses from
bioaerosols. The inspiration for the technology is the carnivorous Nepenthes
pitcher plant, which has a slippery rim and inner walls causing insects to fall
and become trapped within its digestive fluid. By engineering a composite
material comprised of a liquid layer on the surface of a membrane, the capture
and analysis of pathogenic particles will be enabled. The team will optimize the
membrane system to work with SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for the COVID-19
outbreak, in aerosolized droplets that mimic those released during talking,
coughing, and sneezing. This work will fill a critical gap in current methods of
monitoring the spread of disease through fast-tracked research and development
of an inexpensive, high-throughput, and widely deployable technology that can be
continuously operated at high-risk locations, such as hospitals, elder-care
facilities, and travel hubs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disease-causing agents such
as the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that take form as bioaerosols present
unique challenges for disease surveillance, containment, and treatment. Previous
attempts to design aerosol collection systems for viruses have had limited
success due to either the difficulty of retrieving intact virus particles from a
solid filter surface or inadequate throughput. This project seeks to address
these limitations by adapting a liquid-gated membrane (LGM) system inspired by
the Nepenthes pitcher plant. The system adaptation employs a water-immiscible
liquid on the surface of the membrane that creates a reusable, reversible liquid
trap immobilizing live pathogenic particles within a thin liquid shell at the
membrane surface. A model reovirus will be used to develop the LGM system, and
capture efficiency will be assessed using reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, infectivity assays, and structural assessment before
the technology is validated using SARS-CoV-2. The team will explore the
development of new intellectual property that would be well-aligned with
manufacturing industries of both Maine and Massachusetts, including pulp and
paper products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.