* 2029072
* RAPID: Investigating Performance of an Online Platform for Matching Supply and Demand for Medical Equipment During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Auyon Siddiq, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a sudden surge in demand for medical supplies,
including personal protective equipment (PPE) necessary to protect first
responders and healthcare workers. This surge has exposed gaps in the
established supply chains for procurement of such equipment, leading medical
facilities, particularly those that lack the scale to buy equipment in large
quantities, to face shortages. In response, small-scale suppliers have emerged
that can redirect idle design and manufacturing capacity for non-essential
equipment to production of critical medical equipment. In collaboration with the
University of Wisconsin Makerspace, the PIs have created an online platform that
has enabled this fragmented and inherently temporary supply chain to efficiently
match small-scale suppliers with hospitals in need of supplies. This Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) project supports valuable data collection efforts
about participating manufacturers, medical facilities, and overall system
performance of the online matching platform. These data will improve
understanding of the role that pop-up supply chains can play in addressing
supply shortages during pandemics and other nationwide emergencies.

The online platform is driven by an optimization algorithm that efficiently
matches buyers with sellers by order size, price, lead time, etc. The PIs will
collect and archive data from the platform on manufacturer characteristics
(size, capacity, lead times, location, etc.), medical facility characteristics
(size, type, requirements, urgency, etc.), and match logistics available through
the platform, and will perform follow-up surveys to gather information on impact
of the matching system and the effects on business operations. These data will
be used to understand performance of the matching platform during the COVID-19
pandemic, identify factors that influence whether a recommended match leads to a
successful transaction, understand the impact of quality variability on pop-up
supply chain performance, and study the impact of improving the optimization
algorithm on supply chain performance. The project will involve a graduate
student who will gain valuable experience in designing optimization methods for
effective supply chain design.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.