* 2029454
* Rheo-Control 3D Printing: Tuning Suspension Viscosity for Fabricating Functional Materials with Gradient Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Pei-Yu Chiou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2024
* USD 527,716.00

This grant supports research that will contribute new knowledge related to an
additive manufacturing process, promoting both the progress of science and
advancing national prosperity. Additive manufacturing, often called 3D printing,
plays a pivotal role in the rapid design and fabrication of technological
devices without the need for expensive tooling and long turnaround times.
However, high-performance 3D printing of functional devices, such as energy-
absorbing materials, wearable electronics, and morphing structures, remains a
major challenge. Such limitations in performance are largely attributed to the
difficulty in extruding highly functional inks and actively controlling their
properties. This award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge for
developing a 3D printing process that extrudes high-performance inks with
tunable properties. The new printing technology will improve the performance of
current 3D-printed devices and unlock new designs in material fabrication, bio-
manufacturing, and customizable electronic production. Therefore, results from
this research will greatly benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research
involves multiple disciplines including fluid mechanics, microfabrication, and
materials science. This transdisciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and promote equity and
inclusion in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional inks in 3D
printing are often extremely viscous due to the required high filler content,
and they often exhibit shear jamming that leads to catastrophic nozzle clogging.
Moreover, the inability to alter ink properties, such as rigidity, conductivity,
and thermal response, constrains manufacturing and thus inhibits the potential
of realizing many new designs. To address such a challenge, this research will
develop an understanding of and strategies for controlling functional ink
properties via ultrasonic acoustic fields during extrusion. The hypothesis
builds upon recent advances in thickening suspensions, in which high-frequency
perturbations can be used to manipulate the microstructure of viscous fluids and
substantially reduce their flow resistance. Specifically, this project will
investigate the relationship between the mechanical properties of a particle-
based model ink and the inkâ€™s acoustically altered microstructure. The
integration of these findings will lead to the development of design principles
and perturbation protocols for building printing platforms. The project will
explore two perturbation approaches: first, the simple attachment of a
piezoelectric to a printing nozzle, and second, the engineering of an acoustic
patterning device that precisely controls the ink microstructure. Collectively,
these experiments will provide a foundation for developing active control of ink
properties for printing functional devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.