* 2029788
* RAPID: Campus Coronavirus Response
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Moon Duchin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 133,934.00

This COVID-19 RAPID research project will assist hospitals and first responders
throughout the United States as the country responds to the global pandemic. As
COVID-19 cases continue to strain limited hospital resources, college campuses
with largely vacated dormitories are in a unique position to provide additional
beds and facilities to hospitals. Dormitories can be repurposed as alternative
hospital sites to house recovering patients, or other non-critical-care
patients, and can offer temporary lodging to medical personnel – all coordinated
through health systems and hospital networks across each state. The project team
has initiated a mathematical model and mapping tool to efficiently match
patients and medical personnel to vacant college dormitory beds. This project is
poised to make a meaningful impact mitigating the burdens on hospitals,
initially in Massachusetts and the Northeastern U.S. and then expanding across
the U.S. The tools developed have potential to be useful immediately as well as
in potential future “second waves” of COVID-19 infections. In addition, the
model design and the visual tools are adaptable to other emergency response
efforts. The tools this project develops have the potential to support decision-
making any time one type of institution needs to turn to a second type of
institution to expand its capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team has
formulated their approach as a transport issue primarily, which they solve
through a mixed integer program based on minimizing travel time. Their model
primarily considers acute-care hospitals, although it could expand to include
additional types of hospitals based on needs. The research effort behind this
disaster assistance project includes investigating how various kinds of
regularizations can be used to promote sparser matching in the linear integer
program. Sparser matching would ensure that each hospital would collaborate with
only one or a small number of universities and each university would receive
patients/staff from only one or a small number of hospitals. Additional
refinements may take hospitals with shared planning or logistics infrastructure
into account, clustering them with the same universities. The team already
developed a model for Massachusetts which they plan to scale to all 50 states
using national datasets and engaging with appropriate hospital, university, and
emergency management partners in those states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
award is made by the Convergence Accelerator program in the Office of
Integrative Activities and is associated with the Convergence Accelerator Track
A: Open Knowledge Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.