* 2029017
* Collaborative Research: Photochemical Silicon Aerosols: Establishing Atmospheric Sources and Significance
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Eleanor Browne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 217,400.00

This research is focused on improving the understanding of the chemical and
physical transformations of volatile methyl siloxanes (VMS) in the atmosphere.
Volatile methyl siloxanes (VMS) are high production chemicals used in many
personal care products such as deodorants and lotions. The results of this
research are expected to lead to a better assessment of the fate and transport
issues important for understanding the environmental and health consequences of
the increasing use of VMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to assess the chemical speciation and abundance of oxidized VMS in the
laboratory and in ambient atmospheric aerosols. This research is expected to
confirm the presence of particles formed from ambient organosilicon compounds,
establish aerosol yields at near-ambient conditions under urban and remote
oxidation conditions, determine the best aerosol tracer compounds for this class
of secondary organic aerosols, and integrate the results of this effort into a
state-of-science photochemical grid model that will enable the prediction of the
fate of VMS upon oxidation at scales ranging from urban airshed to
continental.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research includes laboratory studies at
the University of Iowa using an oxidative flow reactor (OFR) and experiments in
the University of Colorado environmental chambers to probe the oxidation
chemistry of VMS. Outdoor ambient sampling for VMS and its gas- and condensed-
phase oxidation products will be conducted during a four-week summertime
deployment in the New York City metropolitan area. The scientific insights
gained from this research will be incorporated into the Community Multiscale Air
Quality (CMAQ) modeling system that will lead to better predictions of aerosol
formation from personal care products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the NSF Atmospheric Chemistry Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.