* 2029416
* RAPID: COVID-19 Detection Through Amplification of Protease-Based Signals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Sankaran Thayumanavan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 04/30/2022
* USD 198,497.00

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, SARS-CoV-2, is the cause of
the novel coronavirus infectious disease 2019, COVID-19. During a key step in
the viral lifecycle, infected human cells release not only virus particles but
also enzymes that cut viral and host proteins, called proteases. Detection of
the proteases linked to SARS-CoV-2 would provide an alternative path for testing
for COVID-19. With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in
the Division of Chemistry is supporting the research of Drs. Sankaran
Thayumanavan, Jeanne Hardy, and Trisha L. Andrew at the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst to develop "smart" sampling swabs whose color changes
when the main protease of SARS-CoV-2 is present. The color change of the swab
results when the main protease of SARS-CoV-2 breaks down a colorless, protein-
derived molecule into individual pieces, with one of those pieces having its
chemical properties changed during the break-down process, so that it absorbs or
produces light that can be seen by the human eye. The investigators design and
make the protein-derived probe molecules and then incorporate them into the
fibers of currently-used clinical swabs. Their chemical design allows the probe
molecules to be selectively broken down by the main protease of SARS-CoV-2 and
to produce strong color in the smart swabs even when extremely low
concentrations of the main protease are present. Creation of the necessary
chemical reactions and their application to develop the protease-responsive
smart swabs may lead to inexpensive testing methods that are practical for use
by individuals at home. Due to the generality of the release of proteases in the
lifecycle of viral infections, the new chemical reactions and resulting
technologies are anticipated to be useful for visual detection of other viruses,
which may be especially meaningful during future potential outbreaks.
Educational, training, and outreach activities focus on graduate students
working with Drs. Thayumanavan, Hardy, and Andrew in a cross-cutting, team-
oriented research environment to address the development of front-line
measurement science approaches, with anticipated highlights shared with the
public and K-12 students about their experiences and lessons learned about how
research funding can be used to directly impact a major societal
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop rapid,
accurate, straightforward probe-based sensors that detect the inherent catalytic
properties of viral protease enzymes, which produce a clear optical readout.
Efforts are focused on creating new sensing chemistries that utilize
specifically designed dye-based reporters and using them to develop inexpensive,
disposable smart swabs to detect the presence of catalytically-active severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 main protease (CoV2-MP). The general
research approach Drs. Thayumanavan, Hardy, and Andrew take is to first generate
protease recognition elements by designing, producing, and validating peptides
that provide the optimal specificity to the targeted viral protease. The
resulting protease recognition elements are then linked to donor-acceptor
chromophores to create "pro-chromophoric" probes that remain in a dark
(uncolored, discolored, or quenched) state. Upon exposure to the main viral
protease, the free reporter is liberated and produces a highly intense
colorimetric or fluorescence signal, with the estimated limits of detection
offering sensing of sub-picomolar concentrations of CoV2-MP. Sophisticated
reporter formulations with integrated chemical amplification routes are
predicted to provide access to these limits of detection. Importantly, the
protease-based detection strategy and swab test platform are easily and
generally transferable for detecting potential future viral pathogens based on
their specific protease structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being
awarded using funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act supplemental funds allocated to
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.