* 2029323
* SWIFT: SMALL:  Exploiting Co-Existence for Verifiable Everlasting Security in Wireless Communication Systems: Hardware and Protocols
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Jackson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,998.00

The crowded radio spectrum has motivated significant interest in using spectrum
more efficiently by operating radar systems and wireless communication systems
in the same frequency band. Traditionally such coexistence is viewed as neutral
or detrimental to both systems, but this view is evolving, particularly if there
is information sharing between the systems. This project exploits a coexisting
radar to solve a longstanding problem in communications: protecting the message
contents in wireless communication systems, such as cellular phones, WiFi
systems, and public safety radios. The standard approach is to encode the
message based on a cryptographic key, which is shared by the message sender and
intended recipient but unknown to the adversary; the intended recipient can
readily decode the message, but the adversary is faced with an intractable
computational task. However, the potential for an adversary to record the
encoded message and then work to decode the message in the future using either
computational advances or after obtaining the key means cryptographic approaches
are insufficient if the goal is everlasting security. This project will perform
experimental validation and refinement of a technique for everlasting security
that exploits the strength of two different approaches for security, as
described below, to exploit the coexisting radar signal to block the adversary's
receiver from making a recording of a wireless communications signal from which
the message content can ever be extracted. The experimental thrust of the
project will also serve as fertile ground for project-based enhancement of the
education of a diverse set of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
technique combines classical cryptographic techniques with contemporary
information-theoretic security techniques. Information-theoretic security
approaches protect the message content forever if the proper conditions are
present at the time of message transmission; however, trying to guarantee such
conditions is challenging, particularly in the wireless communications
environment, and hence information-theoretic techniques have seen limited
penetration in practical systems. This project will employ a coexisting radar to
provide everlasting security, as follows. The communicating parties and operator
of the radar system set up a cryptographic key, which is then employed to
provide the required advantage in radar interference cancellation for the
intended recipient over the adversary to establish information-theoretic secure
communications. Even if the key is compromised immediately after message
transmission, the adversary will not have been able to store a version of the
signal from which the message can ever be extracted, hence providing everlasting
security. The advantage is obtained from the intended recipient employing the
key for receiver front-end adaptation to reduce the dynamic range of the
received signal. However, such an adaptation can be challenging and has been
considered only through simple models in the studies of the proposed technique
to this point. Buoyed by full-duplex communication approaches that have emerged
over the last few years and demonstrate interference cancellation over a wide
frequency band, this project addresses the challenging hardware implementation
of this technique jointly with the refinement of the modeling and protocols so
as to yield a robust form of everlasting security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.