* 2029043
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Socioeconomic Determinants of Social Distancing Behaviors in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Christopher Browning, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 186,155.00

The behavioral or “social distancing” response to the COVID-19 pandemic will
largely determine the rate at which the virus spreads throughout the U.S.
population. To encourage social distancing, many states have closed schools and
nonessential businesses and instituted “Stay-at-Home” orders that limit trips to
necessary activities such as grocery shopping and medical care. While Stay-at-
Home orders are typically considered mandatory, most states rely on voluntary
compliance rather than penalize infractions through citations or arrests. A
persistent concern throughout the crisis has been the extent to which
individuals are choosing to practice social distancing effectively in order to
slow the growth of the pandemic. Yet, to date, virtually no systematic
information has emerged on differences in social distancing across social groups
by income, race/ethnicity, and residential neighborhood and, critically, why
these differences exist. This project will address this gap by collecting
detailed data on social distancing practices during the COVID-19 pandemic –
including the timing and location of non-home trips over the course of a week –
from a sample of youth and their caregivers in the Columbus, OH area. The study
will build on an ongoing project focused on differences in patterns of everyday
activity under normal (non-pandemic) conditions). Enhanced effectiveness of
social distancing holds the potential to save millions of lives, reduce the
burden to inevitably taxed health care systems during pandemics, and mitigate
potential longer-term damage to the US and global economies due to ineffective
pandemic containment. Findings from the project will provide crucial guidance to
policy-makers who must target interventions to most effectively contain viral
outbreaks and address the needs of the most vulnerable populations during
pandemics. Findings will also provide important information for epidemiologists
who must model disease spread based on realistic assumptions regarding social
distancing practices across the population. Finally, clinicians will also
benefit from more precise information on infection risk profiles at the
individual level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 has prompted requirements for
social-distancing, and yet we know little about who complies and who does not.
This project will re-contact 246 households (N=309 youth) who participated in an
ongoing NIH-funded study of everyday spatial exposures that was in the field in
the period prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic (the Adolescent Health
and Development in Context study). Objective 1 of the study will investigate the
association between income, race/ethnicity, and residential neighborhood
economic disadvantage and typical (pre-pandemic) exposure to higher infection
risk locations as captured by the density of social interaction at those places.
These data will shed light on infection risk during the early stages of the
pandemic before social distancing behaviors were widely adopted. The study will
leverage unique data from the baseline study on the geographic location and
associated characteristics of everyday places visited based on a novel survey-
based method for the collection of geographically-referenced activity data.
Objective 2 of the study will re-administer this location data collection
approach during the peak period of the pandemic to measure income,
race/ethnicity and neighborhood variation in the extent of social distancing
behaviors for both caregivers and youth. Objective 3 will address the
consequences of pandemic exposure and social distancing behaviors for economic
hardship, mental health, family conflict, and youth behavioral problems. The
project will generate the first geographically referenced data on the mobility
of youth and their caregivers during pandemics in combination with extensive,
high quality social survey data. Findings will inform sociological theories
regarding the social and geographic determinants of compliance behavior, which
complement psychological investigations more attuned to personality and
individual determinants of the same.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.