* 2029515
* RAPID: Determination of health risks and Status from SARS-CoV-2 Presence in Urban Water cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 123,706.00

COVID-19 has impacted human health on a global scale. Understanding the spread
of COVID-19 is thus an urgent national need. This project addresses this need
focusing on the urban wastewater treatment system. Wastewater generated by wash
water and toilets is known to carry human pathogens. Thus, municipal wastewater
represents an important pathway for human exposure to viruses like SARS-CoV2
(the coronavirus that causes COVID-19). The goal of this project is to determine
if wastewater obtained from different municipal wastewater treatment plants and
sewer lines harbors SARS-CoV2. A secondary goal is to use this information to
understand the exposure risk to wastewater treatment plant workers and track
community COVID-19 infections. This will be achieved by testing whether SARS-
CoV2 (or its genetic material) is present in municipal wastewater. This
information will be combined with data on other water quality parameters to
establish correlations between SARS-CoV2 and wastewater quality. Results will
help understand the risk of exposure to SARS-CoV2 in wastewater treatment plant
operators. In addition, the results from this project have potential to be used
as a rapid measure to track hotspots of COVID-19 in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV2 has
become a global pandemic, resulting in over a quarter million fatalities
worldwide. Although SARS-CoV2 has some similarity to the virus SARS-CoV1 (a
well-studied coronavirus responsible for a severe respiratory disease outbreak
earlier this century), we still lack information needed to understand the
survival and infectivity of this pathogen in municipal wastewater
infrastructure. Municipal wastewater generated in kitchens and restrooms is
known to carry human viral pathogens, thus representing a potential exposure
pathway for humans. The goal of this project is to develop efficient techniques
to extract and monitor SARS-CoV2 in wastewater. The secondary goal of this
research is to understand human health risks associated with the presence of
SARS-CoV2 in municipal wastewater influent and treated effluent. This will be
achieved through three broad tasks to: (1) select biomarkers and develop methods
for rapid and efficient extraction and analysis of SARS-CoV2 in wastewater; (2)
sample wastewater treatment plants and distribution systems to determine spatial
and temporal spread; and (3) develop a risk prediction model for exposure to
SARS-CoV2. This project will generate data that can be used to develop health
risk models for municipal wastewater treatment plant operators. Results
generated from this project also hold promise to help epidemiologists and other
health professionals to understand and predict COVID-19 outbreaks in the
community. This project will expand the diversity of the Nationâ€™s STEM workforce
through the education and training of a female graduate student. Broader impacts
to society include the potential development of early warning tools to detect
the spread of human pathogens such as COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.