* 2029745
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and assessment of a diagnostic platform for rapid identification of COVID-19 patients without using custom reagents
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Rajesh Krishnamurthy, 3I Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to deploy a diagnostic to rapidly and
inexpensively detect COVID-19 infections. Beyond the short-term goal of
identifying COVID-19 patients, the technology will lend strong support for real-
time infection tracking nationally. The same hardware components of the
diagnostic can be used to identify a wide variety of pathogens without custom
reagents. The system will work with a cloud-based database and monitoring system
to rapidly identify hotspots of increased pathogen activity, enabling faster
response to new pathogens since no hardware-related development, manufacturing,
and distribution are needed. Once a new pathogen’s fingerprint is obtained, it
can be easily distributed to deployed instruments to enable immediately tracking
of the new pathogen.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
rapid diagnostic capable of detecting SARS-nCoV2 directly from sample matrices
without the use of custom reagents (like DNA) or a cold supply chain. The
approach isolates intact virus directly from the specimen with the help of a
disposable cartridge and a syringe pump. The isolated virus is then identified
using Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR). The proposed work
leverages the differential response to mechanical stress between the virus and
the components of a sample matrix. This differential response is used to
selectively lyse only the sample matrix components, not the virus. The debris is
subsequently separated from the virus by size-based separation methods such as
filtration, enabling rapid isolation of a broad range of pathogens directly from
the sample. FTIR is used to identify the isolated virus since pathogens exhibit
unique spectral fingerprints in the infrared region. The proposed Phase I effort
will develop the protocol for isolating and identifying intact virus and will
demonstrate the performance with nasopharyngeal swab samples. The results will
be compared against results from RT-PCR methods to assess comparability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.