* 2029746
* RAPID: Developing a Benefits Distribution System to Facilitate Economic Recovery from the Impact of COVID-19
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Justine Hastings, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 148,589.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing Pandemic Response
benefits distribution systems to support individuals eligible for unemployment
benefits and other services. The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused
the shutdown of many sectors in the US economy, resulting in an unprecedented
amount of unemployment claims in a short period of time. This project seeks to
(1) help states develop and deploy Pandemic Response benefits distribution
systems needed to meet the high demand of unemployment insurance claims,
including for workers newly eligible under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance
(PUA) program; (2) analyze administrative data to understand needs of the
impacted population; (3) develop and deploy outreach and support systems to
connect the impacted population to government support systems and labor training
programs to help individuals find gainful re-employment; and (4) facilitate the
sharing of findings to increase the national impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon a pilot that was designed to facilitate and deploy a
benefits application collection system for Rhode Islanders (NSF award 1937061).
The pilot successfully developed and deployed the system through a collaborative
effort with Research Improving People's Lives, Amazon Web Services, and the
Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training. This current project will expand
and refine the pilot effort to be openly shared with other states. This project
aims to design and deploy Pandemic Response benefits distribution systems, such
as those needed for unemployment insurance claims, so that states can support
their residents during the crisis. The project will analyze state administrative
data, including administrative data on earnings, employment, and public
assistance programs to quickly deliver insights that help identify needs of the
impacted population. By deploying outreach support systems to connect impacted
individuals to training programs and government support systems, this project
aims to help individuals find gainful re-employment after the COVID-19 shutdown.
The project will facilitate sharing findings through video conference meetings
to disseminate results and evidence-based practices to the public, including
state policy leaders, as an effort to support a national economic
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence
Accelerator program in the Office of Integrative Activities and is associated
with the Convergence Accelerator Track B: Future of Work and the Human-
Technology Frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.