* 2029312
* IRNC Core Improvement: SXTransPORT Pacific Islands Research and Education Network
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,060,763.00

The SX-TransPORT Pacific Islands Research and Education Network (PIREN) project
supports the primary Research &amp; Education (R&amp;E) network backbone
connecting Australia, New Zealand, Guam, and points beyond. Based in Hawaii, the
project enables major advances in astronomy, oceanography, coral reef research,
high energy physics, biomedical research, and data science. Primary PIREN
partners are the Pacific Wave distributed exchange, which ensures that all
PIREN-connect networks have full access to the entire domestic and global
R&amp;E network fabric, and the Network Startup Research Center (NSRC), which
supports the development of campus networks as well as training and education
for Pacific Islander network engineers, a highly underrepresented group in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the PIREN project leverages both the international
fiber optic systems that connect to multiple Hawaiian islands as well as the
unparalleled international astronomy resources on Maunakea and Haleakala. The
PIREN project also established and operates, in partnership with the University
of Guam, the Guam Open Research and Education Exchange (GOREX), strategic new
R&amp;E network infrastructure in the Pacific that interconnects multiple
submarine cable systems from the US, Asia and Australia to provide more
resilient and lower latency paths among major research partners including Japan,
Hong Kong, Singapore, and Southeast Asia. PIREN is also the principal U.S.
initiative to advance R&amp;E networking among underserved Pacific Islands,
which now have increased access to fiber-optic systems that interconnect in
major hub locations such as Hawaii and Guam, and which are on the forefront of
sustainability challenges arising from climate change and sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.