* 2029287
* Scholarships, Mentoring, and Career Development to Support Attainment of Software Engineering Graduate Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Chad Williams, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Central Connecticut State University. Over its five-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 24 unique full-time and part-time students who
are pursuing master’s degrees in Software Engineering. Scholars will receive
scholarship support for up to one year of prerequisite coursework, as needed,
and up to two years to complete the degree on a full-time basis or up to three
years on a half-time basis. Project activities will focus on three strategies
for sustaining engineering graduate students: recruitment, mentoring and
support, and career development. The project will be designed to attract
Scholars with a broad range of STEM experiences and offer them a unique
opportunity to combine their interdisciplinary background with the study of
software engineering. Admitting Scholars as cohorts will create a supportive
environment that supports Scholars’ academic success, retention, and timely
graduation. This project builds upon successful prior S-STEM projects at the
University, which established a well-functioning student support infrastructure.
It also builds upon the faculty and staff experience in these previous projects,
incorporating and improving upon the lessons learned so far. By supporting
advanced degree attainment of low-income high achieving graduate students from
non-traditional and interdisciplinary backgrounds, the project has the potential
to increase workforce diversity in the software industry and help to address the
national shortage of software professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will support the study, implementation, and evaluation of curricular and co-
curricular activities leading to the improved academic success of low-income
academically talented graduate students. The proposed strategies are consistent
with existing practices in higher education leading to the successful
persistence of low-income students, including those from historically
underrepresented groups. The project will help address an under-studied research
question regarding the relationship between the level of identity as a software
engineering professional and graduation rates for academically talented, low
income graduate students. The research team will use a mixed-methods approach
that will collect both quantitative and qualitative data and will employ a two-
round data collection plan. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.