* 2029645
* Collaborative Research: New Roles for Reactive Oxygen Species in Mediating Carbon Fluxes at the Terrestrial-Aquatic Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brandy Toner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,017.00

Wetlands in the north central region of the United States are important
ecosystems that play critical roles in the regional carbon cycle and are likely
to be dramatically affected by climate change. Rates of greenhouse gas release
from these wetlands may increase with warming and offset their ability to
sequester carbon. By studying the chemical and microbiological processes in
wetland sediments over space and time, predictions of the effects of climate
change on these critical habitats will be possible. Documentation of the
ecological importance of this region via photography will demonstrate the value
of wetlands to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The drivers of
biogeochemical activity that dictate the emissions of carbon dioxide and methane
in small, inland waters are poorly constrained, yet processes in these water
bodies play an oversized role in understanding climate change. One process that
is poorly understood is the role of chemical reactions in mediating carbon
dioxide and methane formation in small lakes and wetlands, especially the
abiotic production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) at the sediment-water
interface (SWI). The hypothesis for this project is that the reaction of reduced
soluble and particulate forms of iron, sulfur, and carbon with trace level
oxygen to form ROS at the SWI is an under-appreciated, yet critical, control on
microbiological activity and the cycling of carbon in small inland water bodies.
Using a combination of field work in the prairie pothole region of North Dakota,
controlled laboratory experiments, and mesocosm studies, this work will 1)
identify the geochemical drivers of ROS generation at the SWI, 2) determine
spatiotemporal patterns of linked pore water chemistry and ROS at the SWI, and
3) track the generation of specific labile carbon substrates produced through
ROS-DOM reactions that affect rates of carbon mineralization and methane
production in small lake and wetland sediments. A combination of in situ
voltammetry measurements, detailed characterization of dissolved and particulate
organic matter, iron, and sulfur species, and microbial -omics analyses will be
used to understand the coupled biogeochemical processes. A key component of this
work is understanding how abiotic ROS driven reactions at the sediment-water
interface lead to turnover of terminal electron acceptors and generation of
labile microbial substrates. Establishing a baseline understanding of these
processes is needed to predict changes in carbon dioxide and methane fluxes
under different climate scenarios. The collected data will enable understanding
of how biogeochemical cycles are maintained through coupled abiotic/biotic
pathways, and how these processes impact carbon cycling in aquatic environments.
This approach is also applicable to other systems and the cycling of other
elements, such as nitrogen, which may be especially important in urban wetland
regions. The societal benefit will be improved understanding of processes that
influence, and are influenced by, climate change. To reach as broad an audience
as possible regarding the importance of this region, a photographer will
document the landscape and its ecological function during field sampling
trips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.