* 2029806
* Novel Integrated Characterization of Microphysical Properties of Ice Particles Using In-Situ Field Measurements and Polarimetric Radar Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 647,003.00

East Coast Winter Storms (or Nor’easters) that develop off the eastern coast of
the US from North Carolina northwards can be very devastating producing large
amounts of snowfall, freezing rain, sleet and resultant flooding. The type of
precipitation that falls at the surface is sensitive to subtle vertical changes
of the environment conditions such as temperature and relative humidity. The
National Weather Service’s recently modernized network of radars along with
sophisticated numerical models are used to forecast the hazardous areas but they
depend crucially on the physical properties of the various classes of
precipitation such as size, shape, concentration, density, fall speed and
composition which are highly variable in both space and time. This research is
aimed at developing, implementing, and testing novel approaches to measurement,
characterization, and analysis of the physical and scattering properties of ice
particles in winter precipitation combining delicate optical, electronic, and
mechanical instrumentation and state-of-the-art radars. These integrated field
measurements are performed in collaboration with the Precipitation Research
Facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, operated by the National Aeronautic and
Space Administration, which falls along one of the climatological tracks of east
coast winter storms. Accurate measurements of the physical and scattering
properties of winter precipitation are crucial for advancement of numerical
weather prediction models and in the correct interpretation of data from the
recently modernized national network of weather radars. Hence this research can
lead to improved winter precipitation forecasts (amount, location, and timing),
which is of great importance to economy, safety, and everyday life, including
all travel modes used by the public, and especially air travel and safety.
Educational impacts include research training of graduate and undergraduate
students, instrumentation development by students, and field experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
reduce uncertainties in the interpretation of radar signatures and improve the
accuracy of the retrievals of liquid equivalent snow rate (SR) using an
observationally-driven approach supported by advanced in-situ instrumentation
and radars. More specifically, the first objective is to improve
characterization of geometric parameters, particle size distribution (PSD), fall
speeds, and “effective” density of ice particles, by optimizing the data from
projected views in one plane, obtained by the Precipitation Instrument Package
(PIP), two orthogonal planes, from the 2D-video disdrometer (2DVD), and multiple
planes, provided by the 5-camera multi-angle snowflake camera (MASC) and
7-camera Snowflake Measurement and Analysis System (SMAS). The second objective
is use of the combination of PIP, two 2DVD units and two 3D sonic anemometers
(inside and outside a double-fence windshield) to characterize the effects of
particle-turbulence in natural snowfall on the fall speed and “effective”
density of particles. The third objective is related to closure based on
achieved agreements of the “best” estimate of SR and forward modeled
polarimetric variables from dual-polarization radar using PIP, 2DVD, MASC, and
SMAS data with independent snow gauge and radar measurements, respectively. Some
of the unique contributions of this project are: a student-built research
instrument SMAS that offers 3D-shape reconstruction of particles using 6 cameras
with the 7th camera simultaneously measuring fall speed; use of multiple
instruments (MASC, SMAS, 2DVD, and PIP) to arrive at the “complete” PSD from 100
microns to &gt; 20 mm; experimental approach to study particle-turbulence
effects on settling speeds, with data on vertical/horizontal movements, fall
speeds and sizes, and habits (types) of particles provided by the PIP, 2DVD, and
SMAS, respectively; and closure experiments with the agreement between predicted
and measured SR and radar observables being evaluated based on the estimated
measurement and parameterization errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.