* 2029263
* RAPID: A physics-based model for droplet drying on varying surfaces and changing seasonal conditions and the implications for COVID-19 survival
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Holavanahalli Udaykumar, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,544.00

The COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in enormous loss of lives and economic
damage. Seasonal return of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) will be even more
devastating. One of the primary ways that SARS-CoV-2 appears to spread is
through people touching surfaces with virus-laden droplets. Virus survivability
on surfaces varies greatly by droplet size and composition, surface material and
texture, and the ambient temperature and relative humidity. These factors impact
the concentration of salt and other solutes in the process of droplets drying on
surfaces, which strongly influences the survival of viruses in the droplets.
This project will address survivability of viruses inside droplets and its
relationship to droplet size, type of surface and ambient conditions
representing seasonal variations. The team will especially seek to understand
conditions under which virus survival in surface-adherent droplets is
diminished. This information is crucial for public health officials,
virologists, and other experts working on disinfection efforts to control and
mitigate current and future COVID-19 outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will bring together an interdisciplinary team of engineers, virologists,
and infectious disease experts to understand the mechanisms that determine virus
survival/annihilation on different surfaces under varying seasonal conditions.
The research plan combines computer simulations and experiments to reveal what
happens inside droplets under conditions specific to COVID-19 scenarios. More
specifically, this project will study the thermal and mass transport processes
that occur in droplets drying on various surfaces. Project results will include
quantitative information on the solute (salt, protein) concentration-time
pathways in the interior of virus-carrying droplets drying on surfaces. These
pathways will be quantified as functions of droplet size, composition, ambient
temperature and relative humidity, and surface characteristics. Novel laser and
chemical treatments of surfaces will be employed to modify hydrophobicity and
hydrophilicity over a wide range to examine the effect of such modifications on
droplet drying processes. This project will therefore reveal what types of
seasonal conditions and surface modifications will contribute to diminished
survival of viruses within droplets. The project team will transition project
results to experts who study methods to deactivate viruses. Arming them with
precise knowledge on the thermochemical conditions faced by the pathogens within
drying droplets will enable them to focus attention on effective disinfection
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Thermal Transport Processes program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.