* 2029948
* SWIFT: SMALL: Interference Canceling for Improved Coexistence Between Passive and Active Radio Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Ellingson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

A difficult problem in the management of the limited radio spectrum is that
active (transmitting) users of the radio spectrum must coexist with passive
(receive-only) users of the radio spectrum; in particular, with radio astronomy
and geophysical remote sensing. This project investigates the prospects for
improving coexistence using "canceling". Canceling consists of identifying and
subtracting an undesired signal such that the receiver is able to access signals
of interest that would otherwise be obscured. In principle, this allows enhanced
sharing of spectrum. However, existing canceler technology is generally not
sufficiently reliable for general use. This project aims to improve the
performance of cancelers using enhanced signal processing techniques including
machine learning. Success in this effort will (1) improve the ability of active
and passive users to share spectrum and to operate in adjacent frequency bands
while (2) improving the quality of signals collected in passive applications who
must operate in or near bands allocated to active services. The project will
engage undergraduate engineering students as researchers through two-semester
senior design projects. Public outreach will include a public-facing website and
a YouTube channel documenting the various activities of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy employed in this project is
to address the two principal difficulties that have been found to limit the
performance of canceling for passive users in the past, namely (1) that
interference can be simultaneously damaging yet too weak to accurately estimate,
and (2) interfering signals vary significantly over the timescales over which
they must be canceled. The "too weak to estimate" problem will be addressed
using concurrent partial cross-layer knowledge of the signal, machine learning,
and terrestrial source-sited receivers. The "dynamic channel" problem will be
addressed using augmented physical models and machine learning to improve
tracking of parameters. Enhanced cancelers are expected to be able to better
mitigate the spectral sidelobes of interferers whose primary emission is located
out-of-band relative to the frequency of observation. Further, machine learning
will be used to dynamically predict performance and recommend canceling
strategies tailored to user- and application-specific objectives. Performance
will be evaluated through the use of simulations, bona fide data collected from
operational instruments, and demonstrations using a purpose-built small-aperture
telescope testbed located at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.