* 2029695
* RAPID: Investigating molecular-level responses of coronavirus under UVC irradiation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Karl Linden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,997.00

Coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV1, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV2 (the virus responsible
for COVID-19), have caused several global pandemics of respiratory diseases over
the last two decades. A primary exposure pathway for coronavirus infections is
through skin contact with contaminated surfaces followed by touching of facial
areas. Effective and safe methods for surface disinfection against coronaviruses
is urgently needed. This is particularly true in healthcare settings where
reusable personal protective equipment (PPE), medical instruments, and surfaces
in operating rooms need repeated disinfection. Beyond clinical settings, high-
touch areas such as public transportation and commercial shops have an urgent
need to stay virus-free as intervention efforts to control the pandemic are
eased. Current surface disinfection methods using chemicals like bleach and
alcohol can result in material corrosion and chemical residuals. A potential
solution for surface disinfection is the use of ultraviolet light (UV) devices.
UV light has been proven to be effective against other viruses but must be
optimized to treat SARS-CoV2 and other coronaviruses because of their unique
molecular structure. The study aims to understand how UV light from different
sources (including newly available UVLEDs) damage the nucleic acid and proteins
in SARS-CoV2 coatings. The findings will provide guidance for UV device design
and operation for disinfecting contaminated surfaces, which will help in the
fight against the COVID-19 global pandemic and future coronavirus-caused
respiratory outbreaks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultraviolet light (UV) devices
emitting UVC irradiation (200-280 nm) have proven to be effective for virus
disinfection by damaging nucleic acids and proteins. UV exposure to non-
enveloped viruses revealed that DNA/RNA damage is the primary cause for virus
inactivation, with a peak efficacy around 265nm, whereas protein damage is
important at wavelengths at the high (~280 nm) and low (&lt;240 nm) ends of the
UV spectrum. Coronavirus, which is an enveloped, non-segmented positive-sense
RNA virus, may respond to UVC irradiation differently due to its unique
molecular structure. The goal of this project is to investigate inactivation
kinetics and RNA and structural protein damage of coronavirus under UVC
irradiation across wavelengths from 220 to 280 nm. Murine coronavirus and murine
hepatitis virus (MHV) will be used as a representative coronavirus and a
surrogate of human coronavirus in this project. The UVC inactivation
efficiencies and kinetics of coronavirus will be determined by exposing MHV
contaminated surface samples and water samples under UVC irradiation in a bench-
scale collimated beam apparatus with three different UV sources: a UVLED system
(emitting at 255, 265, and/or 285 nm), a KrCl excimer lamp (222 nm), and a low
pressure UV lamp (254 nm). The RNA damage of MHV under UVC irradiation across
wavelengths will be investigated using long range reverse transcript
quantitative polymerase chain reaction and the protein damage will be assessed
using peptide liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. The fundamental
scientific relationship between virus molecular structure and UV inactivation
efficiency and mechanisms will be evaluated by comparing the UV action of
coronavirus to those of nonenveloped viruses used in previous studies. These
findings will lead to generation of definitive UV-disinfection kinetics of
coronavirus on surfaces to inform proper operation and use of UV devices and
support the engineering of new disinfection devices that will serve as urgent
and effective interventions during relevant public health
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.