* 2029301
* RAPID: Examining How Access to Green Space Impacts Subjective Well-Being During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Benjamin Orlove, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,790.00

The aim of this project is to explore the connections among green space,
perception of risk, and well-being in times of a public health emergency that
require people to stay indoors and isolated. In a crisis like the current
COVID-19 pandemic, the role of urban green spaces in promoting public health and
well-being may be an especially important co-benefit of green infrastructure
(GI) programs. However, there is simultaneous acknowledgement that being
outdoors, even in green space, is a continuing source of risk for exposure
and/or spread of COVID-19. Therefore, this research asks, how do variations in
access to green space, whether due to lack of safe, nearby green space and/or
the perceived risk associated with being outdoors in particular kinds of spaces
during a public pandemic, impact well-being? To answer these questions, this
study uses online surveys and video interviews with college students. These
students have traveled home from their campuses, returning to a wide variety of
residential and landscape forms, presenting an opportunity to conduct
comparative study of how access to green space influences responses to current
conditions and well-being. The survey, distributed via email, includes questions
about well-being, outdoor activity, risk perception, and personal responses to
social distancing/self-isolation measures. Interviewees, solicited from survey
participants, will be asked questions about available outdoor green space and
activity, lifestyle changes in response to COVID-19 and their effect on well-
being, the role of outdoor activity in subjects' well-being, and barriers to
outdoor activity under present circumstances. Both statistical analyses and
qualitative coding analyses will be used to determine (a) subjects' access to
different types of green space; (b) subjects' willingness to utilize green space
with respect to type, accessibility, and risk perception; and (c) the
association of (a) and (b) with subjects' well-being during the pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will expand knowledge on the co-benefits of
green infrastructure (GI) programs, with an emphasis on the co-benefit of health
and well-being during times of great stress. This study will allow determination
of the impacts on well-being for a wide-range of green space types and
accessibility, across and within landscape forms (urban, suburban, rural). As
such, this study will contribute to understandings of how novel, large-scale
stress-inducing events intersect with differences in green space type and access
to contribute to inequalities in human well-being. By collecting data from a
diverse study population located across a broad area this study will be able to
make comparisons across a range of green space types and access. This will
further understanding of the mechanisms by which green space affects well-being,
applicable to a range of fields like public health, civil engineering, urban
ecology, and urban design and planning. This research will address two primary
broader implications for well-being in the face of current and future global
pandemic-related challenges. First, this study examines how green space access
affects well- being during social distancing/stay-at-home conditions, such as
those experienced by more than three-fifths of the US population. Second, this
study will provide detailed information on subjects' choices and behaviors
regarding outdoor recreation during social distancing/stay-at-home conditions,
including risk perception and beliefs about the importance of green space
access. Together these data will be used to inform current and future
preparations and responses to pandemics and other extreme emergency
circumstances through recommendations on outdoor recreation, well-being, and
current and future planned GI design. Attention to characteristics of
neighborhoods by type of building and by population characteristics will support
GI planning and implementation by providing fine spatial resolution for the
integration of GI contributions to well-being with GI contributions to
stormwater management and other environmental
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.