* 2029710
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Managing Ocean Front Ecosystems for Climate Change
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Lee Hannah, Conservation International
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to establish the relation
between the ﬁsh resources and ocean fronts – areas where two distinct water
masses meet in the oceans - and utilize that knowledge to understand how the
fronts and the ﬁshery related to them will change under different scenarios of
changing climate. The project will focus on the Mozambique Channel where ocean
front ecosystems are continually being formed and reformed. This area plays an
important role in the well-being and livelihoods of many people in the area who
depend on these fisheries and ocean ecosystem. Exploitation of the ﬁsheries at
these fronts poses a threat to the ﬁsheries resources which tend to concentrate
in slowly sinking waters of the frontal zone thus making them vulnerable to
over-exploitation. To maintain sustainable social and natural ecosystems, it is
critical to understand how these frontal ecosystems and their marine fauna and
ﬂora will be affected by changing climate. This project will utilize existing
satellite data from the Mozambique Channel to develop models that advance
understanding of ocean fronts, and illuminate temporal and spatial dynamics of
marine life using front ecosystems, including species important to commercial
fisheries and to conservation. The results will improve management of tropical
fisheries and improve conservation of large marine animals including dolphin,
whales, manta rays, sharks and whale sharks. These results will directly benefit
conservation and fisheries in the Mozambique channel and will inform improved
management in similar systems throughout the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.