* 2029484
* RAPID: COVID: Optofluidic sensor array for rapid and sensitive detection of COVID-19 antibodies
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2022
* USD 149,225.00

COVID-19 has caused tens of thousands of deaths and is becoming a severe threat
to global health. One of the methods to detect COVID-19 infection, track the
treatment effectiveness, and validate successful vaccination, is to measure the
antibodies developed in human bodies. Unfortunately, current antibody detection
relies on either complicated instruments in a centralized lab which is expensive
and takes a long time to get the results, or a paper-based test strip, which,
while quick (5-20 minutes), produces only Yes/No results, making this method
very easy to generate false positives/negative and impossible to track the
patients’ response to infection, treatment, and vaccination. Therefore, a
portable device that can rapidly, sensitively, and accurately measure multiple
COVID-19 related antibodies is urgently needed to diagnose early infection and
monitoring patients’ response. The device in the project is based on a portable
microfluidic system to rapidly, accurately, and sensitively measure the
antibodies in blood at point-of-care, which allows for the detection of COVID-19
infection and tracking of antibody development in human
bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to combine
microfluidic laser technology and microfluidic ELISA (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay) technology to develop rapid and highly sensitive sensor
array for multiplexed detection of COVID-19 related IgG and IgM using fingertip
blood. There are three tasks: (1) to develop a microfluidic chip to extract
serum from whole blood; (2) to integrate the laser sensing technology with
traditional fluorescence ELISA to sensitively detect antibodies (IgG and IgM)
with a large dynamic range; (3) to test with artificially spiked samples. The
device provides the following advantages. (1) Quick turn-around time. It is
highly portable and can be used to rapidly screen patients on-site, rather than
sending samples to centralized labs. (2) Highly quantitative. This is critical
to significantly reducing the false positives/negatives and monitoring the
patients’ infection trajectories and response to treatment and vaccination. (3)
Highly sensitive and large dynamic range. Combined with the lasing technology,
we expect to improve the antibody detection limit 10X with 10X larger dynamic
range. Higher sensitivity enables earlier diagnosis of infection, preventing
wide disease spread from those asymptomatic patients. A large dynamic range
enables to easily track patients’ antibody evolution over time. (4) Highly
versatile. The device can be adapted to rapidly detect cytokine release syndrome
(CRS), which is one of the death causes in COVID-19
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.