* 2029983
* I-Corps:  Autonomous Robotic Instructor for Workforce Training
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
define the requirements needed to develop technology to train the next
generation workforce and narrow the skills gap in advanced manufacturing. By the
year 2025, the Manufacturing Institute estimates that the US manufacturing
sector will demand 2 million more jobs be filled by the labor force. Traditional
schools and apprenticeships alone cannot meet the increasing demand for skilled
labor. Small- to medium-sized manufacturers (SMMs) cite a “skills gap” in
advanced manufacturing while receiving more orders than they can fill. The SMMs
seek to hire more workers to increase output, but they cannot find enough
workers with the necessary skills. Currently, the most successful solution to
these problems focuses on providing SMMs with workers just out of high school.
However, training costs and the time spent training workers are significant
barriers. This proposed technology aims to help companies train current workers
with the skills necessary to compete in the modern manufacturing
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an autonomous robotic system that embodies interactive learning for workforce
training. The proposed robotic technology is an instructor that delivers
educational materials from a remote online learning system. The technology also
is a machine that demonstrates physical actions and that physically interacts
with learners. By streamlining instruction with physical demonstration and
interaction, the team establishes a unique pedagogical approach that may engage
a broad population, including those having no engineering training. To
accomplish this, a software architecture has been developed to control the robot
and facilitate robust teaching. The software is cloud-based and modularly
designed so that different industrial robots may be easily exchanged with
minimal reconfiguration. In addition, this methodology represents the first
educational robot that customizes its curriculum in real-time based on user
learning style and background by collecting data on the learner as they progress
through the course and making decisions accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.