* 2029997
* Dimensions US-China: Integrating the dimensions of biodiversity to understand tree performance in a changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,03/31/2021
* Nathan Swenson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,877,190.00

Forests contain the majority of the biological diversity on the planet. They
also play a critical role in storing carbon and in providing other benefits to
society. Our knowledge of how forests function depends on our understanding of
the drivers of tree growth, death and reproduction. The importance of these
drivers may change with tree age, species and environmental conditions. Yet, the
nature and relative importance of these different drivers is difficult to study
because they act over very long timescales and large spatial scales. This
research project will examine tree performance in tropical, sub-tropical and
temperate forests to address this challenge. The project makes use of long-term
datasets about these forests to understand the slow processes involved.
Specifically, the research team will measure growth, mortality and reproductive
rates for 16 common tree species, including those that dominate eastern North
American forests. The three dimensions of biodiversity- genetic, functional, and
phylogenetic- will be integrated in this project. The data produced by the
project will be valuable for those studying the biology of forests in this
region. Lastly, the project will train one postdoctoral researcher, two graduate
students and two undergraduate students based in the United States and will
provide two training workshops for early career United States researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest dynamics emerge from demographic outcomes on the
level of individual trees. This project examines how the fundamental tradeoffs
in tree performance are determined by the three dimensions of biodiversity as
well as environmental conditions. The core questions of this project are: (1)
Are the drivers of the tradeoffs underlying tree performance consistent across a
taxonomically and functionally diverse sample of species? (2) How are intra-
specific functional and genetic similarity of individuals within a population
linked to their demographic success? (3) How does intra-specific functional and
genetic diversity vary across populations and how is this linked to tree
performance across life stages? and (4) How does variation in the abiotic and
biotic environment drive tree performance? The project will use long-term 50
hectare forest plots in the U.S. and China to study tree demography across
temperate, subtropical, and tropical forest systems. Reference genome assemblies
will be produced for 14 species of phylogenetically diverse trees. Finally, a
large greenhouse experiment with tree seedlings under different conditions will
help provide mechanistic understanding of the tradeoffs for young
trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.