* 2029956
* Science Education Campaign for Research, Equity &amp; Teaching: A Working Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* John Settlage, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,746.00

The purposes of this conference are to organize scholarly work about equity in
science education and to broaden the set of scholars in science education who
have equity as a focus. Equity has become a niche focus for many science
education scholars, but the idea that science education should reach all
students should be fundamental to all high quality teaching and learning.
Scholars have documented policies and strategies that expand the diversity of
individuals engaging in science. In turn, practitioners have incorporated these
advances into science classroom practice. Better science learning opportunities
can occur without diminishing expectations. However, many important projects are
only known to local participants and a few outsiders. The conference will gather
these scattered materials into a centralized collection. Producing consensus
documents about equity-centered science education will provide a common body of
knowledge. Having these shared referents will help to consolidate and coordinate
research activity. Such documents will also have value for science education
stakeholders engaged in professional development, policy enactments, and
instructional reforms. The second purpose of this project is to plan for
sustaining these efforts beyond the time of the conference. Because of current
societal and educational dynamics, it is important to be strategic and planful
about subsequent and synchronized ventures within an ongoing campaign for equity
centered science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demographical and institutional
shifts make it necessary to attend to inequities within science education.
Disparities by race and ethnicity are troublingly persistent in terms of
representation in science careers, of college students majoring in science and
engineering, by secondary school enrollments in advanced science courses, and in
K-12 student outcomes on measures of science achievement. Such patterns are
often reduced to deficit thinking about human potential. Deficit explanations
are related to biased expectations by classroom teachers, inappropriate course
tracking practices within secondary schools, uneven attention and support by
college advisors and university faculty, and hostile work environments
throughout academic and corporate STEM settings. In contrast, introducing asset
mindsets about marginalized populations has the potential to contradict biased
views about who can and cannot be successful in science. This project is
creating a multifaceted mentoring initiative to assist scholars with maximizing
impacts and sustaining themselves within their chosen professions. Among
participants, there is considerable variety of career trajectories and depth of
experiences. This diversity is creating a robust network of scholars from fields
adjacent to science education: organizational change, school counseling, teacher
leadership, technology education, and urban schooling. The conference is
providing support mechanisms to increase scholars’ human capital through an
organizational infrastructure to foster the professional community’s continued
growth. Activities subsequent to this conference are continuing to support this
community, maintaining equity at its core rather than an auxiliary feature of
scholarship in science education. The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers,
through the research and development of new innovations and approaches. Projects
in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.