* 2029266
* Studying interactions among metal nanoclusters, host ligands and small-molecule analytes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jennifer Brodbelt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 678,040.00

This project will investigate the molecular structures and photophysical
properties of small metallic nanoparticles encapsulated in nucleic acids, termed
DNA-templated silver nanoclusters. Silver nanoclusters are fascinating
fluorescent nanomaterials whose colors often respond to subtle changes in their
surrounding chemical environment, making them novel sensors for detection of
small molecules (e.g., adenosine triphosphate) and heavy metals (e.g., mercury
and copper). However, it is not known how silver nanoclusters interact with
these analytes and change their physical or chemical properties. In addition, it
is not understood why certain silver cluster species respond strongly to
specific small-molecule analytes but not to other similar compounds. The project
seeks to answer these fundamental questions, with the end goal to achieve
molecular and atomic level understanding of silver nanocluster sensors.
Understanding the nanoscale interactions of silver nanoclusters will also create
new tools for diverse biological and chemical applications, such as detection of
chemicals. The principal investigators will work with local K-12 students in an
outreach program named “Exploring Nanomedicine and Light”. The goal of the
outreach is to intrigue the students to develop new tools based on the new
understanding of silver nanoclusters and encourage them into a science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics path in their college
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future development of nanosensors is
hampered by the scarcity of functional nanomaterials that can be programmed to
respond to specific analytes. Professors Yeh and Brodbelt are using novel
experimental (chip-based high-throughput selection) and analytical (activated
electron photodetachment mass spectrometry) approaches to screen a large number
of silver nanocluster species and develop a fundamental understanding of their
interactions with host ligands, small-molecule analytes and heavy metals. The
principal investigators will also take advantage of deep neural networks to
classify the silver clusters’ responses to analytes and perform atomistic
modeling of silver nanoclusters. Silver nanoclusters present new opportunities
for small-molecule and heavy metal sensing because of their special chemical,
physical and optical properties. The transformative integration of analytical
chemistry, high-throughput screening, photophysical characterization and deep
learning classification will not only allow the hypothesis to be tested (analyte
binding reshapes silver cluster’s electronic structure through rearranging the
nucleobases around the silver cluster) but also enable the creation of a
versatile toolkit for numerous applications, including detection of signaling
molecules and sensing of pollution. The principal investigators will work with
local K-12 students in an outreach program named “Exploring Nanomedicine and
Light”. The goal of the outreach is to intrigue the students to develop new
tools based on the new understanding of silver nanoclusters and encourage them
into a science, technology, engineering and mathematics path in their college
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.