* 2029339
* RAPID: Molecular Imprinting of Coronavirus Attachment Factors to Enhance Disinfection by a Selective Photocatalytic “Trap-and-Zap” Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2023
* USD 187,858.00

The virus that causes COVID-19 (i.e., SARS-CoV-2) has been found in air ducts,
suggesting that it could spread around buildings via air conditioning systems.
SARS-CoV-2 is also shed in stool despite patients testing negative, and thus it
may reach wastewater treatment plants, where it could survive for days and be
aerosolized or discharged in the effluent. In fact, there are reports that SARS-
CoV-2 may spread through bathroom pipes. Although coronaviruses can be
inactivated by some conventional water treatment processes, there is an urgent
need for more precise viral disinfection approaches that are fast, efficient and
reliable under realistic scenarios. The objective of this project is to develop
a novel approach for selective adsorption and photocatalytic disinfection (i.e.,
trap-and-zap) of SARS-CoV-2 and other pathogenic coronaviruses. This would
result in a chemical-free technology (thus avoiding harmful disinfection
byproducts) with unprecedented precision and reliable efficiency to inactivate
coronavirus. The driving hypothesis is that molecular imprinting of graphitic
carbon nitride with common coronavirus attachment factors will enable selective
virus adsorption near reactive sites, resulting in reliably high disinfection.
Whereas enhancing the capacity and resiliency of wastewater disinfection and
hospital air sterilization systems to protect public health against emerging
infectious diseases has significant intrinsic merit, the benefits of this
project are much broader. This project will enhance surface recognition of
various types of coronavirus (e.g., those causing COVID-19, MERS and SARS),
which will inform efforts to concentrate them and improve both precision
separation (e.g., by superior sorbents) and detection limits of sensors that can
be used in diagnostics and surveillance efforts. Project results will be
integrated into various courses, including the NanoEnvironmental Engineering for
Teachers (NEET) course at Rice, which enrolls 15 teachers that reach over 3,300
high school students annually. This course recently expanded to Arizona State
University and is also being expanded to the University of Texas at El Paso,
thereby ensuring wide dissemination of this “trap-and-zap” approach to STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a recently published,
nanotechnology-enabled “trap-and-zap” approach (enhanced by molecular
imprinting), to selectively adsorb antibiotic resistant genes and concentrate
them near photocatalytic sites for efficient degradation
(doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b06926). This approach will be modified to target
SARS-CoV-2 and other coronavirus by imprinting molecules involved in virus
attachment such as sialic acids, heparin sulfate proteoglycan, and angiotensin-
converting enzyme–related carboxypeptidase (ACE2)-associated peptides onto the
graphitic carbon nitride photocatalysts. When the imprinted molecule is removed
(e.g., by acid washing), it leaves behind a target-specific cavity that enables
selective adsorption and photocatalytic inactivation with minimum interference
by background water constituents. Low pathogenic coronavirus HCoV-NL63 (which,
similarly to SARS-CoV 2, is enveloped with an S spike protein and uses the same
cell surface molecule ACE2 as host receptor) will be used to assess adsorption
kinetics and selectivity of molecularly imprinted-gC3N4 in the presence of
competing proteins (such as bovine serum albumin) and bacteriophage MS2.
Inactivation efficiency will be assessed by quantifying residual viable virus
concentrations, using the plaque assay with Avicel overlay. Specific tasks
include to (1) select a model coronavirus (e.g., HCoV-NL63) and attachment
factors for molecular imprinting; (2) prepare homogenous, stable, biomolecular
materials for imprinting; (3) synthesize the molecularly-imprinted catalyst; (4)
characterize adsorption kinetics and selectivity of target coronavirus particles
to the molecularly-imprinted catalyst; (5) benchmark virus inactivation
efficiency of the molecularly imprinted -coated catalyst against traditional
disinfection methods (chlorination, ultraviolet irradiation) under realistic
conditions; and (6) assess durability and reuse potential of the molecularly
imprinted catalyst Project results will be integrated into various courses,
including the NanoEnvironmental Engineering for Teachers (NEET) course at Rice,
which enrolls 15 teachers that reach over 3,300 high school students annually.
This course recently expanded to Arizona State University and is also being
expanded to the University of Texas at El Paso, thereby ensuring wide
dissemination of this “trap-and-zap” approach to STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.