* 2029394
* EFRI E3P: Tuning Catalyst Design to Recycle Mixed Polymer Streams
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Lance Lobban, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,999,987.00

This project aims to develop a new approach to upgrade and recycle multilayer
polymer films. Multilayer films generally perform better and require much less
plastic material in applications such as packaging, but their complexity makes
them far more challenging to recycle than other simpler forms of plastic like
rigid bottles. The investigators in this project aim to develop catalysts that
selectively target and convert components of the multilayer films, allowing the
remaining polymer to be recycled using conventional methods. This catalytic
targeting will be accomplished by modifying the surface of several promising
catalyst supports and incorporating active sites on their surface to allow
selective targeting and conversion of polymers or impurities of interest. Three
families of catalysts will be evaluated based on their effectiveness for
targeting and converting the components of interest, ease of separation from the
multilayer polymer mixture, and effective re-use. A model will be constructed to
determine the cost-effectiveness of each approach to refocus efforts on families
of catalysts that exhibit the greatest potential for economically recycling
multilayer films. The scientific and engineering research will be accompanied by
public perception surveys and education interventions aimed at communicating the
importance of this problem to the general public and thereby increasing public
awareness, acceptance, and participation. Ultimately, this proposal will lay the
groundwork for the cost-effective recycling of more advanced multilayered
plastics. This will ideally enable the technological advantages that accompany
multilayer plastics such as longer food shelf lives without sacrificing the
ability to effectively recycle the plastics
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because multilayer films typically consist of
very diverse sets of polymers, as well as trace amounts of tie layers, they are
not compatible with traditional recycling technologies focused on a specific
chemistry. Common approaches for their conversion are delamination or
dissolution-precipitation using costly solvent-based processes that can easily
become cost prohibitive when multiple streams are present. This proposal aims to
develop a set of catalytic particles that target specific families of polymers
in these multi-component films such that the nonpolar residue can be readily
recycled. Polar polymers will be selectively targeted by manipulating external
functional groups on three families of catalysts - carbon nanotubes, silica
particles, and zeolites. These families are chosen based on their ease of
introducing surface functionalities, effectiveness in targeting molten polymers,
recovery, and regeneration after conversion of polar components. The team will
further test the hypothesis that trace amounts of added water can serve to
remotely activate some polar molecules through remote polarization and
protonation, further extending the rates and selectivity activation of polar
molecules in these blends. Resulting kinetic data will be incorporated into a
techno-economic model to compare this approach with solvent-based approaches.
This technical component of the research will be carried out in parallel with
public perception surveys to guide improved public education regarding the
importance of this problem, with this information being incorporated into the
team’s outreach efforts. Outreach activities involving middle and high school
students will be developed, while also creating research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students spanning the diverse fields of Chemical
Engineering and Psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.