* 2029959
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomics and Epigenomics of Subgenome Dominance in Hybrids and Allopolyploids
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Jianrong Wang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 10/31/2023
* USD 2,600,000.00

Many crop species are allopolyploids, formed by the hybridization of different
species coupled with whole genome doubling, which has long been known to
contribute to the emergence of important agronomic traits. However, one of the
parental subgenomes in an allopolyploid is often more dominantly expressed
compared to the other 'submissive' subgenome(s) in both hybrids and
allopolyploids. This can result in certain genetic pathways, and ultimately
important traits, being dominantly controlled by a single parental subgenome. A
major goal of this project is to understand the genetic and epigenetic basis of
subgenome expression dominance. The identification of epigenetic marks or other
genomic features that indicate the dominantly expressed subgenome, which encodes
for important target traits, would greatly reduce the challenge of researching
and breeding polyploid crops. With respect to training and outreach, the project
will provide interdisciplinary training in plant genetics, genomics, and systems
biology, to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers. This project also aims to broaden scientific participation of K-12
students, spanning under-represented groups in science research, including
through activities at the Michigan State University 4-H Children’s Garden.
Finally, the project will host a workshop that will teach various molecular
cytogenetic techniques to diverse scientists in the broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a comparative genomic platform, consisting
of diploid progenitor and polyploid species genomes, combined with transcriptome
and a diverse epigenomic dataset, this project aims to uncover the epigenomic
and transcriptomic changes that occur during the earliest stages of subgenome
dominance using a set of inter-and intra-specific hybrids and in naturally
established polyploid strawberry. By identifying regulatory regions and
transcription factor (TF) binding sites in multiple genomes and subgenomes,
including TF binding motifs associated with abiotic stress response, this
project will provide the most comprehensive picture of the genetic and
epigenetic changes that occur following hybridization and allopolyploidization
and the potential role of the environment in shaping and determining subgenome
expression dominance patterns. All methods and datasets will be made publicly
available through publications and through long-term
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.