* 2030359
* RAPID: Colorimetric COVID-19 Detection Using Aptamers
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Massood Tabib-Azar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2022
* USD 209,997.00

Because of the current COVID-19 pandemic, there is severe urgency for accurate
point-of-care detection of COVID-19. The investigator will develop colorimetric
aptamer-based COVID-19 virus sensors that will change their color or visually
indicate the presence of COVID-19 on their sensitive surfaces. COVID-19 aptamers
will be synthesized and when bonded with COVID-19 will cause a visible change in
the sensor that can be viewed with the naked eye. They will also develop
COVID-19 sensors that turn “red” when COVID-19 is present. The sensor surface is
functionalized with the COVID-19 aptamers that is in contact with a buffer
solution containing fluorescent microbeads. They are also functionalized with
COVID-19 aptamers. The beads do not attach to the sensor surface unless COVID-19
is present to bridge them together. In the presence of COVID-19 the bright red
microbeads attach to the sensor surface completely changing its color.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on extensive experience with similar
sensors designed to detect Zika viruses, biofluids such as stimulant urine does
not affect sensor’s performance. Heat inactivated COVID-19 will be used in
preliminary experiments. They will be obtained from Zeptometrix corporation and
they do not require Bio Safety Level 2 (BSL-2) laboratories for handling.
Sensors capable of detecting a single COVID-19 virus will also be developed in
this study. Tunneling current sensors (TCS), field-effect transistors using
COVID-19 conducting channels, terahertz and UV-VIS spectroscopy, DC conductivity
sensors, quartz crystal micro balance and micro-electro-mechanical microbalance
will also be developed. Terahertz sensors along with their shorter wavelength
optical counterparts have the potential to remotely sense COVID-19 without
requiring aptamers. The goal is to have a working COVID-19 handheld sensor in 2
months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.