* 2030508
* Partnership to Advance Throughput Computing (PATh)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Miron Livny, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 15,499,999.00

The Partnership to Advance Throughput Computing (PATh) project will expand
Distributed High Throughput Computing (dHTC) technologies and methodologies
through innovation, translational effort, and large-scale adoption to advance
the Science &amp; Engineering goals of the broader community. The project will
offer improved ways for scientists and administrators to manage computing
workloads and resources – transforming raw capacity into effective capacity with
High Throughput Computing (HTC) principles that maximize the sustained use of
distributed computing resources toward computational problems. PATh’s
distributed HTC approach will strive to increase the national return on
investment of compute resources by enabling institutions to share computing
capacity, simultaneously maximizing utilization while also giving smaller
campuses easier access to this vital capacity. The techniques advanced by PATh
serve the national interest by promoting the progress of science, from academic
research groups, to large collaborations, institutions, and industry, with
training and outreach components designed and executed to empower the
communities that can benefit from these services. PATh is aligned with the NSF
National CI Coordination Services blueprint’s goal of producing an “an agile,
integrated, robust, trustworthy and sustainable CI ecosystem that drives new
thinking and transformative discoveries in all areas of science and engineering
(S&amp;E) research and education.”&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PATh brings together
two entities with a strong history of supporting dHTC-enabled research: the
Center for High Throughput Computing (CHTC) and the Open Science Grid (OSG)
Consortium. The team that founded CHTC at University of Wisconsin–Madison
pioneered, in the mid 1990s, the concept and principles of HTC and has advanced
and sustained HTCSS ever since. Roughly in parallel and driven by the needs of
physics researchers, a diverse and multidisciplinary collaboration laid the
foundation of the OSG in the late 1990s to develop, deploy, operate, and sustain
a shared and global dHTC ecosystem of sites spanning geographic and
administrative boundaries. PATh enables these two partners to align their
efforts and leverage each other’s respective strengths, coordinated under the
roof of one project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PATh will develop a Fabric of
Capacity Services (FoCaS) to build vertical dHTC capabilities and drive the next
phase of innovation in the HTCondor Software suite (HTCSS). The HTCSS offers a
rich collection of tools for scheduling, federating compute and storage
resources, and provisioning these resources to support high-throughput workloads
at local, institutional, national, and international scales. In PATh, the HTCSS
will receive new capabilities for incorporating external resources
(particularly, allocations on HPC machines) into scientific workloads. In
addition to the central role of the HTCSS in FoCaS production services, PATh’s
core commitment will continue and fortify these services by integrating external
technologies and ideas into the dHTC ecosystem. Building on the success of the
OSG Connect service, and on campus-oriented Research Computing Facilitation
methodologies pioneered by the CHTC at UW-Madison, PATh will create local dHTC
expertise and capabilities at a growing number of campuses, including those
under the NSF CC* program. Enhanced training, outreach, and community-building
activities in PATh will further diversify the reach of dHTC
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.