* 2030037
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Spatial Modeling of Immune Response to Multifocal SARS-CoV-2 Viral Lung Infection
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Melanie Moses, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 130,391.00

COVID-19 recently emerged as a worldwide pandemic, causing untold human
suffering and severe economic disruptions. How individual immune systems respond
to a novel coronavirus, for example, why some individuals clear infection
efficiently while others do not is not known. This project seeks to understand
how immune cells, specifically T cells, find cells infected with virus that are
dispersed in the lung. It will address how spatial distributions of infected
cells and movement patterns of T cells through complex lung structures determine
the course of infection. The project will develop the Spatial Immunological
Model of Coronavirus (SIM-Cov), a simulation model for studying these effects
and improving understanding of how the immune system controls infection by
coronaviruses. The model will take computed tomography (CT) scans of an infected
human lung as input, as well as biological data on how T cells interact with the
virus and infected lung cells. The model will predict the course of infection in
the form of visually intuitive movies showing how the infection progresses
through time in different individuals. By modeling variability in individualsâ€™
infectious rates over time, SIM-Cov will improve our understanding of why the
severity of COVID-19 varies so much among individuals. The model and movies will
be publicly accessible, and incorporated into educational materials for high
school and college students. The project will also train two graduate and one
undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
gap in understanding infection dynamics of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is
why the severity of infection varies so much among individuals. This project
addresses that gap by incorporating the role played by spatial-temporal dynamics
in within-host infections and immune control, particularly the role of T cells
which are required for viral clearance. Most quantitative models of viral
infection use differential equations or stochastic models and do not account for
the spatial distribution of infected cells or T cell movement patterns. The
project addresses this gap by developing a three-dimensional spatial model of
the whole lung (SIM-Cov) that tests how spatial interactions between T cells and
virus affect viral growth, load and clearance within the lungs. Ultimately,
these within-host factors contribute to the rate of clearance within a single
host and transmission between hosts. SIM-Cov will be parameterized and validated
with empirical imaging data (CT scans of SARS-infected patients) and the
emerging literature on SARS-CoV-2 and immune responses. SIM-Cov will model the
lung microenvironment, including vasculature and epithelium surrounding the
airways and alveolar spaces, the spatial and temporal spread of virus throughout
the lung, and the spatial arrangement and movement of T cells. The project will
have broad-ranging impacts for understanding coronavirus infection dynamics and
educational impacts through dissemination of the model and movies produced in
the project, as well as the engagement of three students in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Symbiosis, Defense, and Self-
recognition Program in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and
by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.