* 2030491
* RAPID: Using Data Science and Biophysical Models to Address the COVID-19 Pandemic
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Javier Arsuaga, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,998.00

COVID-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, is at the center of
one of the most dangerous pandemics the world has ever known. As it spreads
through the human population the virus mutates producing proteins that can lead
to higher infection rates (infectivity), and an increased ability to cause
severe disease (virulence). This project will predict the most likely mutations
of the virus by combining methods from machine learning, mathematics and
biophysics. Specifically, the proteins resulting from viral mutations will be
experimentally synthesized, and their infectivity and virulence will be tested
by the project team through a collaboration with researchers in industry. This
project benefits from unprecedented access to genomic data compiled on SARS-
CoV-2, combined with a rich set of novel tools developed through
interdisciplinary advances in data science, mathematics, and biophysics. The
results of this project will build a pipeline capable of assisting the
development of vaccines and drugs against COVID-19 while simultaneously
advancing the fields of machine learning and mathematical virology. The project
team is led by mathematicians, molecular biologists and biotechnology experts
working in an interdisciplinary and collaborative setting. Students and
postdoctoral researchers will be trained and will participate in publicly
disseminating the findings and results of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus is believed to have originated as a bat
virus and to have evolved through a combination of sequence mutations,
recombination, and natural selection to be infectious in human hosts. Some of
the most relevant sequence variations occurred in the S gene encoding the Spike
(S) protein. As SARS-CoV-2 spreads through the human population, mutations of
the S gene can potentially increase viral infectivity and virulence. Within the
framework of an evolutionary algorithm, the PIs will combine graph theory,
topological data analysis, and computational biophysics to characterize the most
likely mutations of the S protein. This powerful interdisciplinary approach will
draw upon existing experimental data from SARS-CoV-2. The PIs will collaborate
with an industrial partner to experimentally design the peptides corresponding
to those predicted sequences, and use binding affinity assays and cryo-electron
microscopy to test binding of the peptides to the human receptor (ACE2). The
resulting pipeline will help us better understand the evolutionary landscape of
viral proteins and will assist researchers in the development of anti-viral
drugs and vaccines. Future extensions of this work will increase our
understanding of how viruses are transmitted across species and propagate in
humans. The project will provide multi-disciplinary student and postdoctoral
training. The PIs will broadly disseminate their results, as well as the data
they collect and software they design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Mathematical Biology Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry are supporting
Drs. Arsuaga, Rodriguez, and Vazquez from University of California-Davis to
study genomic variations of the SARS-CoV-2 viral spike (S) protein and predict
the expansion range of transmission in human
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.