* 2030451
* RAPID: Responding to COVID-19 using High-speed Mesh Wireless Community Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Foad Hamidi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 64,828.00

This project responds to COVID-19 by investigating an effective and efficient
community-based approach in Baltimore City, Maryland to deploying free,
broadband Internet and creating trusted open-access online education, career,
and communication resources for low-income populations in the face of large-
scale emergencies. This approach builds on existing research on the importance
of equitable broadband Internet access and the potential of community-based
solutions to bridging the digital divide. Project findings will inform the
creation and use of community-led approaches to meet the technical and
informational needs of vulnerable populations during and immediately following
times of crisis. Specifically, it will research the creation of a trusted
technical infrastructure that leverages local partnerships to provide free or
low-cost Internet to communities. It will also inform how to maximize the
potential of Internet connectivity to maintain continuity of education and
employment activities and reduce social isolation among low-income populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a Community Wireless
Networks (CWNs) through the deployment in Baltimore City, Maryland of a series
of Point-to-Point (PtP) and Point-to-Multipoint (PtMP) connections over the 5GHz
spectrum. These Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) radios mounted on Points
of Presence (PoP) at partner sites will provide free and secure, high throughput
links to families in need. As this access is created, the project will then
curate and provide support resources to facilitate the continuity of education,
the expansion of teleworking career opportunities, and virtual socialization
methods. The impact of these interventions will be studied through pre- and
post-intervention surveys as well as remote interviews with stakeholders to
evaluate the impact of having free high-bandwidth Internet on low-income
families’ access to online educational, employment, and social resources both
during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, at the conclusion of the
project participating families and community partners will offer reflections and
suggestions for the future implementation of similar projects in a community
focus group. Project findings seek to further inform how to meet the
informational needs of vulnerable populations using a grass-roots, community-
based, technology-access approach during and immediately following times of
crisis. This project is highly relevant to Smart and Connected Communities
program as it demonstrates tight integration of social and technology research
and strong community engagement will be able to have significant impact
improving quality of life in vulnerable communities in this and potentially
other crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.