* 2030488
* RAPID: Development of a New Test for SARS-CoV-2 using Single Molecule Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Miguel Jose Yacaman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;During the CoVid-19 pandemic, one of the
most challenging aspects is the lack of testing to detect and trace infections
and implementing a strategy to carefully re-open the country and economic
activity. The lack of testing has resulted in uncertainties about public health
policies. Testing is necessary not only for diagnosis but also for tracking to
control the pandemic. This work is based on non-traditional techniques for the
detection of virus in infected patients. The project will develop an alternative
method based on the advances of physics and understanding of the quantum
mechanical aspects of interaction of light with matter. The technique will be
based on recent discoveries in nanotechnology and solid-state physics, allowing
the development of spectroscopy techniques to detect the SARs-Cov-2 virus. The
method, named Single Molecule Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SM-SERS), If
successful, will allow a fast, inexpensive, and much more precise and reliable
method to detect infections. The method is based on the detection the S proteins
of the virus, which participate in the cell infection. The ability of SM-SERS to
detect down to one molecule of protein will allow early detection of infection
and follow up of patients who recover from the illness. In addition, further
analysis of the SM-SERS data will help to understand changes on the virus
proteins and can help in the development of antiviral
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;During the CoVid-19
pandemic, one of the most challenging aspects has been the lack of testing to
detect and trace infections. The limitations in quantities and quality of test
kits have resulted in uncertainties about public health policies. Testing is
necessary not only for diagnosis but also for tracking to control the pandemic.
The practical difficulties to increase the number of available test kits
involve, among other things, difficulty in production of the chemicals needed
for the test. The most used test, technically known as RT-qPCR, is costly, has a
long turnaround time and, although it is highly sensitive, produces many false
negatives and are based on biochemical methods. This work is based on the Raman
spectroscopy in its SM-SERS modality. The method is based on amplification of
the inelastically scattered light by localized surface plasmons on metal
nanoparticles. The main goal will be to establish a Raman signature of the spike
glycoprotein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus that can be used to develop a detection
test. Previous research in the PI's group indicates that tests based on analysis
of sialylated glycoproteins have high sensitivity, specificity, and low
percentage of false negatives. The project will develop a new type of plasmonic
nanoparticles combined with ionic liquids that will improve the nanoparticle
delivery to solutions containing the virus. A second interest will be to study
the fine peak structure, which is related to morphological changes in the
proteins. This will be useful for development of antiviral drugs and the basic
understanding of the biology of the virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) grant supports research that will develop a new method
for viral testing with funding from the CARES Act managed by the Condensed
Matter Physics Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.