* 2030700
* RAPID: Comparative functional characterization of strain-specific CoV E-proteins and involvement in host-specific virulence
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Kenneth Shepard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Viral infections in the last decades with different strains of the coronavirus
(CoV) have led to the SARS-CoV (2003) and MERS (2012) epidemics and to the most
recent COVID-19 pandemic (2019). At this point, no vaccine or effective
antiviral drug is commercially available for these human pathogens. CoVs are
built out of four major structural proteins; the nucleocapsid (N) protein
engulfing the viral RNA, the spike (S) protein, the membrane (M) protein and the
envelope (E) protein. Presently, academic and pharmaceutical efforts are mainly
focused on the S-protein which is involved in the entry of the virus into the
host cell, whereas the M- and E-proteins are less well studied but are shown to
be involved in viral replication. This project will study the E-protein from
different CoV strains to better understand its function. This project will
improve our understanding of SARS-CoV-2, and this understanding is knowledge
necessary to identify new therapeutics to control this current COVI-19 pandemic.
In addition to increasing knowledge about SARS-CoV-2 biology, this project also
supports the training of a post-doctoral fellow, broadening participation in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the E-protein of SARS-CoV-2
and other coronaviruses (CoVs) to understand the role of this ion channel in
host-virion interaction. A multi-level approach will be used to gain
comprehensive understanding on effects of the post-translational modifications
and sequence variability of various E-proteins from different CoV strains.
Patterns in the post-translational modification of E-proteins will be identified
to determine whether these modifications affect the functionality of the
E-protein in model membranes. Using model membranes allows for control of key-
features in the membrane environment, namely charge of lipid head-groups and
saturation of fatty acids creating a microdomain or non-microdomain environment.
The throughput of these recordings will be increased by using our unique
abilities to combine modern electronics and membrane biophysics. E-proteins from
different CoV strains will be used to identify the impact on the development of
productive or non-productive infections in a host-like environment. The current
COVID-19 public health emergency makes understanding this new pathogen of urgent
importance. Little is known about this novel CoV and its relationship to other
CoV virions. Understanding better the exact role that the E-protein plays in the
host-virion interaction will be very helpful in devising new therapeutics. This
RAPID award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the
BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.