* 2030532
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Development of Biocidal Nanofiber Air Filters for Reusable Personal Protective Equipment during Outbreaks of Viral Pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2021
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2021
* USD 99,974.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted a critical need for reliable PPE for
medical professionals and essential workers. This project aims to fabricate
self-sterilizing personal protective equipment (PPE) material. The material will
be made using electrospinning, which produces small-diameter fibers. The fibrous
material will be treated with two types of biocidal agents to destroy pathogens
such as viruses. These materials are expected to be transformative because they
offer the potential for extended use and/or reuse of PPE. This will aid in both
reducing PPE shortages in times of increased use and contribute to reduced
waste. The investigators have identified hospital and industrial partners for
this project. Additionally, future applications of these materials may include
filtration systems for hospitals, on airplanes, and in homes and buildings, and
to protect those working in agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims
to produce biocidal filtration materials by electrospinning and adding novel
biocide and antimicrobial treatments (tetrabutyl ammonium bromide (TBAB) and
silver (Ag) nanoparticles) to produce PPE that captures and neutralizes viral
pathogens. The investigators hypothesize that these novel antimicrobial
composites will exhibit synergistic performance for virus inactivation by
coupling physical and (bio)chemical removal mechanisms. To test this hypothesis,
filter materials of varying fiber diameters will be electrospun from polystyrene
and poly(vinylidene fluoride), and their filtrations performance will be
evaluated using various sized polystyrene beads. The outcome of the project will
be fundamental understanding of the synergistic effects of surfactant biocide
(TBAB), antimicrobial silver, and easy-to-synthesize, electrospun
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.