* 2030338
* Dimensions US-South Africa: Unravelling the influence of endosymbiotic bacteria on the biodiversity of Mucoromycota fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2024
* Teresa Pawlowska, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,999,458.00

The goal of this collaborative work is to investigate how bacteria living inside
of fungal cells contribute to ecological and evolutionary dynamics of
Mucoromycota fungi. Mucoromycota are one of the least understood, yet
ecologically and economically important groups of fungi. They include fungi that
can only live in conjunction with plant associates, as well as decomposers and
fungi that exist within plant root systems. Glomeromycotina, one of the fungal
groups to be studied, offers a promising alternative to mineral fertilizers in
sustainable agriculture. Mucoromycotina are chief agents of crop post-harvest
spoilage. Mortiellomycotina have commercial utility as producers of
polyunsaturated fatty acids. The project will unravel how Mucoromycota
communities assemble and evolve, better informing practical applications for
these fungi. Student participants will be trained in methods to study evolution,
fungal biology, microbiology, and community ecology as well as acquainted with
tools of diverse modern lab methods and computation analyses. In addition,
because of the international nature of the project, the US participants will
interact with researchers in South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike other
fungi, Mucoromycota commonly harbor ancient and highly coevolved endosymbiotic
bacteria (EB). The understanding of factors, including EB, that shape global
diversity of Mucoromycota is limited. To fill this knowledge gap, Mucoromycota
will be sampled from two biomes (Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands &amp; Scrub
and Deserts &amp; Xeric Shrublands) across the U.S. and South Africa. A culture-
independent approach to taxon identification, combined with analytical methods
of community ecology, will be used to test hypotheses concerning the combined
roles of EB and geological history as well as dispersal, environmental and
biotic filtering in determining the biodiversity of Mucoromycota within the
context of broader communities of fungal soil decomposers and root
endophytes/mutualists. Culture-dependent methods will be employed to identify
novel EB associated with Mucoromycota, examine evolutionary innovations emerging
from these symbioses, and discover their impact on Mucoromycota community
structuring and taxonomic diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.