* 2030316
* RAPID: Easing COVID-19 Restrictions: How Variation in State Policy and Public Health Messaging Strategies Impact Risk Perceptions and Behaviors Across Time
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Katherine Dickinson, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 164,638.00

Recent studies of the transmission dynamics of COVID-19 suggest that
intermittent physical distancing may be required until well into 2022 in order
to reduce the continued spread of this novel disease. However, many individuals
are eager to return to normalcy sooner, and state governments have begun the
process of easing such restrictions and “restarting” their economies, despite
continued warnings by public health officials. Effective risk communication is
imperative to successfully navigating this next phase of the pandemic and
reducing the possibility of a resurgence of COVID-19 in the coming months and
years. This research studies the ways in which individual risk perceptions and
consequent behaviors interact with and, more importantly, are shaped by policy
and public health messaging strategies in the context of COVID-19. Based on data
collected through a multi-wave panel survey across six U.S. states on individual
risk perceptions and behaviors, this project provides usable information to
policy makers and public health officials to inform risk communication for the
COVID-19 pandemic in near real-time, particularly as restrictions related to
social distancing, business closures, and other risk mitigation measures are
lifted and changed. This project measures the extent to which individual risk
perceptions and behaviors are shaped by not only the differential policies and
risk messaging strategies utilized by government officials, but also by
preexisting structural factors, such as racial, economic, and gender
disparities. As such, the findings simultaneously inform existing public health
strategies while advancing the extant literature on risk communication relevant
to other on-going and emerging hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
COVID-19 pandemic emerged against the backdrop of an uneven landscape of health
and social disparities, risk preparedness policies, and political factors across
the United States (i.e., at pre-COVID time T0). In response to this threat,
states have taken actions, most notably issuing stay-at-home orders, to attempt
to mitigate risk. These initial state-level COVID-19 restrictions serve as T1
baseline data for understanding policy design and risk communication, against
which individual risk perception and risk mitigation behavior can be assessed
during the crisis phase of the pandemic. As COVID-19-related restrictions are
eased across states (or tightened in the face of a second wave) over time, this
study will assess changes in policy design, risk communication, risk perception,
and risk mitigation behavior in the recovery phase at T2 and T3. Collecting
repeated data from a diverse sample of individuals across multiple states
characterized by different initial conditions and policy responses at three time
points will allow tracking how risk perceptions and behaviors change over time,
how these states’ policies and risk communication influence such changes, and
how the effects of similar risk communication approaches vary across states with
different pre-COVID structural conditions. These insights inform policy makers’
evolving risk communication strategies about the COVID-19 pandemic in near real-
time, as well as generating new knowledge across multiple fields of social
science that can inform mitigation of other emerging
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.