* 2030608
* Fostering Excellence as a Means to Increase Motivation and Persistence of Undergraduates in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Angela Winstead, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,531.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial at
Morgan State University, the largest Historically Black College and University
in Maryland. Over its five-year duration, this project will provide scholarships
to 30 undergraduate Scholars who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Mathematics, and/or Physics. First-year students will receive up to
four years and transfer students will receive up to two-years of scholarship
support. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective supporting activities, including mentoring,
undergraduate research experiences, service learning, outreach projects,
graduate school preparation, and participation in discipline-specific
conferences. With the help of mentors, the Scholars will create Individual
Development Plans outlining their career goals and describing the steps needed
to achieve those goals. The project will also support curriculum improvements
aimed at improving overall first-year student retention in STEM. The project
seeks to shape the University’s best practices into a model that may be
implemented across the nation. To this end, the project will generate new
knowledge about how Tinto’s persistence model can be used to understand the
kinds of activities that improve self-efficacy, sense of belonging, and
perception of STEM curricula, particularly for African American STEM students.
These three factors influence student motivation, which in turn influences
persistence. Because the University has a student population that is more than
80% African American, this project has the potential to broaden participation in
STEM fields and to reveal how mentoring and individual development plans may
support retention and graduation of African American undergraduates in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. A specific goal of the project is to increase understanding
about how project activities affect Scholars’ success, motivation, and
persistence in STEM disciplines and careers. Research on persistence models for
African American students is scarce. This project aims to help fill this
research gap by addressing three research questions: (a) How do the project
activities impact African American STEM Scholars’ self-efficacy, sense of
belonging, and perception of the STEM curriculum? (b) What is the impact on the
project on Scholars’ persistence in STEM disciplines? and (c) How do Scholars
characterize the elements of the program that positively impact their goals,
motivation, and persistence in STEM disciplines and careers? This project
couples Tinto’s persistence theory model with the University’s best practices in
math preparation, active learning, block scheduling, and undergraduate research.
The major expected outcome of the project is to develop an HBCU STEM framework
that leverages university experiences to enhance student motivation, thus
leading to increased persistence. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.