* 2030039
* Elucidating essential factors for production of recombinant secreted proteins through proteomics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Nathan Lewis, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 670,036.00

Mammalian cells are used to produce valuable therapeutic and industrial
proteins, such as monoclonal antibodies, enzymes, cytokines and vaccines. Many
important proteins are difficult to produce because they are not easily secreted
from cells. This project will decipher the molecular mechanisms controlling
protein secretion. Understanding these mechanisms will enable strategies for
engineering protein secretion and improving production of high-value proteins.
Advanced machine learning approaches will also be developed to guide cell
engineering. As part of this project, local high school students will be trained
in a summer program focused on biological big data analytics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a novel method to identify and
quantify the host cell secretory pathway machinery that directly regulates
protein secretion. The primary focus will be on monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and
related Fc-fusion molecules of primary importance to the biotherapeutic
industry. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) will be measured in situ between
the mAbs/related proteins and the cellular secretory pathway machinery. This
will be done using proximity biotinylation with our Fc-mediated biotinylation by
antibody recognition (FcBAR) method. This project will (1) establish a method
for measuring essential PPIs for a secreted protein and identify PPIs
correlating with secretion rate. This method will be applied to Rituximab-
producing CHO (Chinese hamster ovary) cells. (2) A novel systems biology
analysis approach will be applied to unravel how changes in PPI strength impact
secretion. This computational framework will help define roles of interacting
proteins and prioritize PPIs for further study. (3) Expression of these
interaction factors will be modulated to validate their role in mAb secretion.
(4) Finally, product-specific vs. more general PPIs used for protein secretion
will be identified by quantifying PPIs for additional Fc-fusion proteins and
comparing how much the secretory pathway needs differ across secreted proteins.
The tools developed by this project will guide host cell engineering for
biomanufacturing of diverse proteins and will provide deep insights into the
functions of the mammalian secretory pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.