* 2030883
* RAPID: Challenges and Novel Responses in Law Enforcement and Criminal Courts  to the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* John Eassey, American University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 157,138.00

Compared to other types of natural disasters which impact a limited geographic
location, the current pandemic is remarkable for the effect it has had on the
entire country. The criminal justice system has not been immune to this impact
with law enforcement and courts having to adapt their operational decisions and
responses. This study will conduct successive interviews with law enforcement
agencies and adult criminal courts as they navigate and respond to the public
health threat of COVID-19. It seeks to not only document how these agencies have
responded, but to understand why they responded as they have, how their response
has changed as new information becomes available, and the practical and
pragmatic challenges they have faced in the process. Towards these ends, results
seek to inform disaster preparedness, resource management, and criminal justice
policy.

It has been argued that the deleterious consequences of natural and
technological disasters depend largely on the physical and social vulnerability,
or access to physical, social, and economic resources, of the impacted
population. In much the same way, organizations, business, and other
institutions are differentially vulnerable to disruptive events. How they cope
with this vulnerability when confronted by such an event can be generally
understood in the context of organizational decision making, which implies a
complex process that involves differentially weighting specific and abstract
costs and benefits associated with potential alternative choices. This study
draws on theories/frameworks of emergency management, rational choice, and
policing and criminal court administration in order to understand the manner in
which law enforcement agencies and criminal courts are coping with the evolving
threat of COVID-19. Towards these ends, a stratified random sample of law
enforcement and criminal courts in each of the 50 states will be obtained and a
longitudinal self-report survey will be administered in order to examine the
following issues: (1) the practical and administrative challenges these entities
face due to COVID-19, (2) the specific strategies/plans they have implemented or
wanted to implement but could not in order to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic,
(3) the challenges, successes, and consequences (anticipated and unintended) in
the responses and implementation thereof, and (4) why responses were devised,
implemented or not implemented, successful, challenging, and produced various
outcomes. The study results can then be used to inform the development of new
responses and improved implementation of innovative policies and practices,
including emergency management plans for pandemics and how to communicate and
collaborate effectively across the public health and criminal justice systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.