* 2030644
* SBIR Phase I:  Facilitating Early Childhood Teacher and Family Engagement During COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Tammy Kwan, Cognitive ToyBox
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to ensure that the nation’s youngest learners and their families are
supported as their educational experiences are disrupted due to the at-home
learning configuration associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Parents and
caregivers are overwhelmed with all of the changes due to remote learning
models. This project can ease their burden by enabling teachers to more closely
collaborate with families and support their child in a remote learning context.
A lapse in high-quality early childhood education puts the youngest learners at
risk of falling behind in school readiness. With this project, teachers will
have access to ongoing information on each child’s development and be able to
provide better support in the remote context. Moreover, families will have
access to high-quality, low-touch resources to support their child at home, even
if the classrooms are closed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is
developing an early childhood teacher and family engagement tool to support
remote enrichment for young children at home. The approach brings together the
organization’s game-based assessment system to support teachers in the classroom
with the organization’s research-based learning games for children. This project
will make its assessment product accessible within a home context. Parents and
caregivers will be able to use their smartphones or tablets to collect
assessment data. Research will be conducted to ascertain ease of use and
fidelity of assessment data collected in a remote context. This data will then
be used to power recommendations on the organization’s research-based games, two
of which will be developed through this work, as well as other educational
resources that families and children can do together. Assessment data is
typically collected by teachers through an observation-based approach in the
classroom; this project will enable parents and caregivers to collect assessment
data pertaining to school readiness at home through touchscreen games. Early
childhood teachers will then be able to use the data from the assessment and
learning products to guide their remote instructional
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.