* 2030273
* RAPID: Development and deployment of a digital game to combat COVID-19 misconceptions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Gregory Trevors, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,614.00

Early reports show that the general public holds several misconceptions
regarding the risks, transmission, prevention, and treatment of the novel
coronavirus. If not acted upon, such misconceptions may lead to serious and
irreversible harm to individuals and societies. This project responds to the
urgent need to more effectively correct misconceptions about COVID-19 and to
improve upon prior failed attempts to change beliefs about controversial or
emotionally-laden subjects. By promoting affective engagement via digital games,
this project seeks to overcome some of the psychological barriers to belief
change. The potential for broad dissemination through gamification will provide
important insights into whether gamified digital platforms may be a venue to
overcome limitations of traditional direct routes of belief revision. The
project will provide important insights into the pressing question of whether
gamified educational content can effectively correct emotionally-laden and
polarized COVID-19 misconceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solutions this
project provides for successful revision of COVID-19 misconception centers on
two interlocking objectives: (1) design of content specifically to promote the
forms of cognitive processes known to revise misconceptions and (2) develop a
new delivery method to present such content that mitigates negative affect and
biased reasoning. This project will address both problems with a novel digital
game that integrates cognitive and gamification design principles for belief
revision and may represent a transformational augmentation in how individuals
interact with challenging educational content. The digital game will be widely
disseminated online in the U.S. and can be played on mobile or desktop devices.
Overall, the quiz game will be designed to positively engage learners as they
process educational content via game elements and mechanics. Affect, belief, and
user interactions on the platform will be data mined for relevant learner
analytic variables, profiles, and predictors of success. Findings will be used
to iteratively modify subsequent game development and design to optimize success
metrics. The project will advance fundamental knowledge of digital learning
contexts and processes in correcting challenging misconceptions and address
important national concerns of strengthening the general publicâ€™s knowledge of
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.