* 2030015
* RAPID: Time-Sensitive Human Forest and Model Forecasts for COVID-19 Vaccine and Treatment Trials
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Sauleh Siddiqui, American University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Accurate, time-specific predictions are important for planning and decision
making during fast-moving pandemics. In particular, whether an effective
COVID-19 vaccine will be available in 9, 12, or 18 months is an issue of vital
national interest. The main objective of this project is to compare the accuracy
of a new method for crowd-based forecasting of time-specific outcomes–such as
clinical trial transitions of COVID-19 treatments and vaccines–to that of new
machine learning models. The research will examine the relative strengths of
crowd and modeling methods and explore combinations of the two in predicting
clinical trial results. A forecasting tournament is the project’s main method
for human data collection. It starts in 2020 and continues until 2021. People
with interest in forecasting and clinical trials are encouraged to sign up for
participation, independently of their background. Study participants complete
surveys and forecasting training, and will then have the opportunity to make
probabilistic forecasts on specific trial events over several months, with
regular accuracy feedback. To broaden the impacts of this work, the research
team disseminates the aggregate forecasts about clinical trial phase transition
of COVID-19 treatments and vaccines through public health information channels.
These forecasts, combined with predictive training and accuracy feedback
provided to study participants, may aid the coordination of public health and
clinical development efforts to overcome the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
primary research goal of the project is to improve the predictive performance of
crowd-based methods, machine models and ensembles of the two. Psychologists have
shown that taking the outside view, by examining a prediction problem in context
of historical reference classes, improves accuracy. The crowd-based approach,
referred to as human forest, combines reference class forecasting and collective
intelligence approaches to produce data-driven estimates from a group of
forecasters. The time-specific human forest variant employs a survival analysis
approach, enabling forecasters to construct reference classes and obtain
unbiased historical estimates in the presence of missing data. On the decision
science front, the research goals include testing the effects of interfaces
featuring historical estimates; understanding the psychology of reference class
selection; examining time-scope sensitivity in judgmental forecasting; and
assessing the relative importance of subject matter expertise versus general
predictive competence. On the machine-modeling front, the research goals include
integrating survival-type models into machine learning and improving their
performance using bi-level optimization to choose hyper-parameters. The results
are released as soon as they become available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.