* 2030049
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID--Urban Air Quality during the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Shelter-In-Place Orders
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Kelley Barsanti, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 101,072.00

In this RAPID project, a collaborative PI team intends to collect time sensitive
atmospheric samples in the Los Angeles, CA, area, where historically high
pollutant levels of ozone (O3) and fine particulate matter (PM2.5) have plagued
public health. By taking advantage of significant reductions in atmospheric
emissions associated with current COVID-19 shelter-in-place orders, a natural
experiment has presented itself that allows for observations to be made under
uniquely useful conditions. Results will help constrain predictive models of
pollutant concentrations and guide regulatory agencies in best strategies to
mitigate poor air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaseous and particulate samples
will be collected during and after the lifting of COVID-19 by co-locating
sampling devices on Caltech’s established roof-top sampling platform, where
continuous monitoring of essential parameters, including NOx, O3, and PM2.5, is
ongoing. Focus in this study is on the detailed chemical speciation of the
important precursor group of compounds denoted as volatile to intermediate
volatility organic compounds (I/VOCs) containing 1 to 15 carbon atoms (C1-C15).
These compounds are emitted through a number of different sources, including
from fossil fuel production and burning, use of chemical products, and
biological productivity. Their ill-defined sources and reactivities have been
attributed to an existing gap in knowledge that could describe higher-than-
expected O3 levels in megacities where precursor emissions have seen a general
decrease in past decades. Here, I/VOC sources and source markers will be
determined during a period when transportation associated emissions to VOCs and
NOx are low. State-of-the-art analyses of collected samples at PIs’ laboratories
include two-dimensional gas chromatography (GC×GC) with time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (TOFMS) and a multi-column/detector GC system with 5 different
types of separation and detection combinations. Results will (i) provide new
insight into the intricate mechanisms of O3 and PM2.5 production under uniquely
low NOx conditions and a changing mix of VOCs, and (ii) help constrain
predictive models of atmospheric chemistry and air
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.