* 2030935
* Centering minoritized high school students' perspectives from introductory Computer Science through 12th grade and beyond
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jean Ryoo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Despite advances made by national Computer Science (CS) for All movements,
women, students of color, and lower-income students are still underrepresented.
Prior research has shown that computer science learning should be engaging,
meaningful, and relevant for all students. This is especially true for
underrepresented youth who may need additional support to develop a sense of
belonging and identity with computing. This project looks closely at how and why
students perceive their computer science courses during their high school years.
The investigators will interview minoritized youth in Los Angeles and
Mississippi high schools to learn what makes a difference for their engagement,
sense of belonging, and agency with computing. The work will also study how
underrepresented students do or don't persist from introductory to more advanced
computing curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fill two
significant gaps in current knowledge. First, youth perspectives have mostly
been missing from conversations regarding keeping equity at the center of
computing education. This work will specifically amplify minoritized students'
voices. Second, the research will collect needed longitudinal data regarding the
longer-term impacts on students' personal and educational pathways following
experiences with new high school curricula, including Exploring Computer Science
and Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles. The researchers will
investigate how minoritized youth can best be supported to feel a sense of
belonging in CS fields. This work will shine a light on the nature of the
persistent under-representation of women and Students of Color in computing,
moving the field toward critical solutions to this problem. This project is
funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.