* 2030621
* Early Research Experiences and Mentoring to Increase the Numbers of Biology and Chemistry Graduates Prepared for Careers in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Denise Junge, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 03/31/2026
* USD 648,397.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Keene State College. Over
its five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships 14 undergraduate
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology or Chemistry. The
Scholars will enter in two cohorts and receive up to four years of scholarship
support. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with an effective a cohort-based support system designed to
build a sense of community among the Scholars. Students will be supported
academically by tutors and peer mentors in key biology and chemistry gateway
courses and will benefit from paid opportunities to work with faculty on
undergraduate research projects. To prepare Scholars for their future careers,
they will work with faculty, career advisors, and alumni mentors to develop
workforce skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Specifically, this project is expected to
increase the number of students in rural New Hampshire completing a
baccalaureate degree in Chemistry or Biology. The project plans to explore the
role of early research experiences on Scholars' academic success and on
development of their self-identity as scholars and future scientists. In both
year one and two of the award, a cohort of seven entering first year students
will be recruited. During their first year, Scholars, together with other
chemistry and biology students, will engage in a set of experiences aimed at
promoting their success, include a writing course designed for chemistry and
biology students, peer and faculty mentoring, community-building experiences,
and an opportunity to engage in scientific research. Such student support
activities are not in place at Keene State College and may be limited at similar
public liberal arts institutions. Using an Expectancy Value Theory framework,
the project will examine how early research experiences, in combination with
other support structures, affect students’ intentions to persist and their
actual persistence in their STEM major. Findings from this research, along with
other aspects of this project, will be disseminated to the STEM education
community, thus contributing knowledge about how to best support STEM majors,
particularly those coming from rural environments. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.