* 2030942
* SBIR Phase I:  Endoscopic Patient Mask to Limit Aerosolization During Endoscopic Procedures During COVID-19 Pandemic
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Azadeh Khanicheh, ENVISION ENDOSCOPY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help manage COVID-19 transmission in
hospitals with a novel patient face mask to limit transmission of SARS-CoV-2
virus during endoscopic procedures. All endoscopic procedures are considered
aerosol-generating procedures because of the possibility of coughing and
retching during upper endoscopy, and the passage of flatus during colonoscopy.
The proposed patient endoscopic mask limit the spread of microdroplet and
aerosols from the patient. This project proposes to develop an endoscopy mask
which will be disposable, single use, with an oral opening for the introduction
of an endoscope to the gastrointestinal tract. The proposed solution will allow
most type of endoscopes, probes, and tubes to be inserted through the mask and
enter the mouth or nose, while providing a seal between the mask and scope to
limit leakage during the procedure. In addition, it will reduce the post-
procedure wait time needed for air circulation in the endoscopy room to remove
aerosols for the safety of patients and gastrointestinal health care givers. The
solution will be useful for managing transmissions of any airborne infections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop a novel technology that seals between the mask opening and
an endoscope, while allowing the endoscope's advancement inside the
gastrointestinal tract. The challenge with sealing the mask comes from the
scope, which must have significant freedom of motion when it is inserted into
the mouth of a patient. The proposed mask will have an access for suction to
clear airway secretions and to remove aerosol and micro-droplets generated
during endoscopic procedures. If successful, this seal technology can be
utilized in other aerosol-generating clinical applications, such as reducing
spread of aerosolized droplets of blood in laparoscopic surgery
procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.