* 2030806
* Scholarships and a Project-based Work Studio to Support Undergraduate Student Graduation and Entry into Computer Science, Engineering, and Safety Technology Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Tina Cartwright, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 990,550.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, this project at Marshall University in Huntington, West
Virginia, will provide 20 students with four-year scholarships and services to
support them as they earn four-year STEM degrees in computer science,
engineering, or safety technology. The Scholars will progress through their
college curriculum in two cohorts of 10 students. The Project-based Work Studio
will provide the Scholars with practical hands-on experience, practice with
working in multi-disciplinary team environments, and exposure to real-life
projects in computer science, engineering, and technology. This work is also
expected to strengthen connections among and between Scholar cohorts. The
resulting sense of community, coupled with professional development and
mentorship activities, is intended to help the Scholars persist in their
studies, graduate, and become productive members of the STEM workforce. Thus,
the Project-based Work Studio approach may provide a model for workforce
development in general, as well as prepare the skilled STEM employees needed in
the Appalachian area of West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three goals: (1) increase the number of students, particularly women, in
computer science, engineering, and safety technology fields by recruiting
academically talented and financially challenged candidates; (2) prepare
graduates for careers in STEM; and (3) conduct research and disseminate results
on the effectiveness of a learning approach that includes Project-based Work
Studio. This Studio approach provides students with on-campus, faculty-mentored
work experiences to provide engineering or technical solutions to local
industries. To support success in recruiting and supporting the Scholars, the
project team will build strong partnerships with schools, industry, government
and other organizations. Experience Sampling Methods will be used to analyze
both qualitative and quantitative data with a focus on monitoring student
interest and persistence in STEM. It is anticipated that this analysis will
identify socialization, gender, and other issues students face as they develop
their professional identity, thus providing additional insights into the
professional identity development process. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.