* 2030997
* "Engaging with Community for Undergraduate Student Success in Mathematics, Engineering and Science"
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Amanda Ruiz, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of San Diego. Over its five-year duration, this project
will provide scholarships of up to four years to 16 full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in STEM. Student majors will include behavioral
neuroscience, biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, environmental
and ocean sciences, mathematics, and/or physics. The entering first-year
Scholars will be recruited from partnering community organizations that serve
populations of students who are eligible for the S-STEM program. The project
aims to increase the success of these Scholars by leveraging community
engagement, along with individualized faculty mentoring. Scholars will also have
opportunities such as access to research experiences and internships, and to
community- and career-building activities. The project seeks to advance
knowledge about the effectiveness of these activities on students' sense of
belonging and STEM self-efficacy. The project will create and assess the
effectiveness of institutional changes in the admissions process and
institutional supports for the Scholars. Examples of notable institutional
supports include development of a "Flourishing in STEM" student success course
and a "Changemaking in STEM" course to encourage scholars to apply their STEM
knowledge to issues affecting their communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is centered on a mutually-beneficial and equitable collaboration between
the University and community partners that will benefit the scholars, the
community, and the University, and advance understanding of how a community-
based approach, including meaningful community engagement, affects the scholars'
persistence and success in STEM. The project will also investigate how the
participation of the faculty mentors in a community of practice to share and
discuss successful mentoring strategies, including culturally-informed
practices, manifests itself in their mentoring and advising of students. It will
also investigate the effects of these faculty mentoring strategies on the
scholars' sense of belonging and STEM self-efficacy, which are qualities that
support persistence in STEM. Progress toward achieving the project's goals and
objectives will be evaluated annually by an external evaluator who will provide
regular formative feedback. This input will be complemented by both an internal
advisory board comprised of individuals invested in the success of the program,
and an external advisory board to provide additional perspectives to aid in
institutionalizing the project's initiatives. Findings will be disseminated in
appropriate journals and conferences and through an online presence. This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.