* 2030436
* RAPID: Pandemic Learning Loss in U.S. High Schools: A National Examination of Student Experiences
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Jennifer Hamilton, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 04/30/2022
* USD 196,801.00

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, schools across much of the U.S. have been
closed since mid-March of 2020 and many students have been attempting to
continue their education away from schools. Student experiences across the
country are likely to be highly variable depending on a variety of factors at
the individual, home, school, district, and state levels. This project will use
two, nationally representative, existing databases of high school students to
study their experiences in STEM education during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
study intends to ascertain whether students are taking STEM courses in high
school, the nature of the changes made to the courses, and their plans for the
fall. The researchers will identify the electronic learning platforms in use,
and other modifications made to STEM experiences in formal and informal
settings. The study is particularly interested in finding patterns of inequities
for students in various demographic groups underserved in STEM and who may be
most likely to be affected by a hiatus in formal
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will collect data using the
AmeriSpeak Teen Panel of approximately 2,000 students aged 13 to 17 and the
Infinite Campus Student Information System with a sample of approximately 2.5
million high school students. The data sets allow for relevant comparisons of
student experiences prior to and during the COVID-19 pandemic and offer unique
perspectives with nationally representative samples of U.S. high school
students. New data collection will focus on formal and informal STEM learning
opportunities, engagement, STEM course taking, the nature and frequency of
instruction, interactions with teachers, interest in STEM, and career
aspirations. Weighted data will be analyzed using descriptive statistics and
within and between district analysis will be conducted to assess group
differences. Estimates of between group pandemic learning loss will be provided
with attention to demographic factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is
made by the DRK-12 program in the Division of Research on Learning. The
Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers, through the research and development of new
innovations and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.