* 2030393
* Acquisition of a multicollector mass spectrometer for 40Ar/39Ar geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 491,397.00

This project provides a new mass spectrometer for 40Ar/39Ar dating of geologic
materials such as rocks and minerals. This instrument will be used to provide
fundamental time constraints on the evolution of Earth and its biota, including
humans. Among other applications, specific topics to be addressed include the
tempo and history of climate change, which is needed to evaluate the extent of
anthropogenic effects; the causes of mass extinctions manifest in the geologic
record; and the timescales of volcanism, which is critical to evaluating
volcanic hazards. The instrument will be extensively used by students who will
gain invaluable hands-on experience in furtherance of sustaining the STEM
educational pipeline. The Berkeley Geochronology Center laboratory is an
important training ground for the next generations of 40Ar/39Ar
geochronologists, who will benefit from experience using the most modern
available instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument replaces obsolete
and failing mass spectrometers with multi-collector, high sensitivity, high
resolution capabilities which serve to improve the precision and accuracy of
40Ar/39Ar dates. The multicollection feature enables a five-fold increase in
throughput. The instrument uses novel capacitive discharge ion beam detection,
enabling the use of highly stable Faraday collectors, thus reducing the
precision and accuracy sacrificed by the intercalibration of ion-counting
multipliers. The ion Ar beam is produced by a novel cathode source that operates
at substantially lower temperatures than conventional filament sources, enabling
higher sensitivity and greater source lifetime. The new instrument will be mated
to a highly flexible, fully automated extraction line with dual sample chambers
to exploit the increased throughput, and reference gas reservoirs to monitor
mass discrimination and sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.