* 2030355
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Statistical Tools to Quantify and Mitigate the Spread of COVID-19
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Alexander Volfovsky, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 04/30/2022
* USD 171,936.00

This project will develop rigorous statistical models and inference tools to
better understand the spread of COVID-19 as well as the type of the
interventions that are most likely to work to prevent further outbreak. The work
will result in concrete approaches for quantifying uncertainty of possible
outcomes and provide reliable tools to assist decision makers in designing
mitigation strategies for the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, a new
statistical inference tool will be developed to estimate the key epidemic
parameters that describe the nature of the COVID-19 spread in an interpretable
manner. These parameters are critical for providing reliable forecasts through
real-time simulation of potential outbreaks. The new models will analyze the
effects of changing social contact structures on the spread of COVID-19, and
account for missing or partial data in a systematic way. The results of this
project will contribute to the scientific and mathematical approaches needed to
provide effective and quick understanding of future epidemics or relevant
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing epidemic models largely rely on
deterministic systems that are unable to quantify the uncertainty critical for
decision making. In addition, data analysis and predictive modeling for the
COVID-19 pandemic require statistical tools for fitting epidemic models with
only partially available data. However, most stochastic models face challenges
in the face of missing data. To address this gap, the project team will develop
new stochastic compartmental models that extend classical approaches to
explicitly account for changes to the social contact network underlying the
disease spread. These new developments will be accompanied by likelihood-based
methods to infer key epidemic parameters that offer mechanistic interpretations
with uncertainty quantification. In particular, missing data such as infection
times at the individual level will be accounted for via novel data augmentation
techniques. The results of this project will provide guidance both to the
scientific community on how to evaluate the COVID-19 pandemic, and to the
general public on which mitigation strategies would be most
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplemental funds allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.