* 2030025
* SBIR Phase I:  Photoactivated coatings &amp; cleaners to disable COVID-19 on hospital high touch surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Jeffrey Roeder, SONATA SCIENTIFIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of new tools to reduce
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 virus and the associated COVID-19 pandemic. The
materials platform developed in this project will help control and prevent
surface-borne transmission of viruses, bacteria, and other pathogens with the
potential to cause pandemics. The project will advance a robust coating that can
be applied at point-of-use to reduce the hand-to-face spread of COVID-19. This
technology may help reduce infection transmission among patients and care
providers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
durable and non-toxic virucidal coatings containing visible-light-stimulated
photocatalytic materials and a dark active material in a robust polymer matrix.
The continuous antipathogenic action is activated with room light; the dark
active material provides disinfecting species between daily cleanings. The
coating will disable viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2, as well as other bacteria and
bacterial spores. These objectives overcome key drawbacks of current
antimicrobial coating technology that limit its application, including the use
of ultraviolet light (UV), degradation of polymeric coatings with time, and
toxicity and ineffectiveness of the coatings in low-lighting conditions. The
proposed research will develop a non-toxic coating offering improved viricidal
activity with white light, by modifying the photocatalyst and coating, enhancing
the performance in low-light environments, and exploiting chemical synergistic
interactions between the coating and commonly used liquid
disinfectants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.