* 2030929
* Scholarships, Community, Mentoring, and Leadership Development to Support STEM Undergraduate Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Stacey Dutton, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2025
* USD 649,998.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Agnes Scott College. Agnes Scott College is a liberal arts college for
women serving a high percentage of underrepresented minorities. Over its five-
year duration, the project will fund scholarships for twenty unique, full-time
students pursuing bachelor's degrees in astrophysics, biochemistry-molecular
biology, biology, chemistry, mathematics, mathematics-physics, neuroscience, or
physics. Scholars will enter in two cohorts and receive scholarships for up to
four years. The Scholars will participate in a new three-day pre-orientation
program and be part of a special Living and Learning Community in year one. They
will complete STEM-specific courses, a leadership course, and a leadership
experience in their first two years. Finally, in their final two years, Scholars
will participate in hands-on research. Scholars will receive targeted advising
and career coaching. STEM students with financial need are often also first-
generation college students from underrepresented minorities. Thus, the project
expects to increase the numbers and diversity of students in natural sciences
and their placement into STEM graduate education and careers. The project will
investigate how an intensive support culture focused on community building,
mentoring, career exploration, and leadership development affects Scholar
persistence. This information could inform best practices for institutions with
highly diverse student populations and will contribute knowledge to national
efforts to broaden participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific aims are to: 1)
recruit, enroll, and support twenty academically talented Scholars with
demonstrated financial need majoring in a STEM discipline; 2) increase Scholars’
retention and four-year graduation rate; and 3) increase the percentage of
graduate Scholars who are admitted into a post-baccalaureate STEM program or
employed in a STEM field within the first year after graduation. The project
will obtain data for research and evaluation through focus groups, interviews,
enrollment records, and retention data. The data from Scholars will be compared
to that of their peers. Analysis of these data will generate new knowledge about
diverse students' perceptions of their STEM self-efficacy, identity, and values
at different times in their college careers. It will also provide insights into
Scholars’ decision-making processes regarding persistence toward STEM degrees
and career paths. Results of the studies will contribute to evaluation of a
theoretical model of social influence on the development of students as STEM
professionals, examining self-efficacy, identity, and values as possible
mediating variables. The project team intends to disseminate the results of the
project through regional consortia and/or annual STEM society meetings, STEM
conferences targeting minority students, and articles in peer-reviewed journals.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers and generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.