* 2030680
* I-Corps: Dendrite-Suppressing Separator for Next Generation Lithium-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a separator technology that will lead to higher energy density
and safer batteries necessary for electric vehicles as well as other
applications in industries such as grid energy storage and consumer electronics.
Once realized in the commercial world, the proposed approach may significantly
advance the current technologies for producing battery cells with a high degree
of rate capability, energy density, and safety. The societal benefit is in its
ability to accelerate the adoption of electric vehicles and other clean energy
solutions by addressing global energy and environmental challenges. Translating
the technique to commercial applications may create new jobs and contribute to
the improvement of the economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a novel battery separator that utilizes a material
technique to suppress dendrite formation in fast charging batteries or batteries
with lithium metal anodes. The technology may solve the long existing problem of
dendrite formation, which causes battery shorting and is a barrier to the
commercialization of higher energy, next-generation batteries. This project will
help to develop the technique into a commercially ready technology that may
accelerate the adoption of high energy density lithium metal batteries as the
industry standard. This project will improve understanding of lithium metal
batteries and dendrite formation so that new research may focus on further
enhancing the performance of lithium metal batteries. This project may have a
transformative impact on the translation of separator materials techniques and
fundamentals of electrochemistry to battery manufacturing, bridging the
technical gap between the fundamental research and commercial production of
advanced lithium-ion batteries. The fundamental science and technology
associated with dendrite suppression will be further explored to optimize and
demonstrate the fabrication technique and products to diverse customers in
different formats, sizes and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.