* 2030581
* Scholarships To Improve Undergraduate Students' Academic Achievement, Retention, and Career Success in Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Ilmi Yoon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 02/28/2025
* USD 999,987.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at San Francisco State University. This university is one of the 23
campuses of the California State University system and is designated as a
Hispanic-serving institution. Over its four-year duration, this project will
provide one-year scholarships to 80 first-year, full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computer science. The project will support a
three-pronged wrap-around support system that ensures students make steady
academic, social, and professional progress in the first year. This support
system will include academic advising, winter and summer programs, co-curricular
activities, and professional development activities. The project has the
potential to broaden the participation of low-income students in the fields of
artificial intelligence and computer science and to increase the economic
competitiveness of the US artificial intelligence sector. The results from this
project may be valuable for other higher education institutions seeking to
increase retention of socioeconomically diverse students in their artificial
intelligence/computer science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The objectives
through which the project goal will be realized are: (1) to improve information
equity through intensive and tailored academic and professional advising; (2) to
increase academic and professional self-efficacy through co-curricular
activities that provide early exposure to, career coaching in, and research and
industry experiences in artificial intelligence; (3) to develop students’ sense
of belonging and identity as computer scientists by helping them become part of
the computer science community and by humanizing computer science and artificial
intelligence via showcasing role models and social good projects. Students’
sense of identity as computer scientists has been shown to be critical to their
persistence and success in the field, especially for students from
underrepresented populations. However, little is known about the mechanisms by
which students develop a positive sense of computer science identity. This
project will investigate if and how low-income students’ sense of computer
science identity changes during their first year of undergraduate computer
science study, and if a stronger sense of computer science identity predicts
greater retention in the computer science major. The impact of early artificial
intelligence exposure on student’s achievement and retention will also be
studied. A mixed-methods approach including both formative and summative
components will be used to evaluate the acceptability, feasibility, and
effectiveness of the project. The resources developed as part of this project
will be disseminated through the project website, and the results from the
project will be disseminated through publications in journals and at conferences
in artificial intelligence and computer science education. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.