* 2030720
* Building Science Identity, Sense of Belonging, and Social Support Networks to Increase the Success of Undergraduate Chemistry Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Heather Petcovic, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 999,972.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Western Michigan University. Over its five-year duration, this project
will provide scholarships to up to 40 unique undergraduate students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Chemistry and/or Biochemistry after transferring
to Western Michigan University from another institution. It will also support up
to eight graduate students pursuing doctoral degrees in Chemistry. Undergraduate
students will receive up to four years of scholarship support and graduate
students will receive up to five years of scholarship support. This project
intends to recruit, retain, and support future chemists and biochemists through
opportunities to conduct summer research or participate in summer internships
with local industries, government agencies, and community organizations. The
project will also offer programming and workshops to promote academic success
and career preparation. Participating students will complete activities in a
cohort with other undergraduate students, graduate students, faculty, and
industry professionals. Ongoing faculty professional development will provide
all STEM faculty with the opportunity to learn about and engage in discussions
to help improve students’ sense of belonging and inclusion. Because Western
Michigan University has a high population of transfer students, this project has
the potential to broaden participation in chemistry programs. The project will
provide new insights into how social support networks, sense of belonging, and
development of scientist identities support retention and graduation of this
student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Specifically, this project aims to better
integrate and support transfer students while developing their identities as
scientists and preparing them for scientific careers and/or graduate studies. In
the Chemistry Department at Western Michigan University, 40% of students
enrolling as chemistry or biochemistry majors are transfer students and 33% of
the graduates over the past five years have 30 or more credits from another
institution. This project includes structured, targeted interventions aimed at
integrating transfer students into the chemistry department, supporting their
development of identities as scientists, and building their social support
networks. This project will be evaluated longitudinally through yearly surveys
and interviews on scientist identity, social support networks, and departmental
integration and sense of belonging. This project will advance understanding of
the experiences of transfer students and the role of interventions such as
student programming, faculty programming, stratified cohorts, summer research
and internship experiences, and scholar recognition. These findings will be made
available through academic presentations and publications, a project website,
and community events. Project findings will be useful to other institutions
interested in better supporting and retaining science students transferring from
two-year institutions. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.