* 2030801
* Scholarships and Support to Improve Retention and Graduation of Appalachian Community College Students in Math and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* DeAnna Proctor, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Somerset Community College, a two-year college in Appalachian Kentucky.
Over its five-year duration, this project will provide scholarships to 30 unique
full- and part-time students who are pursuing associate degrees in Biology,
Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, or Pre-Engineering. Scholars will be admitted
in three cohorts and receive two-year (first year students) or one year
(transfer students) scholarships. The project aims to improve the retention and
graduation of STEM students by creating close-knit cohorts of students in a
Science, Technology, Engineering, STEM-contextualized Arts, and Mathematics
(STEAM) learning community. This learning community will provide general
education instruction, co-curricular activities, and mentoring by STEM faculty.
Recruitment for the project will focus on inclusion of groups tat are under-
represented in STEM fields, including veterans, women, minorities, disabled, and
non-traditional students. To increase the effectiveness of the project, the
College has partnered with STEM-related businesses and STEM faculty at other
institutions from which or to which many of the College’s students transfer. The
project is designed to extend its impact to include the Scholars' families and
communities. The project aims to improve the educational attainment, especially
in STEM fields, of students from south-central Kentucky. Lessons learned from
the project will include knowledge about strategies to improve success in STEM
education, particularly in rural, under-resourced communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Project aims are to: (1) improve Scholars’ retention and
graduation; (2) implement effective evidence-based strategies; and (3) research
the effectiveness of the implemented strategies. The project's research plan
will add to the knowledge base on effective strategies to improve the success of
community college STEM students from rural, under-resourced communities. This
research will investigate the effects of project activities on increasing
Scholars’ academic success, persistence, retention, completion, transfer of
learning, and employment rates compared to non-Scholars and historical students
who would have qualified to be in the S-STEM cohort. Data will be collected and
analyzed to determine which strategies aided student success. This data will
also be correlated with participant demographics to assess the effectiveness of
project activities for supporting different demographic groups. The project has
the potential to advance understanding of the effectiveness of faculty mentoring
and STEAM Learning Communities on rural, low-income college STEM students. The
results of this project will be disseminated widely by sharing lessons learned
with higher education and industry project partners, and in national educational
journals and conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.