* 2030706
* Promoting Undergraduate Student Success in STEM through Scholarships, Research Experiences, Mentoring, and Career Development
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* David Wilson, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the graduation of high-
achieving, low-income students at Kalamazoo College. Over its five-year
duration, the project will provide scholarships to 20 full-time students who are
pursuing baccalaureate degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, or
Physics. Scholars will be recruited and supported in two annual cohorts of ten
students each and will receive up to four years of scholarship support. In
addition to receiving scholarships, Scholars will be embedded in a system of
evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities, including activities
developed specifically for this project and others that build upon previous
efforts. These student supports include a fall orientation, monthly cohort
meetings, field trips, peer mentorship, faculty mentorship focused on the
Scholar's Individualized Development Plan, career and professional development,
early research experiences, research stipend support, and campus recognition for
the Scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific aims include: (1)
increasing the retention of Scholars in STEM disciplines at a higher rate than
peers; (2) fostering Scholars’ sense of belonging, science identity, and
community engagement; and 3) ensuring that Scholars graduate with knowledge and
skills needed to enter graduate programs or the workforce. In addition, the
project team will conduct a mixed methods research study to investigate the
effects of mentoring on Scholars’ sense of belonging, science identity, and
degree attainment. Based on the research literature, national reports, and
results from prior National Science Foundation support, this research will use
partially mixed concurrent dominant status design to examine the effectiveness
of faculty mentoring guided by Individualized Development Plans and a culturally
responsive approach to mentoring. A comprehensive evaluation will be implemented
for project improvement and accountability. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.