* 2030282
* EAGER-Development of Antiviral Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) for Generating Virus-free Medical Grade Water and Preventing the Spread of COVID-19
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Somenath Mitra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2023
* USD 138,573.00

At this point there is an urgent need to address many issues related to the
Corona virus (COVID-19) outbreak including stopping the spread of the virus, and
helping the overwhelmed healthcare industry cope with different problems. The
goal of this project is to generate antiviral functionalized carbon nanotubes
which will have several applications related to the COVID-19 pandemic. First,
the functionalized nanotubes can be used as self-cleaning sorbents in personal
protection equipment (PPE) such as medical masks. Many commercial
paints/coatings formulations contain carbon nanotubes, and the anti-viral
nanotubes will be effective materials for preventing the spread of COVID-19 via
surface contacts. An immediate application is carbon nanotube-enhanced membrane
distillation for inexpensive bacteria/endotoxin/virus-free medical-grade water
generation. This water is used for cleaning medical equipment and as injectable
water in patient treatment. Most importantly the membrane distillation with
antiviral nanotubes will be developed into a point-of-care technology where a
domestic water heater or a microwave oven can be used to generate medical grade
water in field hospitals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Objective of this project is
to develop functionalized carbon nanotubes with high anti-viral activity for
stopping the spread of Covid-19 and helping the overwhelmed healthcare industry.
The work will be an extension of work already underway with bacteria and
endotoxins. The two major proposed tasks are the development of specific carbon
nanotube functional forms with antiviral activity, and the development of carbon
nanotube enhanced microwave induced membrane distillation for generating
bacteria/endotoxins/virus free medical grade water. In the first task,
functionalized carbon nanotubes will be synthesized by the incorporation of
different antiviral agents. In the second task these nanotubes will be used to
synthesize biocidal membranes for membrane distillation. In the proposed
process, as the hot contaminated water will pass over the antiviral nanotube
membrane, it will be partially transformed to water vapor that will pass through
as purified water while the hydrophobic membrane will prevent the aqueous phase
from permeating through. In this project we also propose to use microwaves to
heat the water because this has additional biocidal effects. The novel membranes
developed by immobilizing the antiviral carbon nanotubes will not only serve as
molecular transporters for pure water generation, but also have biocidal
properties that will generate highly pure medical grade water. The developed
approach will open the door to specific carbon nanotube functionalization to
deal with different bacteria and virus. These functionalized nanotubes can be
used in adsorbents and membranes to provide effective virus protection in air
purifiers, in personal protection equipment (PPE) such as gas masks and for
water treatment. Since many commercial paints/coatings formulations contain
carbon nanotubes, the anti-viral nanotubes in surface coating will serve to
prevent the spread of COVID-19 (or other viruses) that transmit via surface
contacts. The educational goal of the project is the expansion of nanotechnology
into disease prevention and medical infrastructure, which has not been
emphasized in the past but has significant potential
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.