* 2030789
* RAPID: Modeling COVID-19 transmission and mitigation using smaller contained populations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Monique Chyba, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,023.00

In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic the state of Hawaii, being an archipelago,
is in an exclusive position to carry out measures no other state could do â€” it
essentially sealed its borders to virtually all travel-related infections
including inter-island ones by instituting a two-week quarantine of incoming
air, water, and inter-island passengers, thus providing a critical data set that
can help researchers understand the spread of the virus and the effectiveness of
mitigation and isolation strategies. Hawaii also tracks the currently limited
arrivals onto the various islands, and this collection of information will
continue as mitigation levels change. This project will use the unique data from
Hawaii to provide a predictive understanding of the virus through modeling of
spread and mitigation effects, focusing on a critical gap in understanding
variability of COVID-19 spread within different communities and a lack of
dynamic modeling. Incorporation of data sets from a controlled environment will
greatly enhance predictive understanding and enable mitigation approaches with
better certainty based on real data. The project will use advanced computational
techniques to make the models run efficiently and make them readily available to
the public and decision makers involved in the COVID-19 response strategy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many current COVID-19 models only consider a totality of
the population of any given state/county and do not take into account patterns
of spatial activities or specificity of the region under consideration. This
project will implement new dynamic and computationally-optimized models that
incorporate compartmentalized populations to study variability in the spread of
the disease as well as rapidly changing mitigation strategies. These elastic
models are easily adaptable to different environments and employable locally and
around the world, thus helping to minimize the negative effects of COVID-19 on
public health at a global level. Use of discrete compartmentalized
epidemiological models, as well as models based on spatio-temporal stochastic
processes, can take into account different population communities distinguished
through a variety of attributes that potentially affect the susceptibility of
individuals to the disease. Such enhanced granularity will improve predictive
capability of the models and provide better insights into the spread of
COVID-19. The project will also engage students thus providing training for the
future generation of researchers in data-driven sciences using a critical and
urgent topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CCF
Division Software and Hardware Foundations Program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.