* 2030396
* Providing Scholarships and Interdisciplinary Cohort Experiences to Increase Retention and Graduation of STEM Undergraduates in Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Panayiotis Meleties, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2025
* USD 649,955.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at York College, a public baccalaureate college in
the City University of New York (CUNY) system. Over its five-year duration, the
project will provide scholarships to 35 undergraduate students. The Scholars
will be admitted in four annual cohorts and receive up to four years of
Scholarship support to pursue bachelor’s degrees in Chemistry, Computer Science,
Mathematics, or Physics. In addition to providing scholarships, the project will
also provide curricular and co-curricular supports designed to increase
retention and graduation rates and to prepare graduates for STEM careers or
graduate school. Specifically, the project intends to enhance peer mentoring and
tutoring, as well as build a sense of community among the Scholars by
establishing cross-disciplinary cohorts. By examining the effectiveness of these
cross-disciplinary cohorts, the project plans to generate new knowledge about
effective practices for retaining and graduating STEM students. York College is
located in one of the most ethnically diverse urban areas in the US and students
from groups that are underrepresented in STEM comprise mor than 60% of the
student body. Thus, the project is well situated to increase diversity in STEM
fields. By linking Scholars with internship opportunities in minority-owned and
other businesses/industries, the project also has the potential to enhance
partnerships between academia and the private sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
specific project goal is to achieve Scholar annual retention and four-year
graduation rates of 90%. By implementing and studying interdisciplinary Scholar
cohorts that include sophomores to seniors, the project will shed light on the
dynamics within non-traditional cohort groups, as the Scholars conduct
collaborative research projects, learn to be peer mentors and tutors, and
investigate STEM graduate programs and careers. The project will address three
specific research questions: (1) How do peer-to-peer and faculty-student
interactions affect the experiences of and outcomes for different Scholars,
particularly those from groups underrepresented in STEM? (2) How do co-
generative dialogues affect the scholars and other students in foundational
mathematics courses? and (3) What benefits and challenges do faculty mentors
face in implementing the interdisciplinary cohort-based mentoring model? The
investigators will address the research questions through qualitative data from
case studies of the Scholar cohorts. Data will include information from
independent studies courses, observations of course sessions, results of focus
groups, interviews with the mentors, and information from weekly mentoring
journals. The project includes plans for formative and summative evaluation
regarding the effectiveness of program elements and progress toward meeting
benchmarks regarding Scholar recruitment, retention, graduation, and career
trajectories. Research findings will be published in relevant peer-reviewed
educations journals and presented at conferences aimed at university-level STEM
educators. Project outcomes will be publicized on a website and shared with STEM
leadership across all 25 CUNY campuses. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students. The York College student population includes more than
66% underrepresented minorities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.