* 2030243
* Collaborative Research:  SWIFT:  LARGE:  Broker-Controlled Coexistence of 5G Wireless Artificially Intelligent Power Amplifier Array (AIPAA) with Passive Weather Radiometers
* MPS,OMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Robert Marks, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 12/31/2024
* USD 479,202.00

The recent auction of the 24 GHz frequency band for use by fifth-generation (5G)
wireless communications applications concerns weather forecasters operating
radiometers in the 23.6-24 GHz and 50-58 GHz bands. 5G wireless transmitters can
produce unwanted interference signals that can overwhelm sensitive radiometer
receivers that measure radio emissions from water for weather forecasting. This
project focuses on the design of a broker-controlled collaborative approach
between the radiometers and a 5G transmitter array capable of reconfiguring its
amplifier devices to allow successful transmission without interfering with
nearby radiometers. This Artificially Intelligent Power Amplifier Array (AIPAA)
will respond to broker instructions to maximize the 5G device transmission range
while minimizing emissions in specified directions and frequencies to avoid
interference. The research will examine the development of millimeter-wave
reconfigurable circuitry, the design of AIPAA optimization techniques in the
context of a spectral broker, and the implementation of a test bed for examining
collaboration and optimization techniques. This research addresses the NSF SWIFT
primary challenge of Effective Spectrum Utilization and/or Coexistence, in
addition to the challenge area of Innovative Transmitter and Receiver
Technologies through Cross-Layer Design. The research will be integrated into
standards and regulatory processes through collaboration with the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST). Additionally, the research will have a broad impact through a
local high school visitation program, contribution of results to workshops and
special sessions at conferences, integration of results into courses at Baylor
University, Purdue University, and the University of Colorado, and a commitment
to diversity in research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent auction
of the 24 GHz frequency band for use by fifth-generation (5G) wireless
communications applications concerns weather forecasters operating passively in
the 23.6-24 GHz and 50-58 GHz bands. The design of a broker-controlled
collaborative approach between the radiometers and a 5G transmitter artificially
intelligent power amplifier array (AIPAA) with reconfigurable power-amplifier
matching networks is examined to allow coexistence between active 5G
transmitters in the 24 GHz band and passive radiometers in the 23.6-24.0 GHz and
50-58 GHz bands. Specific intellectual and scientific aims of the research are
to (1) devise and implement a brokering approach that will assign spectral,
spatial, and temporal resources for sharing between 5G communications and
passive weather radiometer systems in real time, (2) design a millimeter-wave
tunable impedance matching network capable of fast real-time optimization and
reconfiguration, (3) develop joint array and impedance matching real-time
optimization algorithms for 5G AIPAA transmitters based on interaction with the
brokering system for coexistence with 23.6-24 GHz and 50-58 GHz weather
radiometers, and (4) demonstrate coexistence between a radiometer system and a
5G transmitter using a four-element mm-wave array with amplifiers and
reconfigurable matching networks, using the brokering approach to assign
resources and a controller to adjust the array element excitations and matching
networks. The research will provide a broad impact through the following
specific initiatives: (1) collaboration with American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) and National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to
ensure the research enables useful standards and regulatory developments, (2)
visits to high schools to demonstrate and discuss wireless and spectrum
engineering issues and research, (3) contribution of results to workshops and
special sessions at conferences related to the different disciplines involved in
the research, (4) integration of results into courses at Baylor, Purdue, and
Colorado, and (5) commitment to diversity in research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.