* 2030205
* SCC RAPID: Consumer Responses to Household Provisioning During COVID-19 Crisis and Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Kelly Clifton, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 168,914.00

Early evidence suggests that the COVID-19 crisis is accelerating the rate of
adoption of e-commerce with more people ordering online and using delivery
services to meet their needs. The embrace of e-commerce and delivery during the
crisis and recovery are likely uneven, as opportunities and barriers to
accessing transportation, local retailers, online technologies, and delivery
services vary across the population. This study will collect critical and time-
sensitive information to evaluate the extent to which people modify their
shopping behavior during the pandemic and the lasting effects of technological
adoption during recovery and beyond. It will reveal important trends in consumer
behaviors and gaps in access that can aid planners in preparation for ongoing
recovery and future emergencies. Findings will promote the health and well-being
of the community by identifying opportunities to meet household needs while
minimizing risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a representative sampling frame for
three states, this project will survey consumers in a repeated cross-sectional
online survey over the next year to understand how their shopping strategies
have changed, their use of online retailing and delivery services, and their
challenges in accessing food and household goods. This project will also
collaborate with delivery platform firms with the goal of being able to marry
trend data and information about the demand for their services before the
crisis, during it, and in the recovery phase. Together, these novel and timely
data will be used to examine trends in online and in-store household
provisioning, identify barriers to shopping, and develop models of technology
adoption. This project is highly relevant to the Smart and Connected Communities
program at NSF as it explores the impact of shocks such as pandemics on
communities and strongly integrates technical and social dimensions. Research
results from this proposal will help better inform communities of behavioral
changes in crises and potentially develop resilient
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.