* 2030390
* RAPID: Effective mass spray disinfection using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Marco Pavone, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The SARS-CoV-2 persists on contaminated objects or surfaces, referred to as
fomites, for long times, which may promote virus spread. Effective and efficient
disinfection of surfaces in public spaces will play an important role in plans
to resume business, education, commerce, and other important activities. Mass
spray disinfection is currently used in multiple countries by employing Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). While this strategy has potential benefits, such as the
minimization of health risk to personnel performing the disinfection and the
potential for large-scale and quick deployments, the effectiveness of mass spray
disinfection, especially for Covid-19, has not been systematically examined. The
goal of this RAPID project is to identify effective mass spray disinfection
strategies for Covid-19, and employ UAVs to implement those strategies. The
results of this project will provide effective means to mitigate the spread of
Covid-19, as well as other infectious diseases (e.g., influenza), by
intercepting virus transmission via fomites. The approach has the potential to
be adopted as a general and scalable strategy for sanitization in hospitals,
schools, and other public facilities that are susceptible to virus exposure and
contact with a large number of people. To ensure the broader impact and
accessibility of the research, all results will be available in open-source
archives, as well as on social media dedicated to this project (e.g., Facebook,
Twitter). The unique collaboration among the researchers provides an excellent
opportunity for training and workforce development at the interface of
multiphase flow physics, UAV engineering, and infectious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fomites are objects or surfaces that can become
contaminated with a pathogen. Studies have cited fomites as significant vectors
for virus transmission in a range of environments including hospitals, schools,
and offices. SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to contaminate a wide range of porous and
nonporous fomites, and can persist on many surfaces for extended periods of time
from a few hours to days. The long persistence time indicates the need for
effective surface disinfections to intercept virus transmission and the spread
of the disease. Mass spray disinfection from Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) has
many advantages including the high-tempo coverage of large and difficult-to-
reach areas, and the minimization of health risks to personnel performing the
disinfection. Nevertheless, the basic science that underlies the effectiveness
of such mass spray strategies has not been examined. Instead, most prior work on
surface disinfection is highly empirical. This project will develop a
physicochemical understanding behind the empirical results. The project aims to
address these gaps, and will determine the spray parameters and the underlying
physics for effective disinfection under different conditions, and devise
perception and decision-making algorithms that allow a UAV equipped with
programmable sprayers to implement the spray strategies
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.