* 2030266
* RAPID:CRISPR Whole genome screen to identify cellular machinery and pathways of SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Adam Hoppe, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2022
* USD 199,475.00

This project will discover genes that help and/or inhibit the entry of the
COVID-19 virus into cells using a new unbiased screening approach. This work
will benefit society by creating a more comprehensive view of how COVID-19
infects cells. In addition, this work has the potential to identify host cell
antiviral defense genes that can inhibit viral entry, as well as define genes
that contribute to antibody protection in immune cells. Here, new CRISPR
technology will be applied to screen the entire human genome to find these genes
by correlating gene inactivation with increased or decreased viral entry into
lung and immune cells. This information will provide the knowledge needed to
develop new anti-viral strategies and to understand how environmental, genetic
and cellular factors may influence the susceptibility of an individual to
infection as well as the severity of the infection. The Broader Impacts of the
project include training the next generation of virologists and cell biologists.
Graduate students will participate in all phases of the project, including
learning state-of-the-art CRISPR technologies. With the help of high school
teachers, the work of this project will also be used to produce artistic
descriptions that will allow broad dissemination of our findings to students,
the scientific community, and the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
aims to elucidate host genes that promote and inhibit the entry of the SARS-
CoV-2 virus, the causative agent of COVID-19, into epithelial cells and
macrophages using new whole-genome CRISPR screening approaches. At present, the
ACE2 viral receptor and the host cell protease, TMRPSS2, have been the focus of
research on the machinery needed for viral entry. However, other receptors,
including CD147 and other proteases can facilitate viral entry indicating that a
broader perspective is needed. Conversely, little is known about the role of
innate antiviral genes that may restrict viral entry. Rapid adaptation of
current CRISPR whole genome screening strategies will enable identification and
ranking of all genes contributing to and inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 entry into
epithelial cells expressing the ACE2 receptor and macrophages via antibody/Fc
receptor or CD147-mediated attachment. Screens conducted in epithelial cells are
expected to provide a map of the genes that contribute to and inhibit infection
as well as viral spread within the lung. While it is not yet clear the extent to
which SARS-CoV-2 can replicate in macrophages, multiple lines of evidence
indicate that the virus can infect macrophages in a process aided by the
presence of antibodies that may modulate their inflammatory state contributing
to COVID-19. The screening strategy of the Project using pseudotyped lentiviral
vectors will enable detection of viral entry, absent viral replication, and will
provide a description of the genes aiding and inhibiting antibody-dependent
viral entry into macrophages. Comprehensive genetic analysis across both cell
types will provide an unprecedented view of viral entry and will provide
scientific knowledge urgently needed to combat
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.