* 2030790
* IIBR: Informatics: RAPID: Genome-wide Structure and Function Modeling of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Yang Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2022
* USD 199,785.00

The most recent outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has become a
global pandemic. It has spread over more than 200 countries and caused numerous
deaths worldwide. The central activities of SARS-CoV-2, including human cell
invasion and viral duplication and infection, are conducted through the proteins
coded by the viral genome as well as the protein-protein interactions between
the virus and its human hosts. Determination of the structures, functions and
interactions of protein molecules associated with coronaviruses can thus provide
critically important knowledge to help elucidate and end the pandemic. This
project will extend state-of-the-art structural bioinformatics methods to
generate genome-wide protein structure and function models for SARS-CoV-2 and
other human coronaviruses, which will help in understanding the general
mechanisms and principles governing the virulence, diversity and evolution of
these coronaviruses and facilitate the development of new treatments to cure
infected individuals and terminate the COVID-19 pandemic. Multiple graduate and
undergraduate students, including women and minorities, will be trained through
participation in different Objectives of the project. The project results will
be integrated with the bioinformatics core courses in the Bioinformatics and
Biochemistry PhD Programs and the Museum of Natural History at the University of
Michigan, with the purpose of enhancing the outreach and broad impacts of this
research on both student and public education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately
modeling protein structure and function has been a long-term challenge in
structural bioinformatics and computational biology. A classical approach to
this problem is comparative modeling, i.e., deducing information of unknown
target proteins from known homologous proteins that are evolutionarily related
to the targets. This approach is built on the assumption that similar sequences
have similar structures and functions. Although they work well in many
applications, the comparative approaches cannot be applied to effectively model
proteins associated with SARS-CoV-2 and other human coronaviruses, because viral
genomes are highly mutable, and many of the genes and gene products belonging to
these viruses do not have close homologous templates with other species. To
address these issues, this project plans to extend multiple algorithms developed
in the PIâ€™s lab, which have been designed primarily for non-homology-based
protein structure and function prediction. In particular, the methods will
utilize cutting-edge deep convolutional neural-network (DCNN) models to generate
amino acid-level contact and distance maps in order to improve protein structure
and interaction network modeling accuracy. Since the DCNN models are trained
only on sequence databases, the performance of the approaches does not rely on
the availability of structural and functional templates and can therefore be
effectively used to model the coronavirus proteins that lack homologous
templates; successfully developing these methods will also benefit the field of
structural bioinformatics in general due to the importance of non-homologous
protein structure and function prediction. In summary, the success of this
project will result in the development of an urgently needed knowledge base to
improve the understanding of fundamental principles associated with human
coronaviruses and facilitate the development of new treatments for the COVID-19
pandemic. The data and methods produced by the project will be accessible to the
community at https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/COVID-19/. This RAPID award is
made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.