* 2030052
* RAPID Collaborative Proposal: High-resolution structure determination of Coronavirus ligands by high-throughput WAXS
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Thomas Grant, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID award is made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI)
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.
The award to Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute supports research with
a novel strategy that yields structural information on protein interactions in
solution and with high-throughput by using x-ray scattering techniques. The
researchers will use their rapid analyses to understand how proteins critical to
SARS-COV-2 viral replication function within cells of infected individuals, and
how these proteins interact with potential therapeutic drug compounds. High-
throughput, rapid hit detection and fast structure solutions are essential for a
timely and aggressive response to this pandemic. Results from these studies will
contribute vital information to our understanding of SARS-COV-2 biology and may
help to inform on the selection and development of therapeutic treatments.
Students from under-represented groups will also participate in this activity
through the BioXFEL Scholars program to help with data analysis. Data from these
studies will be rapidly disseminated through publicly available repositories so
that other researchers can leverage the experimental outcomes in their own
studies. The study findings will also be published in peer-reviewed journals and
shared at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use small
and wide-scattering X-ray techniques (SWAXS) to deliver a large database of
structural information on protein-ligand interactions for the NSP5 protease and
then NSP13 helicase (and potentially NSP15), including binding-induced
structural changes. The successful application of high-throughput SWAXS
screening approach to SARS-CoV-2 proteins will provide the community with
valuable structural information on molecular interactions modulating viral
function. These studies will focus initially on the ligand binding with the main
viral protease, NSP5, responsible for the release of various proteins encoded in
the large polyprotein sequence. Analyses will also be performed to investigate
NSP13, a protein known to interact with many human proteins involved in the
innate immune response. Finding surface binding hotspots will provide
information on potential binding interfaces as well as initial small molecule
scaffolds that future efforts can use to target these
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.