* 2030059
* RAPID: COVID-19 Information Visualizations
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Jessica Witt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

COVID-19 has upended daily life across the globe. Government leaders, medical
professions, and the media are communicating the impact of various public health
measures such as social distancing by describing predictions of epidemiological
models. Social media has been inundated with visualizations that have been
created to help communicate the need for these measures. People’s everyday
decisions, as well as their support of public health policy, will depend on
their understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic. The research identifies the best
way to communicate COVID-19 risk data to the public and to help people
understand the potential impacts of different behaviors and policies. The public
has many questions about what behaviors are safe. If the results show that
simulations can help convey the information to the public, simulations that
center on specific questions people are asking will be a valuable tool as people
navigate the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19. The simulations are available to
the general public and shared with the news media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People’s everyday decisions, as well as their support of
public health policy, will depend on their understanding of the COVID-19
pandemic. Unfortunately, lack of understanding has led to claims that public
health officials’ dire warnings are merely scare tactics of propaganda. In
general, there is a fundamental misunderstanding and distrust in uncertain
simulations of hypothetical data and outcomes. The current project develops
visualizations for communicating important risk-related COVID epidemiological
models to support comprehension and trust in science-based forecasts and
recommendations and improving COVID-related decision making. The research tests
key proposed visualization design features to assess their value in the current
pandemic. The scholars also determine the influence of individual difference
factors (numeracy, trust in science, and current anxiety levels) on the
effectiveness of different visualization design features on comprehension of
personal and global risk models, trust, and macro- (general actions such as
social distancing) and micro-level (using a face mask while shopping) COVID-19
decisions asked before and after experience with the visualizations. The
proposed research tests the generalizability of key cognitive principles to
visualizations in a real-life context. While prior research has independently
considered these factors in artificial contexts, limited work has addressed how
these factors interact with each other, and also how the factors influence not
only comprehension but also trust and behavioral intentions. If principles
developed in these artificial contexts do not generalize to COVID, this would
necessitate revision of risk visualization guidelines. Thus, the intellectual
impact of this work is to improve our understanding of how to communicate
complex risk models to individuals with varying backgrounds and prior
beliefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.