* 2030013
* RAPID: Winners and Losers when Science Moves Home: Differential Effects of COVID-19 based on Discipline, Caregiving, and Career Stage
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Stephanie Pfirman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,687.00

COVID-19 is having widespread—but disparate—effects on the nation's scientific
capacity housed in the higher education sector, including the STEM researchers
who conduct basic and applied research, and who train future generations of
scientists. One-half of basic research conducted in the United States is
performed in the higher education sector, and the federal government finances
over half of it. The research universities, and the academic STEM researchers
who are employed by them, are essential to the national science system. The
overarching question of this project is, how do changes brought about by
COVID-19 affect the productivity of academic STEM researchers and the science
they conduct? Results will inform policy making to help the core of the nation's
research enterprise to meet the challenge of conducting research vital to the
nation’s interests during a worldwide pandemic. Although COVID-19 is a specific
instance of a macro-level disruption to science, findings from this study will
also inform how to build STEM research capacity to be resilient when confronted
with future large-scale changes. Because academic STEM researchers are also
student research mentors and educators, understanding adaptations such as use of
new technologies, will improve the quality and impact of STEM education and
contribute to a better prepared STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
multi-method study, we study the impacts of macro social disruption and
dislocation on patterns of academic productivity, choice of research topics and
projects pursed, and sustaining or rethinking patterns of collaboration and
teamwork. The first arm of the study is to conduct semi-structured qualitative
interviews of STEM professors in the following broad areas: large-scale
infrastructure-dependent research (e.g., that requiring large congregate
specialized research facilities, such as observatories); smaller-scale
infrastructure-dependent research (e.g., laboratories located at universities);
fieldwork dependent research; applied research; and analytic research. We expect
differences in impact on research productivity across these different types: We
hypothesize that infrastructure-dependent science will be affected more
negatively than other modes of science. In selecting participants in the
qualitative arm, we will ensure diversity across a variety of dimensions to test
our hypothesis that the COVID-19 crisis will have especially negative impacts on
early career researchers, and those with more caretaking responsibilities.
Results from the qualitative arm of the study will enable the development of
extensive indices of potential impacts and scientific adjustments, which will
then form the basis of a national survey to assess the project's hypotheses on a
nationally representative survey of academic scientists. The study design is
longitudinal, including two waves of the survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.