* 2030845
* RAPID: Exploring the Cyber Behaviors of Temporary Work-From-Home (TWFH) Employees
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Michael Posey, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 170,249.00

Responses to the novel coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) have led to a substantial
number of employees working from home in an ad-hoc emergency fashion. This
project examines the ramifications of temporary work-from-home environments for
organizational cybersecurity. The project team is assessing organizational
methods used to help secure temporary remote locations, examining the new
workplace characteristics that employees encounter, and determining whether and
how these factors influence the security of sensitive organizational data,
information, and digital systems. Project findings will allow the research team
to develop actionable recommendations to organizational leaders who rely on
temporary, remote work locations for their employees in times of substantial
uncertainty. This project will help guide the design and implementation of
organizational cybersecurity policies, procedures, and other efforts relied upon
during significant future crisesâ€”times when cybersecurity threats tend to be
elevated and employees dispersed throughout numerous
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is using a mixed methods
approach to evaluate possible responses by employees to the unexpected work
conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. These employees might exhibit
increased resilience to cybersecurity risks due to the cooperative motivations
that often follow disasters. On the other hand, stressors associated with
working at home might lead employees to pay less attention to cybersecurity
demands and to engage in shortcuts and workarounds. Thus, the project
investigates the extent that organizational responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
and the crisis lead individuals to protect their environments and their
organizations from cybersecurity threats or by contrast to engage in behavior
that constitutes threats to sensitive organizational assets and practices. In-
depth semi-structured interviews and experience sampling assessments are
performed using several samples of employees working at home. Daily surveys will
be completed by a sample of participants over a two-week period to determine
fluctuations in employee attitudes, emotions, and
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.