* 2030655
* A Flexible Approach to STEM Scholar Recruitment, Retention, and Preparation in Computer Science and Computer Information Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Kriss Ferluga, Davenport University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 647,527.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Davenport University, which serves a large population of non-traditional
and commuter students. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund
scholarships to twenty unique full-time students pursuing bachelor's degrees in
computer science or computer information systems. Twelve Scholars will enter as
first year students and receive scholarship support of up to four years; eight
transfer students will enter as juniors and receive scholarship support for up
to two years. The Scholars will enter in four annual cohorts of four to six
students. The project aims to address a persistent issue faced by non-
traditional and commuter students that cannot be overcome with scholarships
alone: the scheduling conflicts that inevitably arise for those who must work to
meet financial or family obligations. In fact, reports have ranked such
conflicts as the second most frequently cited barrier to college persistence. A
unique feature of this project is that it is situated in a University that
offers flexible delivery of courses, mentoring, support services, and co-
curricular activities. The flexible delivery method allows students to choose,
as needed, how they can best participate, either in person, online live during
class time, or asynchronously via a recording of the live class session. The
project aims to embed that level of flexibility into the Scholar support and
enrichment activities. Thus, the results of this project will likely be of
interest to institutions of higher education trying to enroll, retain, graduate,
and place more non-traditional students into the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. To this end, the project will recruit Scholars
through shared activities that build community with high school, community
college, and Davenport University students. In addition to scholarships, it will
provide the Scholars with enhanced academic support and faculty mentoring,
cohorted extracurricular activities that help build a sense of belonging, and
internships with industry mentors. The project will investigate the impact of
the flexible delivery of courses, support systems, and supporting activities on
Scholarsâ€™ retention and sense of STEM belonging. A mixed-methods approach will
be used to collect qualitative and quantitative data on Scholars' engagement,
sense of belonging, participation in project activities, and retention. Results
of the project will be made available through the National Centers of Academic
Excellence community, the Michigan Association of State Universities, and
relevant journal publications. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, which seeks
to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.