* 2030068
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SMALL: Enabling Seamless Coexistence between Passive and Active Networks using Reconfigurable Reflecting Surfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* SEYEDMOHAMMADRE Faghih Imani, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,992.00

Harmonious coexistence between multiple wireless technologies is necessary for
efficient utilization of the radio spectrum. However, enabling this in practice
is known to be challenging because of the random and uncontrollable nature of
the wireless channels, which makes it difficult to limit interference among co-
existing wireless systems. This challenge is exacerbated by the fact that many
wireless technologies, such as radio astronomy, rely on passive receivers whose
performance can be disrupted by the slightest levels of interference. However,
recent advances in metamaterials have made it possible to develop reconfigurable
reflective surfaces (RRSs), which are electromagnetically active surfaces (e.g.,
a wall with wireless capabilities) that can be used to control the wireless
propagation environment. Thus, RRSs can potentially help mitigate the challenge
of interference among co-existing wireless technologies. The goal of this
research is, thus, to develop a novel framework that will enable seamless co-
existence among multiple passive and active wireless systems, by developing the
fundamental science and technology needed to practically exploit the RRS concept
to suppress interference at the wireless receivers. By achieving this goal, the
proposed research will pave the way towards a seamless co-existence among a
broad range of wireless technologies and applications. Improving these critical
technologies will have tangible societal and economic impacts. The research is
complemented by a comprehensive educational plan that includes spectrum-centric
courses as well as the involvement of graduate and undergraduate students
through diverse activities on spectrum sharing. Concrete broadening
participation events, including seminars and participation in science fairs and
outreach activities, are planned to engage under-represented K-12 students in
spectrum research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop foundational
analytical and experimental approaches for holistic and cross-layer design,
analysis, deployment, and optimization of RRS-enhanced spectrum co-existence
networks. This includes several novel contributions: 1) A holistic statistical
model that captures the effect of RRS deployment on the wireless propagation
environment in spectrum sharing scenarios and creates RRS-inspired performance
metrics tailored to spectrum co-existence use cases, 2) A systematic approach
for network planning that can be used to determine how many RRSs to deploy,
where, and with what surface and orientation so as to facilitate seamless
communication, 3) A novel online optimization framework for performing
distributed spectrum sharing while dynamically leveraging RRS reconfigurability,
and 4) Design and fabrication of an RRS that offers near-continuous beam
steering capability, as well as an experimental demonstration of RRS-enhanced
spectrum co-existence in practical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.