* 2030713
* Developing Future STEM Leaders in the Caribbean:  Scholarships and Systemic Support for Graduate Students in Marine and Environmental Biology in the Virgin Islands
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Paul Jobsis, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,615.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of the Virgin Islands, a Historically Black University.
Over its five-year duration, the project will provide two-year scholarships to
thirty-six unique full-time graduate students who are pursuing a Master of
Science in Marine and Environmental Science degree. The selected Scholars will
also have a demonstrated interest in natural resource conservation in the
Caribbean. The project aims to increase student success in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective supporting activities, including mentoring,
research experiences, service learning, outreach projects, professional
development, and participation in discipline-specific conferences. By analyzing
the effectiveness of student recruitment, curriculum, and co-curricular
activities, the project will identify practices with high impact for low-income
students and adapt them to maximize their effect. The Scholars will conduct
research that has regional significance, partner with potential employers, and
share their research results. Broad dissemination of the project’s findings can
enable it to serve as a model for graduate student recruitment and support
services of low income, academically talented students in other programs at the
University and at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific goals of this
project are to increase recruitment of Virgin Islanders in the master of marine
and environmental sciences program, investigate conditions under which improved
student learning occurs, promote successful post-graduate employment, and share
the knowledge for broader impact. Additional project aims include analysis and
improvement of recruitment strategies to include low income Virgin Island
students, as well as students from populations that are under-represented in
this STEM field. The scope of this project also includes faculty development
workshops to address best practices for mentoring and advising of low-income
students, as well as professional development training and professional
partnering for the students. Potential outcomes include increased recruitment
and graduation, and successful post-graduate employment of the Scholars. An
external evaluator, provided by The Virgin Islands Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (VI-EPSCoR), will assess this project using an
approach that includes project document review and stakeholder surveys. NSF
S-STEM Program initiatives will be bolstered through integration with the VI-
EPSCoR project on undergraduate resilience education research, connecting
freshman-level UVI students with co-curricular activities, service-learning
projects, and community partners involved in this master of marine and
environmental sciences initiative. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.