* 2030707
* Supporting Undergraduate Scholar Cohorts to Prepare Career-Ready Engineering and Science Graduates
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Tamara Floyd-Smith, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at West Virginia University Institute of Technology, a public, primarily
undergraduate institution. Over its five-year duration, the project will provide
at least 20 full-time undergraduate students with scholarships to support
pursuit of bachelor’s degrees in either Electrical and Computer Engineering or
Computer Science and Information Systems. The Scholars will be academically
talented, low-income, full-time freshman and will receive scholarships for up to
four years. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective supporting activities, including mentoring
by faculty, STEM professionals, and peers; cohort-shared living and academic
experiences; undergraduate research experiences; career exploration; and
participation in discipline-specific conferences. In addition, Scholars will be
encouraged to complete a minor in Entrepreneurial Studies, with the goal of
raising Scholars’ awareness of the potential economic and social benefits of
STEM careers. Because the University has a high proportion of underrepresented
students, this project has the potential to broaden participation in STEM fields
by increasing the number of career-ready STEM graduates from low-income
backgrounds. Dissemination of the research findings will help other rural,
geographically disadvantaged regions of the U.S. to implement similar
educational programs focused on increasing student employability and local job
creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. There are three specific goals: 1) increase
recruitment, retention and graduation of Scholars majoring in engineering or
computer science; 2) adapt, implement, and study the impact of evidence-based
practices and strategies to support STEM student success; and 3) implement
sustainable curricular and co-curricular improvements. The expected project
outcomes include increasing the number of career-ready STEM graduates with high
motivation and an entrepreneurial mindset and placement of more graduates in
technology-based industries and technology-based start-up ventures. The project
will improve the University’s capacity to collect and analyze student data and
effectively diagnose the needs of STEM students and the impact of support
activities on STEM student success. The project’s research component will focus
on the impact of project activities on low-income STEM students’ retention,
motivation to pursue careers in STEM fields, persistence to graduation, and
career preparation. It will also investigate the impact of the entrepreneurship
minor. Evaluation of project impact will include propensity score techniques to
match Scholars with a comparison group of non-scholars who do not receive
scholarships. The outcomes of this project will be shared with local and
scientific communities through journal publications, conference presentations,
project websites, and news media appearances. The project has the potential to
strengthen the pipeline of qualified engineers and scientists in West Virginia,
the Appalachian region, and the United States. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.