* 2030063
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: LARGE: MAC-on-MAC: A Spectrum Orchestrating Control Plane for Coexisting Wireless Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Xin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Wireless systems with different radio access technologies (RATs) are becoming
packed tightly in the space of radio spectrum. The carrier frequency and channel
bandwidth of these systems, however, are drastically different across the
spectrum domain, e.g., the IEEE 802.11 family that operates at 900 MHz, 2.4/5
GHz, and 60 GHz (mm-wave) bands, the 3GPP 5G family that spans 6-100 GHz, and
more. Therefore, radio spectrum, which has long been identified as a scarce
resource, will be more crowded and diversified than ever. Swift and effective
spectrum sharing requires enhanced capability and increased intelligence at the
wireless devices, from innovative transmitter and receiver technologies at the
physical layer, to multi-band spectrum sensing across physical and MAC layer;
from mapping spectrum slices for each access request, to radical modification of
medium access control (MAC) protocols. Altogether, there is a need to support a
myriad of heterogeneous devices that run diverse communication standards over
different frequency bands to achieve efficient spectrum and energy utilization
in such huge, dynamic and disparate systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
mitigates the incoherent and disassociated frequency bands of the multi-RAT
coexisting environments by exploiting the potential of cross-layer design from
the circuits of transmitter and receiver, to the MAC layer with an innovative
MAC-on-MAC spectrum control plane. This project has four major thrusts: (i)
design of innovative transmitter and receiver techniques for energy-efficient
multi-band spectrum monitoring, by using custom single-chip ultra-broadband (1-8
GHz) bio-inspired spectrum sensors to create a multi-band sensing solution that
includes both sub-6 GHz and emerging mm-wave bands; (ii) methods to acquire
complete spectrum occupancy information with a limited number of measurements
from the proposed multi-band spectrum sensing circuits by exploiting matrix
completion for low-cost, accurate and scalable monitoring through a learning-
based sequential scheme; (iii) algorithms of obtaining a sorted ranking of paths
that map a data flow to a range of spectrum slips by modeling spectrum-flow-RAT
domains, finding the set of unoccupied spectrum slices, sorting out multiple
recommendations from neighboring SAP control entities; (iv) creating MAC-Flow, a
flow based network protocol that is capable of handling networking demands from
both upper and lower layer, for both traditional user frames and for MAC-on-MAC
controller processed frames for system-level performance evaluation. A holistic
system-level integration of advances in spectrum detection, sensing, mapping
with data flows, and implementation of MAC protocols is critical to improving
spectrum utilization and user experience in coexisting wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.