* 2030473
* RAPID: Structure of Membrane-Bound Fusion Peptide of SARS-CoV-2 Required for Infection
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Steven Van Doren, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 220,184.00

The 2019 novel coronavirus spread quickly and became a global pandemic.
Infection by an enveloped virus, like SARS-CoV-2, requires fusion of the viral
membrane with a host cell membrane. This NSF Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
project will support studies to characterize a coronavirus fusion peptide before
and after it binds to the cell membrane. The understanding of this process will
inform the active development of vaccines and antibodies. The scientific
activities will provide a special opportunity for the PI and his lab members to
show local high school students how basic research can assist technology
development to safeguard public health and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)-guided studies of SARS-CoV-2 docking into the
human cells will provide the first structural models of lipid bilayer
coordinates bound to a viral fusion peptide, thereby providing details of fusion
peptide manipulation of the lipids. The results will prompt immune developers to
consider the presence and format of the fusion peptide as antigen. The dynamic
structure of the unbound state of the fusion peptide should represent its
behavior as a solvent-exposed antigen and the structure of its bilayer-
associated state will inform about sites accessible to antibodies outside the
bilayer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.