* 2030296
* Adaptive Robust Optimization with Endogenous Uncertainty and Active Learning in Smart Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Qi Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 306,746.00

This award will contribute to the national prosperity by providing rigorous
methods to manage uncertainty in complex systems, with a particular focus on
manufacturing systems. Uncertainty is pervasive in manufacturing, and safe and
efficient operation under uncertainty, as well as effective risk management, is
critically important to the nation's manufacturing competitiveness. This project
develops methods to support operational control that explicitly consider
endogenous uncertainty, that is, uncertainty that depends directly on decisions.
In the manufacturing environment, significant uncertainty is due to the health
states of physical assets, and managing these assets effectively constitutes a
major challenge. The resulting methods, while validated on manufacturing
systems, are expected to be widely applicable to other complex systems, such as
energy systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates an adaptive, set-
based robust optimization approach incorporating endogenous uncertainty with
active learning methods that collect and analyze data on an ongoing basis.
Robust optimization presents a tractable approach to advance the state of the
art in operational control by addressing various types of endogenous
uncertainty. The project is expected to deepen our understanding of the
dependence of uncertainty on decisions, provide a set-based robust optimization
perspective on endogenous uncertainty, and introduce a new approach to modeling
active learning and optimizing the trade-off between exploration and
exploitation. The theoretical advances will be motivated by challenges in smart
manufacturing, namely in integrated production and maintenance planning in
networked production environments, The PI will include graduate and
undergraduate students in the research, and will incorporate optimization
methods in capstone design courses in chemical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.