* 2030672
* Supporting Academically Talented STEM Undergraduates with Scholarships, Interdisciplinary Explorations, Mentoring, and Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Jani Lewis, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,994.00

This project contributes to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technology experts by supporting high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the State University of
New York at Geneseo. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships for an estimated 30 full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in Biology, Biochemistry, Biophysics, Biomathematics, Chemistry,
Geochemistry, Geological Sciences, Geophysics, Mathematics, Applied Mathematics,
Neuroscience, Physics, or Applied Physics. Scholars will be selected as first-
year students and will receive scholarships for up to four years. Specific
project activities include a new first-year Interdisciplinary STEM Exploratory
Seminar, peer and faculty mentoring, cohort building activities, research
experiences, conference attendance, alumni interactions, and presentation
opportunities. The project will study the impact of the interdisciplinary
seminar, mentoring programs, and faculty-led research experiences on the
retention, persistence, and graduation rates of the Scholars. Project research
will also study how project components prepare Scholars for the STEM workplace
or graduate school. Knowledge generated by the project will inform institutional
efforts to retain and graduate low-income STEM students and will be shared with
institutions nationwide that serve a similar population of talented students
with financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion for two cohorts of approximately 15 students
each. The objectives of this project are to (1) increase retention between the
first and second years of study within the major for all Scholars, (2) increase
the four-year graduation rate for Scholars, and (3) increase the preparation of
all Scholars for post-graduation careers and graduate school. The contents of
the interdisciplinary seminar will be informed by research on effective first-
year experiences and will be designed to foster cohort building, STEM identity,
and Scholars' engagement in interdisciplinary problem solving. The project will
investigate the research question, “What is the effect of participation in the
Interdisciplinary STEM Exploratory Seminar on academic success, STEM identity,
and retention in a STEM major?" Investigating this question will contribute
knowledge about evidence-based approaches that can support retention and
graduation for high achieving, low-income STEM students. The project will be
evaluated by an independent external evaluator using both formative and
summative methods to study progress toward accomplishing project objectives.
Outcomes will be disseminated within the University and the State Universities
of New York system, and more broadly through conference presentations and
publications so that other colleges and universities might learn from and build
on the project’s experiences. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.