* 2030114
* Increasing the Academic and Career Success of Alaska Native and Rural Students in Science and Math
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Dayna DeFeo, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 118,999.00

This project will address the national need for skilled scientists and
mathematicians by increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation of
academically talented, low-income rural and Alaska Native students at the
University of Alaska Southeast. To this end, the project will provide
scholarships to 22 undergraduates pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Marine
Biology, Fisheries, Environmental Science, or Mathematics. First-year Scholars
will receive up to four years of scholarship support and transfer Scholars will
receive up to two years of scholarship support. All Scholars will create an
Individual Development Plan (IDP) in partnership with a faculty mentor. This
plan will serve as a blueprint for the Scholars’ academic and career planning.
In addition, first-year Scholars are expected to significantly increase their
academic success by attending a first-year seminar focused on academic skill
building and career development. The program also plans to improve Scholars’ use
of student support services, anticipating that this change will increase STEM
degree completion and career success for Alaska Native and rural students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project’s specific aims are to: (1) increase first-year
retention and graduation of STEM students; (2) increase STEM student
participation in high-impact workforce development activities; and (3)
implement, adapt, and study the IDP as a sustainable strategy to increase the
success of low-income, academically talent STEM students. This project will use
an IDP for each student as a tool to: (1) help students articulate, plan for,
and monitor academic progress towards academic and career goals; (2) support
student transitions to the university; (3) facilitate structured faculty
mentoring; (4) catalyze student use of academic and social support services; (5)
include employers in career planning; and (6) develop responsive co-curricular
activities to support student success. The project’s research agenda explores
career decision self-efficacy as a critical component of individual development
planning. Data collected from the research and evaluation activities will be
used to improve institutional capacity to serve Alaska Native and rural students
during and after the funding period. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students who
earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention,
transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.