* 2030691
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: What makes a generalist herbivore? The interplay between top-down and bottom-up forces on herbivore diet breadth
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mayra Vidal, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Dudgeon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 236,464.00

One-third of all species on Earth are insects that eat plants (herbivores) and
they are key to environmental health. For example, insect herbivores are food
for other animals, such as birds, snakes, and mammals. Insect herbivores
pollinate flowering plants, however they can also be pests of food crops which
can reduce our food supply. Thus, to conserve natural habitats and our food
supply, we must know how insect herbivores are affected by their food plants and
by the animals that eat them. After decades of research, we still do not know
why insect herbivores feed on particular plants. Even though very few insect
herbivores are generalists which feed on many different types of plants,
generalists are the most damaging pests of crops. This research will study a
common generalist herbivore to answer: What allows generalist herbivores to use
new plants or to feed on many different types of plants? Answering this question
is key for knowing when and how pests spread onto different crops. This project
will educate elementary, middle, high school, and college students. A science
camp for middle school girls from low income families will be established by
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major unresolved questions in
biology is to understand why there are so many different species. Insect
herbivores are an ideal study group for this question because they are so
diverse. Host plant use is an important driver of insect herbivores’
diversification, however, most studies examining the link between diet breadth
and insect herbivore evolution focus on specialist herbivores. Focusing on
specialists does not tell us which factors lead herbivores to specialize or to
maintain generalism. By focusing on generalists, this project will study how
selective forces from host plant use and natural enemies can lead to diet
expansion or contraction, and thereby affect the evolution and diversification
of insect herbivores. Using a generalist herbivore (fall webworm, Hyphantria
cunea) that feeds on over 400 plant species across a wide geographic range, this
project will: 1) Determine whether diet breadth is a population or individual-
level trait, and test for the genetic basis of diet breadth using a candidate
gene approach; 2) Investigate if local adaption to host plants is predicted by
diet breadth; 3) Test how natural enemy composition and abundance affect
herbivore diet breadth; 4) Test if escape from natural enemies explains diet
expansion to poor quality hosts; and 5) Examine how the interplay of selective
forces from host plants and natural enemies may change over time. This research
will provide critically needed tests of how selective forces influence
generalist herbivores and diet breadth evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.