* 2030460
* EAGER: Testing the Host-Microbiome Specificity Paradigm in Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sarah Hird, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,995.00

The collections of microorganisms that live on and inside animals - the
microbiome - affect their hosts in many known and unknown ways. Understanding
the relationship between animals and their microbiomes requires that we use the
right tools and collect appropriate data. Currently, most vertebrate microbiome
studies have two things in common. They use a single marker (called “16S”,
because it sequences a portion of the 16S rRNA gene) to identify the members of
the microbiome and they frequently rely on feces as the sampling material
because it is easy and non-lethal to collect. These two factors may be
introducing bias and/or error into the analyses of the microbiome. Additionally,
the amount and impact of the bias/error may depend on the animal host, because
they have unique natural histories and ecologies. This research will assess the
relationship between birds and their microbiomes using the standard methods
above and compare them to additional markers and sampling material. Together
these tests will demonstrate and compare the utility of standard and more novel
approaches to studying the host-microbiome relationship. This project will
support student graduate and undergraduate training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
trend that appears to be common in animal microbiomes is that more closely
related animals have more similar microbiomes. Mammals, the best studied group
of vertebrate microbiomes, tend to adhere to this paradigm, whereas the
specificity between host and microbiome is weaker in birds. The objective of
this research is to test two hypotheses about potential sources of noise in
microbiome data. Hypothesis 1 is that functional traits of the microbiome are
structuring the avian microbiome more than taxonomic composition. This will be
tested by comparing shotgun metagenomic data (function) to 16S rRNA amplicon
libraries (taxonomic composition). Hypothesis 2 is that birds regulate the mucus
microbiome such that it contains a higher resident to transient bacteria ratio
than the lumen contents. This will be tested by physically separating the lumen
contents and mucus-associated bacteria. Comparative analyses, including
phylogenetic comparative methods, will relate avian microbiome data to host
ecology and evolutionary history. Together, these hypotheses are a robust test
of host-microbiome specificity in birds and will determine the appropriateness
of commonly used microbiome methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.