* 2030478
* STEM-relevant Civic Engagement and Service as a Foundation to Prepare Rural Undergraduates for STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Brian McFarland, MORNINGSIDE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2025
* USD 999,337.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Morningside College, a private four-year liberal
arts institution. This five-year project will provide scholarships to two
cohorts of twelve students, to support their attainment of bachelor’s degrees in
biology, chemistry, computer science, or mathematics. First year students will
receive up to four years of scholarship support. The project seeks to increase
the retention and graduation rates among rural STEM students by supporting them
through STEM-centric civic engagement activities, together with faculty and peer
mentoring programs, a mathematics co-requisite course, undergraduate research
experiences, and career-oriented externship opportunities with industry
partners. Because the College has a large population of students with rural
backgrounds, this project will explore the complexity of issues with
recruitment, persistence, and success of STEM students from this
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The specific aims of this project include a)
increasing the first- to second-year retention, and graduation rates of STEM
scholars, b) enhancing their scientific workplace or graduate school readiness,
and c) integrating civic engagement experiences with STEM courses. The research
question will investigate how student involvement in science-centric civic
engagement activities embedded within STEM courses might contribute to increased
retention in STEM disciplines and to increased attitudes of civic
responsibility, particularly among students from rural backgrounds. The expected
outcomes are increased STEM student retention rates and graduation of STEM
professionals who are ready to make a positive impact on their communities.
Throughout the five-year project, an external evaluator will provide feedback on
the project by reviewing longitudinal institutional assessment data, student
success and progression measures aligned with project elements, and student
attitude and perception data. The results will be shared through regional and
national conferences and participation in events sponsored by organizations such
as the Council of Independent Colleges. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.