* 2030948
* Scholarships and Communities to Support STEM Undergraduate Student Persistence and Graduation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Bernhard Beck-Winchatz, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2026
* USD 999,997.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at DePaul University. Over its four-year duration, the project will fund
scholarships to sixteen unique full-time students who are pursuing STEM
bachelor's degrees in Astrophysics, Biochemistry, Biological Sciences,
Chemistry, Data Science, Environmental Science, Environmental Studies,
Mathematics, Mathematics and Computer Science, or Physics. The Scholars will
enter in two cohorts of eight students and participate in a Learning Community
featuring study groups, tutoring, and mentoring. They will also benefit from a
College and Career Pathway program that includes a writing seminar, career
exploration, workshops, research experiences, and internships. The project
expects that these supports and resources will contribute to Scholarsâ€™
persistence to graduation, as well as ensure that they are well-prepared to
enter the STEM workforce or graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of the project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There are three
specific aims: (1) increase the number of low-income academically talented
students entering graduate programs or the STEM workforce; (2) adapt, implement,
and study evidence-based practices, thus contributing to understanding how to
improve recruitment and success of low-income academically talented students in
STEM; and (3) implement evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities
for low-income academically talented students. The project will conduct research
to increase knowledge about the effects of learning communities on non-cognitive
factors generally associated with students' academic persistence and outcomes.
Specifically, the project will investigate two research questions: (1) How will
participation in a learning community affect the socialization experiences,
college adjustment, retention and persistence to STEM degree attainment of low-
income academically talented students? (2) How will participation in programming
offered in the College and Career Pathway Model affect students' academic
engagement, academic performance, completion of STEM internships, research
projects, and their time to graduation? Project evaluation will be conducted
using students' academic records, survey and focus group responses, interviews,
attendance at co-curricular workshops, and participation in internships and
research. Results from this project will be presented at professional
conferences, such as the annual meeting of the Association of American Colleges
and Universities. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.