* 2030056
* RAPID: Exposure Indices for COVID-19 Research
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Victor Couture, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,355.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;We use smartphone movement data to create human exposure
indices for COVID-19. The immediate outputs of the project are ready-to-use data
that will enable COVID-19 research requiring information on human movement. The
three indices, LEX, DEX, and VEX, study movements both within and across
geographies in the United States. They measure location exposure stemming from
cross-county movements, device exposure stemming from potential interactions at
establishments, and venue exposure that counts visits at identified
establishments, respectively. All indices are provided at a daily frequency at
various granularities. In addition to these indices, we provide documentation
and practical advice for using the data in research. These data can be
immediately used by other researchers and policy makers in examining human
exposure to COVID-19. Policy makers can utilize these resources for immediate
insights on COVID-19 exposure and for modelling reopening the economy in
relation to human movement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our analysis utilizes cell
phone ping data covering millions of devices and millions of identified
locations. The LEX is a matrix that utilizes smartphones pinged in a given
location each day and incorporates the share of devices pinged in each location
at least once during the previous two weeks. The DEX is a device-level index
that incorporates the average exposure of people living in a county to other
people within commercial venues. To calculate exposure, the index utilizes the
number of distinct other devices the focal device interacts with through visits
in a given establishment in a given day. The DEX index take into consideration
that individuals sheltering in place may influence the quantity of cell phone
pings for analysis. The VEX counts the number of devices that are present in the
same establishment at the same time. The VEX index provides insights around
establishment traffic before and after stay-at-home
orders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.