* 2030217
* RAPID: Antiviral Functionalized Membrane Mask and Nanostructured Materials for Corona Virus Capture and Deactivation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Thomas Dziubla, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2022
* USD 152,454.00

The current coronavirus pandemic has created a severe societal health issue,
resulting in significant economic problems across the globe. The novel
coronavirus particles (ten thousandths of a millimeter) are covered in club-
shaped “S-protein” spikes, which give it its crown-like, or coronal, appearance.
These protein spikes allow the virus to readily enter host cells once in the
body, resulting in a highly infectious and readily transmissible disease. This
project will develop layered membrane-based materials that are capable of
deactivating these spike proteins. With humid air containing corona virus
droplets, the developed functionalized membranes will enable attachment to the
protein spikes of the coronavirus and disarm the virus. In addition, the thin
membrane architecture should result in a highly breathable mask. This project
will result in the development of advanced barrier devices (such as, face masks)
capable of recognition-based capturing and deactivating coronavirus-type active
particles. The integration of science between advanced materials and
medical/biological sciences will have immense societal impact. This RAPID effort
will also enhance interactions with industries for bringing the application of
functionalized membrane and virus recognition technology to the medical field
and industrial manufacturing sector where airborne virus or other nanoparticles
present a potential health hazard. Students with diverse background will be
exposed to multidisciplinary research involving chemical/environmental
engineering, biological chemistry, and electrical engineering. This project is
jointly funded by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems (CBET) Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will involve the
development of functionalized, open structured and highly breathable membranes
with attached enzymes and/or antibodies. This will allow for a significant
improvement in the efficacy and safety of the diffusion and impact filtration
mechanisms and subsequent deactivation parameters for PPE. This innovative RAPID
project will result in the development of new materials which incorporate
integration of easily adaptable virus cleavage and recognition materials on
existing cellulosic and other membrane polymer films which are easily scalable.
The overall project will involve enzyme/antibody attachment on surfaces, and
material evaluation using synthetic and plasmonic aerosol nanoparticles
functionalized with spike glycoprotein found in corona virus. This novel
approach includes means for maintaining hydration for enzyme activity. The
plasmonic particles will act as “smart” labels to determine both particle
location in the material and enzyme-protein interactions. The integrated
research on functionalized membranes, virus particle quantification approaches,
and novel virus analogs will advance the state of the art in anti-viral barrier
materials while deepening fundamental understanding of virus-enzyme-antibody
interactions on surfaces. This RAPID effort will also enhance additional
interactions with industries for bringing the application of functionalized
membrane and virus recognition technology to the medical field and industrial
manufacturing sector where airborne virus or other nanoparticles present a
potential health hazard. Students with diversified background will be exposed to
multidisciplinary research involving chemical/environmental engineering,
biological chemistry, and electrical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.