* 2030654
* Pacific Excellence in Analytics through Research and Learning in Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Helen Turner, Chaminade University of Honolulu
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, this project at Chaminade University of Honolulu will
provide scholarships to 20 students pursuing a bachelor’s degree in data
science. Themed around using Pacific data to solve Pacific problems, the project
aims to empower students to find data-driven solutions to challenges in the
Pacific basin. To do so, it will implement project-based courses and internships
centered on data provided by a coalition of businesses, agencies, and community
and grassroots organizations. The project expects to produce a cohort of Pacific
data science professionals who will enter regional research and professional
practice, as well as contribute to a data-driven culture of decision support
across Hawai'i’s economic sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project
are to: (1) Mitigate financial and academic barriers to data science
participation for high talent, low-income Pacific students; (2) Acknowledge and
address cultural and non-academic barriers to STEM persistence and attainment
faced by Pacific students; and (3) Develop new curricular and extracurricular
best practices that reflect data science training aligned with student needs,
strengths, and cultural expectations. Layered curricula will address direct and
meta-academic outcomes by emphasizing coding skills from Python to AI, decision
support, data visualization, data ethics, and data communication. The project
will contribute to STEM education knowledge through the development of an
adapted suite of new high impact practices that will connect a data science
program to Pacific epistemology. The project intends to develop connections
between students, place, community, and employers, with the goal of mitigating
Hawai'i’s talent drain. The project will conduct research to explore
integration, separation, and synergism of Pacific cultural and Western
approaches to STEM learning. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.