* 2030482
* SBIR Phase I (COVID-19):  Identifying Medical Supply Shortages on Social Media for Fast and Effective Disaster Response
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Carmen Banea, INITIUM AI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,207.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project consists of providing immediate help during the COVID-19 crisis by
identifying the needs of medical providers and compiling reports for government
agencies and medical equipment suppliers and manufacturers. The proposed Natural
Language Processing methodology will help (1) hospitals and clinics seeking
medical supplies, personal protective equipment, and testing supplies to meet
their needs; (2) the government coordinating response; (3) manufacturers and
suppliers seeking information regarding needs. Additionally, it can be used to
identify other non-medical supply shortages and can be adapted to provide an
efficient response for other disasters or outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will leverage recent
advances in natural language processing and machine learning to identify at
scale needs in medical equipment and supplies, based on insights derived from
free text in social media, and convert these needs into a centralized, easily
accessible structured data format. The technology will identify expressions of
needs on social media; identify users, their specific needs, and locations; and
generate geographically sorted actionable formatted
lists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.