* 2030253
* Photosensitizing Nanoconstructs for Regulation of ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters in the Brain
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Huang Chiao Huang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2023
* USD 650,000.00

The adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecule is the nucleotide of intracellular
energy transfer. ATP is able to store and transport chemical energy within
cells. Energy is released by hydrolysis of the third phosphate group, and this
energy is captured by proteins to drive cellular processes. ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporters are proteins found within our cells that take toxic chemicals
from the inside of a cell and push them to the outside of a cell. Blood vessel
cells in the brain adopt this protective mechanism to pump a variety of drugs
out of the brain, thereby making treatment ineffective. There are currently no
effective strategies for selective inhibition of ABC transporters in diseased
tissues while sparing healthy tissues. This project fills a major gap by
studying the fundamental mechanisms by which light, chemistry, and nanomaterials
can be exploited to modulate ABC transporters in brain microvascular endothelial
cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will quantify the impact of
photochemistry and nanomaterials on the activity and integrity of ABC
transporters. Compartmentalization and spatial organization of photosensitizers
in nanoscale objects will be investigated to alter or even enhance the
photochemical effects on ABC transporters. A correlation between the
photochemical modulation of organelles and the function of ABC transporters will
also be established. The third objective of the project involves understanding
how light modulates drug transport across the blood-brain barrier. The results
of this project may enable the development of new types of nanoconstructs, which
will enable a transformation in the treatment of brain cancer and other types of
cancer. The proposed research will be seamlessly integrated with educational,
mentoring, and outreach activities to advance the cross-disciplinary program in
the field of Biophotonics and Neuroscience. The research results will be
disseminated broadly through journal publications, conferences, and workshops
held at UMD. This work will be presented at international conferences on
photochemistry, photobiology, and biomedical optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.