* 2030569
* RAPID: ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC FOR LOW INCOME, LATE MIDDLE-AGED AFRICAN AMERICANS
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Chalandra Bryant, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has fostered a number of dramatic social changes,
including sheltering in place and job loss for millions of Americans. The
African American community has been disproportionately impacted. As African
American families struggle with self-quarantine, a faltering economy, and high
rates of infection, there is a need for detailed information regarding how they
are coping, and a need to identify resources they are successfully or
unsuccessfully accessing. This project will build on an on-going longitudinal
survey of African Americans living in the South and Midwest to evaluate the
effects of the pandemic on family functioning and well-being. Findings will
inform policies of governmental and private agencies tasked with providing
support to citizens during extreme events. These findings will aid in recovery
from the current crisis and provide information as to how to better prepare for
another pandemic or similar emergency, thus promoting safety, security and well-
being in our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has
had a disproportionately negative impact on the African-American community. This
project will investigate the impact of financial hardship and self-quarantine
using a longitudinal data set comprised of close to 500 middle-age African
Americans living in the South and Midwest (250 married, 74 live alone, 174 live
in multigenerational households). This data set currently consists of eight
waves of data collected over 25 years, with the most recent wave completed in
2019. It includes data regarding work, economic hardship, family relationships,
social support, religious activities, and psychological well-being over several
waves, thus forming a baseline in assessing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
These baseline data provide a unique opportunity to assess the degree of change
in various domains of life following self-quarantine and unemployment, including
emotional well-being (anxiety, depression, anger, loneliness) and, in turn,
quality of family interaction and involvement in risky behaviors such as
smoking, heavy alcohol consumption, and an unhealthy diet. The project will also
analyze whether the pandemic’s impact on economic hardship, family
relationships, and emotional well-being vary by social class and by household
composition. Findings from the project will inform sociological theories of
family functioning, including the family stress model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.