* 2030526
* Supporting Inclusive Excellence II: Scholarships to Support Undergraduate Student Success in Neuroscience and Biology-Biochemistry-Molecular Biology Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Rebecca Lyczak, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2025
* USD 989,407.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Ursinus College, a small liberal arts college. Over its five-year
duration, the project will fund scholarships for 20 unique full-time students
who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in the Neuroscience or the Biology,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology majors. Scholars will enter in two cohorts of
first-year students and receive four years of scholarship support. Many
academically talented undergraduates are unprepared for college by their high
school experiences and this lack of preparation stands in the way of their
success. Through both novel and well-established strategies to boost student
success, this project will support students through attrition points in
introductory biology courses and increase their successful completion of the
majors. In the new Learning to Lead course, students will develop the skills to
become ethical leaders in science by considering current science issues. The
Scholars will meet successful career scientists of diverse backgrounds as role
models. Additionally, through career workshops that introduce students to and
prepare them for internship and research opportunities, as well as various
career paths, the Scholars will be launched on careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The goal of this project is to make college affordable for
students so that they can reach their full potential. The project aims to
provide students with the study skills, confidence in themselves as scientists,
and science content knowledge necessary to succeed. The project will include
well established methods of increasing student success including building
community among Scholars, individualized academic advising, and career guidance.
In addition, the project will implement a new Learning to Lead course and a
four-day January workshop to prepare students for the second semester biology
course that has an emphasis on designing and conducting experiments. This
project will investigate the effectiveness of these activities through surveys
of perceptions of program effectivenessm from both scholars and other students
who participate in the activities. Data on student grades, retention until
graduation in the major, and their next steps after college will be collected
and used to inform project improvement. The data will also be used to assess the
effectiveness of these project activities so that findings may be shared with
colleagues nationally through presentations and publications. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.