* 2030165
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: LARGE: Spectrum Sharing Via Interference-resilient Passive Receivers and Passive-aware Active Services
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Karl Warnick, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 306,935.00

Scientists use radio observations of the sky to understand the evolution of
galaxies and cosmic structures and answer questions about the origins of the
universe. Cellular devices and other wireless technologies are vital to a modern
economy but interfere with sensitive astronomical instruments. This project will
develop technologies that will allow wireless devices and networks to coexist
with scientific uses of the radio spectrum. These technologies include
innovations in electronic systems that will make astronomical receivers more
immune to interference from wireless devices; and advanced networking methods
that allow wireless devices to intelligently cooperate with scientific
observatories. &lt;br/&gt;This project includes both fundamental technical
innovations and integrative system-level validation. It combines technical
innovation at the passive receiver with new ideas on active transmitter
management and looks at the problem in an integrative way. Technical innovations
include novel hardware architecture and custom analog circuits, machine-
learning-inspired design framework, cooperative wireless network protocol
design, and testbed verification and evaluation. Breakthroughs in wideband
beamforming, beam nulling, and interference cancellation through wideband true-
time-delay arrays are proposed, which have the potential to enhance US
competitiveness in various markets. A software-defined physical layer protocol
brings a new approach to communication between active and passive devices,
allowing for coordination between the device types. Industry interaction will
enable the discussion of the practicality of ideas, placement of students in
internships and permanent positions, and technology transfer. The astronomy
application is a significant draw for women and minority engineering students
and will allow for a significant increase in the diversity of the students
involved in the project relative to historical norms in the engineering
discipline. The proposed work will potentially impact the design and conception
of future astronomy systems as wideband beamforming and cooperative network
protocols will be available to technical standardization committees to enable
practical coexistent deployment of active and passive services. The PIs'
collaborations with astronomical observatories will allow for knowledge transfer
and possible technology adoption in current and future instrument
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.