* 2030629
* STTR Phase I: Smart IoT Wearable for Remote Monitoring and Assessment of COVID-19 Patients (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Lloyd Emokpae, LASARRUS CLINIC AND RESEARCH CENTER
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will help COVID-19 patients with a lower burden
to the medical system. This project will lead to a low-cost wearable internet of
things (IoT) system to enable improved telemedicine. The collected data can be
leveraged for public health purposes. The proposed project will develop
telemedicine software tools using real-time physiological data from a wearable
that is affordable, comfortable, non-invasive, washable, and
reusable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project will develop a risk
stratification mechanism for patients who experience signs and symptoms
suggestive of COVID-19 such as dry cough, shortness of breath, and a fever. Such
type of lower respiratory tract illness could be managed at home without
resorting to hospital admission. Our objectives include development of: 1) a
multi-modality system for diagnosing illness conditions for COVID-19 and similar
contiguous diseases; 2) a software telemedicine interface with algorithms that
learn and assess the need for further hospitalization; 3) a pilot
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.