* 2030602
* SBIR Phase I:  Cell-derived vesicles loaded with novel anti-inflammatories for treatment of severe COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Alain Delcayre, JUPITER THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,961.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a novel treatment option for
COVID-19 patients with life-threatening medical complications. Coronavirus
infection causes inflammatory reactions leading to acute respiratory distress
syndrome, lung and organ failure. This project builds on new methods to generate
cell-derived drug delivery vehicles that, when combined with special molecules,
specifically target inflamed tissues and modify the disease course. This drug
candidate could also impact the outcome of many diseases where runaway
inflammation underpins disease pathology, such as emerging viral and/or
bacterial threats, neurological conditions such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
disease, stroke and heart attack, autoimmune disease including lupus and
arthritis, and various cancers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project uses new technology that harnesses both
physical and chemical forces applied to cultured cells to generate cell-derived
vesicles. Compared to state-of-the-art techniques, this technology generates
vesicles with substantial improvements in product yield, generation rate, and
homogeneity, and allows control over vesicle size. Moreover, vesicles can be
generated from any cell line to optimize vesicle tropism for specific tissues in
the body. When loaded with molecules that induce inflammation-resolution such as
resolvins, these vesicles could yield a new treatment. The proposed work will
optimize vesicle production, perform vesicle characterization, and develop
efficient resolvin-loading procedures. Tissue-specific delivery and
functionality in cells and animal models of lung injury will subsequently be
assessed. The in vitro assays will measure the ability of vesicles to
specifically bind cognate receptors and block neutrophil migration and
macrophage production of pro-inflammatory mediators. The disease model will
monitor the capacity of resolvin-loaded vesicles to block and reverse
inflammation in the lung. This potential triple activity could generate an
alternate treatment modality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.