* 2030873
* Using a Data-driven Approach to Improve Persistence of Academically Talented STEM Students with High Unmet Financial Need
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Lynne Raschke, College of Saint Scholastica
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2026
* USD 999,995.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at The College of St. Scholastica. Over its five-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time students pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer science, or
mathematics. Two cohorts of academically talented first-year students with low
income and high levels of unmet financial need will receive one-year
scholarships renewable for up to four years. The goal is to reduce the Scholars’
financial burden and increase their probability of completing a STEM degree.
Project activities include a common academic experience for first-year students,
a sophomore success seminar, tutoring, and multiple community-building
opportunities, such as Family Welcome Weekend, STEM learning communities, and
faculty and peer mentoring. This project will study the role of financial aid as
well as curricular and co-curricular programming in the success of STEM
students, particularly for those with high unmet financial need. Data generated
through the comprehensive evaluation plan will inform the College’s financial
aid policies and curricular and co-curricular strategies. These results may also
guide STEM faculty and administrators at similar institutions across the country
who seek to improve STEM undergraduate student persistence. The project will
provide STEM programming opportunities to about 200 STEM students (including
non-Scholars), about 15% of whom are students of color and 57% are females.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Ten years of institutional data demonstrate that persistence and
graduation rates of STEM students declines with increasing levels of unmet
financial need, with a sharp decrease as unmet need exceeds $10,000 per year.
This project will use a data-driven process to select scholarship recipients who
would otherwise be most likely to leave STEM and/or the College due to
significant financial need. This project is designed to improve all STEM
students’ persistence at key academic transition points by delivering evidence-
based curricular and co-curricular support. To measure the success of the
project, students’ progress through the degree programs and participation in
curricular and co-curricular activities will be monitored, and student
interviews and surveys will provide information about what elements of the
project encouraged or discouraged them from persisting in STEM. Finally, this
project will study the effectiveness of the proposed strategies and share
results broadly with STEM researchers and college administrators. As a result,
this project and its findings have the potential to advance understanding about
the value of a data-driven approach to STEM student retention that could be
beneficial to other small colleges with similar academic and financial profiles.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.