* 2030128
* Thermal Transport in Dynamically Disordered Materials with Frustrated Energy Landscape
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ming Hu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Rechargeable all-solid-state batteries have become instrumental in powering
small, portable electronics and are also of interest to grid-scale energy
storage. One of the most pressing challenges of those batteries is overheating,
which is often caused by moving ions during charging and discharging.
Understanding the heat transfer process in these materials is critical for
addressing the overheating problem in batteries and improving performance of
thermoelectric energy conversion. The conventional theory fails to treat
materials with significant movement of ions. This project aims to elucidate
concomitant and competing heat and ion transport in not-quite-solid materials
such as batteries and fast ionic thermoelectrics. The knowledge gained through
this project will enable novel design of structures and materials for broad
technological needs in waste heat recovery, batteries, hydrogen storage, fuel
cells, and solar panels. The project will also develop new course materials for
undergraduate and graduate heat transfer courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently,
dynamically disordered materials have emerged as new types of building blocks
for immense functional systems, which form a judicious platform to study unique
energy exchange mechanism among a phonon sublattice and an ion-conducting
subsystem. The novelty of this project manifests itself through a fundamental
exploration of the thermal transport mechanisms of a new class of materials that
combine ordered crystalline sublattices and kinetically disordered ions as a
whole, which has thus far not been rigorously addressed by material physicists.
Closely linked atomistic simulations and pertaining methodology development,
including constructing accurate interatomic potential to describe the frustrated
energy landscape, are proposed as an approach to this end. The challenge of this
project lies in the conceivable failure of the existing computational
approaches, although mature for traditional perfect crystals and even amorphous
solids. The outcome of this project will be of both fundamental significance and
technological interest to the broader context of dynamically disordered
materials. The project will also promote the engagement of underrepresented and
minority students in research, equip the engineering students with
interdisciplinary expertise and frontier knowledge crucial to their future
careers, and fulfill the mission to prepare high quality workforce for science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.