* 2030979
* Uniting Culture, Purpose, Connection, and the Academic Journey to Advance Hawaii's Low-Income Undergraduate Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Elisabeth Dubuit, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,600,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with verified financial need.
The project will support students at the University of Hawaii Maui College and
Hawaii Community College, both of which are designated Alaska Native and Native
Hawaiian serving institutions and serve the highest percentages of Native
Hawaiian students in the nation. Over its five-year duration, the project will
fund scholarships to 48 full- and part-time students who are pursuing associates
degrees in Electronic &amp; Computer Engineering Technology, Electronics
Technology, Information Technology, Natural Sciences, and/or a bachelor’s degree
in Engineering Technology. Scholarships of up to $10,000 for four years will be
provided to incoming first year students, currently enrolled students, and
students who transfer into the engineering technology degree program. In
addition to receiving scholarships, Scholars will be mentored by STEM faculty,
participate in cohort-building activities, and have leadership and undergraduate
research opportunities. The project will provide STEM faculty with professional
development on incorporating the Indigenous Ka’ao Model across STEM courses and
on using a guided pathway tool for advising students. Moreover, the project will
establish a hybrid, distance education program in engineering technology, with
the aim to reach low-income, rural, and Native Hawaiian students on the Island
of Hawaii and in remote areas of Maui County. The broader impacts of this
project include transforming engineering education at the University of Hawaii
to broaden the participation of low-income, rural, and Native Hawaiian students.
As part of its intellectual merit, this project will study strategies to support
retention, graduation, and transfer of low-income, rural, and Native Hawaiian
students in engineering pathways. In addition, the project will determine the
effectiveness of a hybrid distance education model for serving this
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The three specific aims are to: 1) grow STEM
faculty capacity to serve low-income students; 2) increase educational outcomes
(retention, graduation, and transfer) of low-income Scholars; and 3) expand STEM
education options for low-income students. This project is timely as it can help
meet the growing need for engineering technologists on Hawaii Island. Although
much is known about evidence-based practices to increase STEM student retention
in general, little is known specifically about how to support low-income, rural,
and Native Hawaiian students in Hawaii. Each year, 40% of students (20-25
students) who declare an engineering pathway at one of the two campuses either
leave the major formally by switching to another major or informally by
switching to courses outside the major. To understand this phenomenon and
increase participation in engineering for low-income, rural, and Native Hawaiian
students, the project will use a case study model to investigate: 1) What
strategies support retention, graduation, and transfer of low-income, rural, and
Native Hawaiian students in the engineering pathways? and 2) Does a hybrid
distance education delivery model of the engineering technology degree increase
enrollment of low-income, rural, and Native Hawaiian students? This novel
research has the potential to increase understanding of factors that increase
participation of underrepresented minorities in engineering. The project will
provide nearly all STEM faculty at the two institutions with resources to
improve low-income, rural, and Native Hawaiian student outcomes. It will also
permanently establish the hybrid distance four-year engineering program on the
island of Hawaii. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.