* 2030156
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigating Attitudinal and Behavioral Changes in US Households Before, During, and After the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Sybil Derrible, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 126,351.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will investigate how American
households have adapted their attitudes and behaviors in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic with the end goal to help a rapid and stable recovery.
Virtually overnight, a large fraction of American households has transitioned
from a reality of long commutes, in-person classes and business meetings, and
in-store shopping to one of telecommuting, online classes and business meetings,
and online shopping â€“ even for groceries. Many of these changes were happening
already, but COVID-19 has pressed the fast-forward button. Not all American
households have been affected in a similar fashion, however, bringing about many
questions. In particular, this grant will help answer four questions. (1) How
are different socio-economic segments of the U.S. population changing their
attitudes and behaviors during the COVID-19 pandemic? (2) To what extent are
current (during pandemic) behaviors likely to persist after the pandemic? (3) To
what extent do behaviors return to before pandemic patterns within the one year
time period of this study? (4) How do attitudes and perceptions evolve over the
course of the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will be pursued through a nationwide, multi-wave survey. The survey includes
retrospective questions related to attitudes and behavior before the pandemic
(e.g., being risk averse, attitudes toward the economy, environment,
technology), and sections about current attitudes and preferences including
activity and travel behavior (e.g., scheduling, commuting and discretionary
travel choices pre-, during, and post COVID-19 as well as long-distance travel),
socio-demographics (e.g., employment type and status, and household
composition), and social networking and social behavior. Using a combination of
recruiting strategies (Facebook ad and targeted emailing), the grant will help
collect at least 5,000 responses, disproportionately stratified across the
nation, and distributed across a variety of socio-demographics (e.g., household
types, urban vs. rural, income, employment status during COVID-19). Follow-up
waves will be conducted 3, 6, and 9 months after the first version of the survey
has been taken to track the evolution of attitudes and behaviors over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.