* 2030771
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a rapid, point-of-care coagulation test for the investigation and treatment of COVID-19-related coagulopathy.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Galit Frydman, COAGULO MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2021
* USD 253,210.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a rapid, point-of-care
device that allows for the precision management of blood clotting (coagulation)
disorders and therapies. The proposed technology will support the development of
a fully-automated reader system, along with single-use disposable cartridges, to
enable clinical testing of COVID-19 patients with blood clotting issues. Due to
the severe inflammation that occurs during COVID-19 disease, these patients
often require frequent testing for blood clotting disorders. The proposed
technology will rapidly identify patients that are more likely to form blood
clots, and it can help evaluate the effectiveness of their current regimens;
this will have impact beyond the current pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project allows for the
determination of coagulation factor-specific inhibition and/or deficiency and
real-time monitoring of response to treatment. The development of a point-of-
care, portable, small volume coagulation assay that can be used for
anticoagulant management using a precision-medicine approach would enable the
identification of coagulation factor-specific inhibition, and, therefore, prove
to be an essential tool in the diagnosis and treatment of coagulation disorders.
This diagnostic would also be able to be used in non-COVID-19 anticoagulant
management, aiding the identification and quantification of anticoagulants in an
emergency and surgical setting and in other high-risk patients, such as
neonates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.