* 2030650
* Scholarships and Science Opportunities, Activities, and Research to Support Undergraduate STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* John Kaup, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,814.00

This project will contribute to the national demand for well-educated scientists
by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need at Furman University, a national liberal arts
university. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to
24 unique full-time students pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Chemistry, Biology,
Neuroscience, or Geosciences. Scholars will receive up to $10,000/year in
scholarship support, renewable for four years. They will also engage in
evidence-based supports and services, including an eight-day summer bridge
experience. Through their entire college tenure, the Scholars will receive
cohort-based advising that includes weekly seminar/workshop meetings during the
Scholars’ first two years. Scholars will further benefit from curricular
enhancements, including an adaptive online review of precalculus, and joint
enrollment in introductory chemistry and first-year writing courses that use
active learning and peer learning assistants. Scholars will also benefit from
guaranteed support for early undergraduate research experiences. This suite of
experiences, supports, and services is designed to enhance Scholars’ academic
and social integration, helping Scholars progress to graduation and preparation
for the STEM workforce or postgraduate STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Student
participants will be Pell-eligible, with primary objectives to: (i) ensure that
Scholar recruitment includes students self-identifying as first generation or as
members of a group that is underrepresented in STEM; (ii) improve performance
and resiliency in gateway chemistry and math courses; (iii) achieve a 90% four-
year graduation rate, with at least 85% of initial enrollees completing a
primary STEM degree. This effort expands a previous Track 1 S-STEM project to
strengthen best practices for STEM intervention applied to under-resourced
participants. Effectiveness pf project activities will be measured through
research and evaluation focusing on multiple dimensions, including quantitative
measures of academic success, STEM identity (including self-concept, sense of
purpose and STEM socialization), community belonging, resiliency, and indicators
of a life of purpose and meaning. This work seeks to advance understanding and
plans to disseminate transferable outcomes and best practices locally and
nationally, through conference presentations and publications in STEM education
journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.