* 2030894
* Developing and Encouraging Engineering Professionals within a Commuter Student Population
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Hazel Marie, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 999,971.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Youngstown State University. Most students at
this University are commuter students who live off campus, have part-time or
full-time jobs, and must balance responsibilities outside their academic work.
Over the five-year project duration, thirty commuter students will receive
scholarships. The Scholars will be recruited in two annual cohorts of fifteen
students, who can be first-year or transfer students enrolled full- or half-
time. These Scholars will pursue bachelor’s degrees in engineering fields
including chemical, civil, electrical, industrial, mechanical, and
manufacturing. The Scholars will receive annually renewable scholarships for up
to four years. In addition, the Scholars will have access to established and new
support structures that emphasize community building, mentoring, and development
of professional and leadership skills. The proposed project has significant
intellectual merit because it addresses two gaps related to the academic success
of commuter students: (i) limited scholarly literature on the integration of
commuter students into college support systems; and (ii) limited attention of
colleges to the needs of commuter students. Broader impacts of the project
include the potential to transform the culture and outcomes of the engineering
programs at a commuter campus and, simultaneously, strengthen the regional
economy by providing additional engineers to fill technology-related job
openings in Ohio. The proposed model for engineering student success is expected
to be informative for designing student support structures on commuter campuses
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase
STEM degree completion rates of low-income, high-achieving undergraduate
commuter students with demonstrated financial need. The project will generate
new knowledge by investigating the effectiveness of the support model for
increasing commuter student persistence to graduation. The value of this
knowledge is elevated by the relatively unique institutional setting, which
features a primarily commuter campus with several fully accredited engineering
programs. Two research questions are posited: (i) How do undergraduate
engineering commuter students experience academic and social integration into
the University? and (ii) How do cohort-based student learning communities
influence integration of engineering commuter students? Answers to these
questions will be sought through collection and analysis of quantitative and
qualitative data from surveys, in-person interviews, and focus groups. The
project management team has the required expertise, including engineering and
science education researchers who will lead the educational research activities.
A qualified external evaluator will examine project execution and monitor the
extent of adherence to the project management plan. The plan for dissemination
of project results is robust and comprehensive, including on-campus
presentations, professional engineering conferences, social networks, and K-12
outreach. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.