* 2030197
* SBIR Phase I: COVID-19: Self-Disinfecting Nanofiber Filters and Reusable Facemasks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Amita Nakarmi, BAONANO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a demonstration of a high-quality, self-
disinfecting facemask, which is safe, comfortable, and reusable, and will have
an immediate impact during the current COVID-19 pandemic. The filter media used
in modern facemasks are either inefficient in filtrating submicron size viruses
or are difficult to breathe through and highly uncomfortable. Viruses can be
active on a facemask for up to one week. With the possibility of contamination
and without a self-disinfection function, facemasks must be disposed of after
single use. The proposed highly efficient and self-disinfecting filtration
technology will solve these problems. The reusability will also directly address
the facemask supply shortage as well as waste disposal issue. In the long term,
this technology may be further applied as window screens for blocking and
disinfecting airborne pathogen particles. The self-disinfection function could
be adapted for other personnel protective equipment as well as for environment
self-disinfection and for food packaging, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an innovative
filtration medium for a disruptive facemask technology by effectively capturing
submicron particles including viruses via a nanoparticle-functionalized
nanofiber mat that has high filtration efficiency and is thin with low air flow
resistance. The technology will also deactivate pathogens in-situ via the
ambient, light-enabled, photocatalytic disinfection function of nanoparticles
and the subsequent synergetic effects that include physical and chemical
disruption of virus membranes and their RNA/DNA. The functionalized catalysts
absorb ambient light, producing reactive oxygen species to disinfect pathogens,
while the plasmonic effects enhance the light absorption. The charged
nanoparticles are firmly embedded on the electrospun nanofibers, and the
resulted surface irregularity, the improved charge density, and the hydrophilic
absorption further boost the filtration and trapping efficiency through
mechanical and electrostatic capture of aerosol particles. Taken together, all
these effects may lead to a highly efficient, breathable, reusable facemask with
in-situ self-disinfection functionality to combat highly infectious viruses and
a broad spectrum of pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.