* 2030861
* Curricular, Co-curricular, Social, and Financial Supports for Successful Transfer and Graduation of Engineering Undergraduates from Rural/Nontraditional Backgrounds
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Bulmuo Maakuu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,070,087.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Polk State College and the University of South Florida. The
participating students will pursue an Associate degree at Polk State College and
transfer to the University of South Florida to complete a bachelor’s degree in
engineering. Over its five-year duration, the project will provide four-year
scholarships to 50 full- or part-time students, in two cohorts of 25 students.
To facilitate transfer students’ transition to the University and support their
academic success, the project will provide (a) a Pre-Engineering Academy, (b)
Grand Challenges-focused project-based learning, (c) peer-led course-driven
learning communities to create a social learning environment, (d) proactive
advising and mentoring, and (e) career competency training. The novel feature of
this project is its role as a conduit to ensure academic success and social
integration for rural, non-traditional transfer students into a metropolitan
research-intensive university. The project expects that such supports will
enable the students to earn an associate's degree and a bachelor’s degree in
engineering, thus opening up greater opportunities for employment and career
success. The project will leverage and enhance relationships between high
schools in rural parts of Polk County, and will recruit non-traditional students
through the Gateway to College Collegiate High School. Lessons learned and
guidelines for building successful STEM transfer support systems will be
disseminated to other institutions intending to build effective academic and
social pathways between two-year and four-year institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Specifically, the project aims to create a bridge from associate
to baccalaureate degree completion through curricular, co-curricular, social,
and financial interventions specifically tailored to the students’ needs. Rural
community college students transferring to a four-year institution face
additional socio-cultural challenges compared to suburban or urban transfer
students, with social acclimatization explicitly needed for rural students
transferring to an urban university. This project will investigate the impact of
the proposed curricular and co-curricular activities on community college
students’ retention, transfer, and degree attainment, and the effect of those
activities on students’ engineering identity development. The project will also
examine the effects of curricular and co-curricular activities on community
college transfer students’ social acclimatization in moving from a rural to a
metropolitan environment. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.