* 2030665
* Increasing Retention and Graduation of STEM Undergraduates through Scholarships and a Learning Community Combined with Academic, Social, Professional, and Family Supports
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* HSI-JEN YEH, Azusa Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 649,987.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income STEM undergraduates. The project is
located at Azusa Pacific University, a Hispanic-serving institution. Over its
five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to 14 students, who are
enrolled at least half-time and are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computer
science, engineering, mathematics, and/or physics. Scholars will enter the
project in their first year in college and will be supported for four years.
They will participate in a STEM learning community that includes enrollment in
common courses, peer and faculty mentoring, and academic success coaching.
Additional Scholar supports include a STEM-focused success coach who will
provide career guidance, as well as internships and research opportunities. A
distinguishing feature of this project is organization of regular family
gatherings designed to include Scholars’ families in supporting their students’
degree completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project aims to increase the Scholars’
first-year retention and four-year graduation rates. In doing so, the project
intends to establish an enduring STEM-focused recruitment pipeline that includes
local high schools with highly diverse student populations. The project will
advance understanding of the effectiveness of pairing significant scholarship
support with mentorship, both peer-to-peer and faculty-to-student. With expert
guidance from nationally recognized consultants, the project expects to provide
Scholars with transformative mentoring experiences, and produce nationally
normed, measurable results of project effectiveness. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.