* 2030347
* STTR Phase I:  Microbial Discovery and Biosynthesis of Targeted Protease Inhibitors (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Levi Kramer, THINK BIOSCIENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,937.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase 1 project is to develop new lead compounds for treating
COVID-19 by using microbial systems. The microbial assembly approach, which
enables rapid, fermentation-based scale-up of therapeutic candidates for pre-
clinical studies and early human trials, could accelerate the pace and reduce
the cost of therapeutic development. Broad-spectrum therapeutics for COVID-19
could shorten hospital stays, reduce disease-associated mortality and morbidity,
and help combat future coronavirus diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase 1 project will use engineered
microbial systems to identify and build antivirals for treating COVID-19. The
approach departs from contemporary efforts to use microbial systems for the
production of known, pharmaceutically relevant molecules by using them for the
identification, evolution, and biosynthesis of new (or previously
uncharacterized) biologically active agents. The research exploits contemporary
approaches to synthetic biology to develop a microbial strain that detects
inhibitors of enzymes needed for viral infection by SARS-CoV-2, and it will use
that strain to (i) screen a library of late-stage pharmaceutical compounds for
therapeutic candidates and (ii) build natural products that inhibit those
enzymes. If successful, it will yield a set of therapeutic candidates for
treating COVID-19 and a simple, easily shared microbial platform for screening
compound libraries for targeted antivirals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.