* 2030313
* RAPID: Graduate student experiences of support and stress during the COVID-19 pandemic
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Craig Ogilvie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 04/30/2022
* USD 163,033.00

RAPID: Understanding Graduate Student Experiences of Support and Stress During
the COVID-19 Pandemic &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 has rapidly upended
graduate students’ learning, research, and teaching. Carefully crafted career
paths that often require substantial investments by both students and their
institutions have been placed at risk due to newly imposed challenges. These
challenges include limited access to classrooms and labs, disruption to current
and planned collaborations, increased stress and anxiety, and new
responsibilities for children and other family members. This impact is
particularly acute for graduate students with marginalized identities (e.g.,
students of color, low-income students) who are often already struggling with
existing inequalities. To compound matters, these hardships confront a graduate
student population that multiple studies suggest was already facing a mental
health crisis. If graduate students do not feel supported during this critical
period, the U.S. may suffer a dramatic decline in the effectiveness and
inclusiveness of its graduate-level training, resulting in long-term negative
impacts on the U.S. scientific knowledge base, society, and the broader U.S.
economy. This National Science Foundation Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award
to Montana State University, Iowa State University, and Texas A&amp;M-Commerce
will support research on: postsecondary institutional policies and practices
that are designed to help graduate students feel supported during the COVID-19
pandemic and the influence of these efforts on graduate student educational and
career decision-making. The study will contribute to a research base for
graduate school administrators and faculty about how to immediately help
graduate students during a crisis, as well as what strategies might be most
effective for supporting graduate students in STEM fields and more broadly as
they make degree and career-related decisions as society emerges from the
crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a multi-institution, two-phase
explanatory mixed method study of graduate students’ experiences during the
COVID-19 pandemic, their perceptions of institutional support, and near-term
impact of this support on educational and career decision-making. The research
team will leverage existing institutional higher education networks to solicit
the participation of 15 institutions and disseminate questionnaires to 30,000
graduate students in late spring/early summer 2020. The research is informed by
scholarship on trauma and disaster response. The survey, which will include
validated trauma scales that measure post-traumatic stress disorder-like
symptoms, anxiety, and depression, will be designed by an interdisciplinary team
that includes trauma and mental health experts. Team members will then conduct
virtual focus groups using semi-structured qualitative interview protocols to
explore students’ experiences and reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic in-depth,
and how these experiences relate to their identities, persistence, and career
aspirations. Researchers will integrate both quantitative and qualitative data
to further interpret, explain, and provide new insights to understanding
graduate student experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic. Analyses will pay
particular attention to student experiences related to race, class, gender, and
other socio-demographic factors. Multiple efforts will be made at each stage to
recruit and support participation of underrepresented minority STEM graduate
students in the study. Results of the research will be disseminated through peer
reviewed scholarship, a white paper, and workshops providing graduate college
leadership and STEM faculty with research-based guidelines on how to support the
broadest range of their graduate students during a time of crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award is made by the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program in the Division of Graduate
Education/Directorate of Education and Human Resources using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.