* 2030552
* Implementation of a Contextualized Computing Pedagogy in STEM Core Courses and Its Impact on Undergraduate Student Academic Success, Retention, and Graduation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Pauline Entin, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth. Over its five-year duration,
it will fund scholarships to twenty-eight unique full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, or
physics. Scholarships will be awarded to first-time students for up to four
years and to transfer students for up to two years. In addition to providing
scholarships, the project plans to improve computing education by teaching
computing though real-world contexts that include either computational research
or authentic consulting. This learning will be integrated into the core STEM
courses. The project team also plans to provide Scholars with intensive
mentoring, which will focus on career development. The project will assess how
problem-based computational teaching in core STEM classes, coupled with
scholarships, proactive mentoring, and sustained career advising, affect the
success, retention, and graduation of low-income students. Furthermore, it may
provide a reproducible model for integrating financial support, mentoring, and
discovery-based education, while helping to prepare a STEM workforce capable of
computation and data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific objectives include
developing and implementing a problem-based computing and analysis module in at
least one new course every year for every involved STEM major and engaging every
Scholar in computation-themed research or consulting for at least one semester.
Every Scholar will have a faculty and near-peer mentor and will be encouraged to
participate in at least one career event per year. The project will seek to
determine what roles proactive faculty and peer mentoring play in increasing
students' sense of belonging and self-efficacy in STEM and whether integrating
undergraduate research, problem-based computing modules, and authentic learning
within core STEM curricula increases retention and career aspirations of
academically talented low-income students. To answer these questions, surveys
and student-tracking will be used to study the curricular and co-curricular
activities' effectiveness. Project evaluation will explore a cross-section of
activities and impacts, the insights from which will inform both formative and
summative aspects of the work. These findings and modules will be disseminated
through websites, national conferences, and annual workshops with three
community colleges so they can be adapted and implemented by other institutions.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers and generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.