* 2030871
* Genomic Architecture Underlying Biochemical Diversity and Molecular Convergence  within the Carnivorous Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Victor Albert, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 09/30/2024
* USD 975,421.00

The central goal of the proposed research is to examine how prey digestion among
distantly-related carnivorous plants has evolved and is regulated. The
remarkable capability of carnivorous plants to obtain nutrients from non-soil
sources, namely insects, has independently arisen perhaps ten separate times in
the flowering plants. The carnivorous habit involves attraction, capture, and
digestion of prey, and this project focuses on the latter characteristic while
specifically testing whether common plant defense proteins have been repeatedly
repurposed for acquisition of essential nutrients. Strength in the research lies
in the interdisciplinary approach in which multiple species will be compared to
address this question. The research has significant potential to inform plant
physiology, including studies of nutrition and functions of plant hormones.
Additionally, outcomes of this proposal also have broad implications for
understanding plant defense, and may result in the discovery of novel proteins
for use in plant disease management and alternative technological applications.
The project will enable training of graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse and underrepresented backgrounds, and findings will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate-level courses. Through established collaborations,
the project will support public programs for K-12 students and adults aimed at
teaching concepts related to biological evolution using charismatic carnivorous
plants.&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine the extent co-option has played in
the functional diversification and regulation of common plant defense proteins,
specifically pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins, used in prey digestion among
independently-evolved carnivorous plants. Using methods in comparative genomics,
and a transcriptomics approach coupled with targeted treatments, the project
aims to: (1) determine which digestive-functional genes are expressed within the
traps of distantly-related Drosera and Pinguicula species, and if these loci are
homologous to PR genes used in plant defense, (2) investigate differential
expression and regulation of PR genes with trap-specific expression induced by
prey, wound-signaling, and phytohormone cascades, and (3) elucidate the
mechanisms by which PR genes have evolved by examining gene birth-death, changes
in selection pressures promoting functional divergence, genome structural
context, and mechanisms for gene family expansion. The research benefits from
new genome assemblies, builds upon preliminary RNA-seq data, and lays the
foundation for studies of adaptive genomic architecture across the carnivorous
plants. Data resulting from the project will also facilitate future projects
devoted to systematics, trait evolution, development, and genome evolution. A
study of the genes underlying nutrient acquisition will not only add to an
evolutionary understanding of plant carnivory, but will have the potential to
transform present understanding of the mechanisms by which the evolutionary
dynamics of gene families and gene expression drive phenotypic
novelty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.