* 2030811
* I-Corps: Flexure mechanism-based advanced nanopositioning motion stages for the semiconductor industry
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Shorya Awtar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cost-effective, high-speed, nanopositioning stage for use in
the semiconductor industry. A nanopositioning stage is a macro-scale motion
system that is capable of nanometric precision and resolution. Given the
nanometric feature sizes in the semiconductor devices found in everyday
electronics such as computers, mobile devices, displays, etc., nanopositioning
stages are used in various steps of semiconductor device manufacturing and
metrology. Conventional nanopositioning motion systems are either too slow:
limiting process throughput, or too expensive: leading to higher production cost
of semiconductor devices. The challenges associated with the current systems
result in higher retail costs of electronic products. Commercialization of the
proposed nanopositioning stages may lead to yield improvements in semiconductor
manufacturing, resulting in lower costs of production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of cost-effective, high-speed,
nanopositioning stages that use flexure mechanisms. Conventional nanopositioning
stages based on ball bearing technology provide a large range of motion, but are
limited by slower speeds and settling times because of their size. Slower
settling times lead to lower throughput in the various processes where these
motion systems are used. Maglev-based nanopositioning stages offer larger ranges
of motion as well as higher speeds but are expensive, and their cost is
justified only in limited applications. Flexure mechanism-based nanopositioning
stages are compact, affordable, and have existed for decades. Flexure mechanisms
are jointless, monolithic structures that are free of friction, backlash, and
assembly. However, these stages suffer from significant trade-offs between range
of motion and high speed. Large range of motion results in geometric non-
linearities, which in turn lead to complex dynamics and control challenges.
Previous basic research in non-linear flexure mechanics and dynamics, flexure
mechanism design, electromagnetic actuators, and control schemes have helped
overcome these historical tradeoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.