* 2030154
* SWIFT: LARGE: Averting Wireless Spectrum Pollution in the Era of Low-Power IoT
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anthony Rowe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project seeks to address the problem of spectrum pollution in the Internet-
of-Things (IoT) era. Spectrum pollution is an inevitable challenge that emerges
when low-cost and low-power wireless IoT devices deployed at scale cannot detect
and respect the presence of other devices on shared spectrum. The core challenge
is the low-power and simplicity of most IoT devices, due to which they are
narrowband and unable to sense and avoid incumbents on shared spectrum. The
project investigates a system that allows teams of geo-distributed low-power
devices to quickly and efficiently scan wide bandwidths to avert interference.
This proposal presents Swallow, a system design for low-power devices to sense
spectrum at minimal energy and cost, allowing these devices to behave as low-
cost and distributed spectrum observatories. The testbed developed through the
project will serve as a vehicle for undergraduate and graduate-level projects as
well as workshops for K-12 students in the City of Pittsburgh. The team has
direct experience working with sensor deployments both at Carnegie Mellon, the
City of Pittsburgh, United States Geological Survey (USGS), and local industry
partners and will leverage these connections to deploy Swallow at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study a low-power analog frontend
and associated digital processing that allows IoT devices to summarize large
bandwidths using inexpensive components. It investigates an end-to-end system
design that collates measurements from distributed individually low-power IoT
devices to obtain a shared spectrum map. It further develops an accurate
localization framework to geo-locate individual IoT devices to sample spectrum
occupancy at fine-spatial resolution. The wide bandwidth of Swallow’s low-power
frontend naturally leads to an accurate solution for time-of flight based
localization, where bandwidth is a key metric that dictates system accuracy.
Swallow proposes a sub-meter accurate ranging solution for low-power wide-area
radios that enables detecting proximity to known passive RF devices such as
fixed radio telescopes and enables spectrum occupancy maps sampled at fine-
spatial resolution. The project will be implemented and evaluated on a large
programmable Low-Power Wide-Area Networking testbed in the Carnegie Mellon
University campus that serves large parts of the City of
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.