* 2030972
* Supporting Perseverance and Degree Completion in a Diverse Undergraduate STEM Cohort through Scholarships, Peer Academic Coaching, and a Career Education Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Kevin Johnson, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2026
* USD 989,075.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
and mathematicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Pacific University. This
University is a small residential undergraduate liberal arts institution with a
focus on serving regional and local underserved populations. Over its five-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 65 unique full-time students
who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in bioinformatics, biology,
chemistry, computer science, environmental science, mathematics, and physics.
Students in this ‘small-college-model’ cohort will include first-year,
returning, and transfer students. Scholars will receive two to four years of
scholarship support and concurrent targeted support services through their
fourth year of undergraduate study. The project is designed to serve a cohort of
Scholars that is diverse in both STEM discipline and academic year in college.
It is expected that this diversity will create an environment that promotes
academic and social success through peer support and interdisciplinary STEM
learning and discovery. Building on the University’s existing student support
services, the project will pilot test and evaluate the effects of two new
academic support programs for STEM students: structured STEM-specific peer
academic coaching and mentoring, and a three-course STEM career education
curriculum. The project seeks to advance understanding of the extent to which
financial support, faculty mentoring, peer coaching and mentoring, career
education, and cohort development may synergistically support student
persistence to degrees in STEM disciplines. As a result, it has the potential to
broaden participation in the national STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This
program will support Scholars’ completion of baccalaureate STEM degrees and
prepare them for STEM careers. Programmatic elements of the project include
weekly seminar meetings, peer academic coaching, and a STEM career education
curriculum. Formative assessment of these targeted programmatic elements will
inform ongoing implementation and identify best practices for supporting
students' persistence in STEM. To evaluate Scholars’ development of a
professional and social orientation toward STEM disciplines, the cohort will be
evaluated via a longitudinal study that will survey students’ self-reported
‘belonging’ in STEM course work, STEM self-identification, perceived faculty and
institutional support, perceived parental/family support, and STEM career
orientation. Participant’s academic and professional outcomes will be correlated
to their professional and social development as well as participation in the
project interventions. This project will address a knowledge gap in post-
secondary STEM education research regarding best practices for delivery of STEM-
specific peer academic coaching and career education curriculum. In addition to
dissemination to the STEM education community through presentations and
publications, the conclusions of this study will be disseminated within
professional organizations for undergraduate academic support and career
services. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.