* 2030535
* STEM Scholars: Supporting Graduation of Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics Majors by Developing Their STEM Ethical Knowledge and Identity as Scientists
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Kristy Wilson, Marian University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2026
* USD 649,465.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Marian University. This
University is a Catholic and Franciscan university in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Over its five-year duration, the project aims to fund scholarships to at least
15 full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry,
or mathematics. The Scholars will be recruited in two cohorts of first-year
students and receive up to four years of scholarship support. The project will
provide Scholars with innovative support services focused on strengthening their
understanding of the role of ethics in STEM and building their identities as
STEM professionals. The project aims to advance understanding of the value of
ethics instruction and identity-building activities in retaining and graduating
STEM students. It also plans to diversify the local STEM workforce and help to
meet STEM workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. A known contributor to
retention in STEM is the development of students’ self-identity as STEM
professionals. However, the efficacy and impacts of ethics instruction on
professional identify are scarcely researched aspects of STEM education. Marian
University will recruit students from local Catholic schools, public schools,
and community colleges to study the effectiveness of early-career ethics
coursework and STEM activities designed to build identity as a scientist. The
project will be guided by two research questions: 1) How does the introduction
of Responsible Conduct of Research principles and subsequent evaluation of case-
studies impact a student’s ability to recognize and apply these principles to
various research scenarios and make ethically sound decisions regarding their
own research projects? 2) To what extent does the intentional discussion of
identity issues surrounding STEM majors affect their self-identification as
“scientists” throughout their undergraduate career and to what extent do these
students cite specific aspects of identity development as contributing to their
persistence in STEM? Expected project outcomes include that at least 80% of the
Scholars will remain in STEM majors into their third semester, at least 70% will
graduate with a STEM major, and all graduating Scholar will be placed into STEM
employment or graduate education. The project will be evaluated by an external
evaluator based on student academic and career outcomes, student perceptions of
themselves, and the value of participation in the project. It will also
synthesize these results into lessons learned for replicating and scaling the
project. Project findings will be disseminated by investigators and
participating students through peer-reviewed publications and regional research
venues. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.