* 2030800
* RAPID: Public Responses to Personal and Societal Risk: Attitudes and Behavior on COVID-19 and Global Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Elke Weber, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2022
* USD 191,160.00

The project studies public responses to COVID-19 and global change in order to
advance the health, prosperity and welfare of American citizens and promote the
progress of science. Addressing COVID-19 and global change requires large-scale
collective action and governmental response. Yet, for both issues, the
consequences of inaction are delayed, the costs and benefits of inaction are
unequally distributed, and harms grow exponentially over time, if unattended.
These features make it hard to learn from experience and lead to drastic
underestimates of the costs of inaction. However, the response of the American
public to the two risks appears to be very different. This research project will
systematically compare public perceptions and reactions in the United States to
these two crises, tracking them over the coming months as the COVID-19 pandemic
continues to unfold. Understanding people’s perceptions and responses will
highlight promising (and likely different) policy responses to each crisis. A
better social scientific understanding of public reactions to the COVID-19
pandemic under conditions of great fear and deep uncertainty is crucial to
inform the design of effective and efficient policy interventions and
implementation by public and private actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
seeks to understand the determinants and consequences of public responses to
COVID-19 and global change and will examine both the analytic and affective
dimensions of these responses. A large nationally-representative panel survey (n
= 4,000) enables the research team to examine how different segments of the
public respond to each risk and to test focused hypotheses comparing these
responses. The longitudinal dataset will allow the researchers to understand how
these responses evolve as the pandemic, and exposure to the pandemic, unfold
over time and against a rapidly evolving backdrop of COVID-19 incidence and
response. The survey instrument examines several DRMS theories of long-standing
importance: (1) Psychological risk dimensions; (2) Decisions from experience and
the prediction that personal experience of (extreme) consequences shapes
decisions under risk and uncertainty more than mere knowledge of their
likelihood; (3) Finite pool of worry and theories of people’s limited ability to
attend to or worry about multiple hazards at a time. From a political science
perspective, the teams examines how public attitudes and behavior are affected
by polarization in the American electorate and by variation in trust in
institutions. Collecting panel data on four occasions over the course of the
next year tracks changes in Americans’ risk perceptions, trust and distrust in
various actors, and in their willingness to engage over this unique, critical,
and uncertain time period, when COVID-19 infections and risks will abate and
resume in response to differential enforcement and relaxations of lock-down
measures across states. Key explanatory variables for the hypotheses include
political party affiliation, levels of social trust, trust in science, personal
experience, and visceral concern and dread. Novel survey experiments probe
support for multilateral action, connection to air pollution, links between
attitudes on the pandemic and support for green infrastructure programs, and
comparative willingness to pay for government policy action on the two
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.