* 2030653
* RAPID: Survey Study of COVID-19 Responses in Southeast Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 430,839.00

This time-sensitive RAPID project focuses on public risk responses to the
COVID-19 crisis in rural Alaska. The project involves a two-part attitudinal and
behavioral survey in Southeast Alaska rural communities, which were
disproportionately affected by the 1918 flu pandemic. The initial survey will be
conducted immediately to assess current attitudes and behaviors relative to
COVID-19. A follow-up survey conducted six months later will document what, if
any, changes in public attitudes and behaviors have occurred. This research
leverages the current crisis to provide insight on the differences in COVID-19
risk perception and behavior between Alaska Natives and rural Alaskans and
Americans in the Lower 48 states. The work will contribute to better
understanding how geographic variation and isolation impact pandemic attitudes
and behaviors and to state and national preparedness to future public health
crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research leverages existing partnerships in
communities to maximize participation and engagement. Two sets of surveys of
rural residents of Southeast Alaska are supplemented with qualitative interviews
that contextualize COVID-19 perceptions and behaviors. Broader impacts are
ensured through community engagement activities involving existing local
partners and include participation of researchers in the award-winning
“Scientists in Schools” program, as well as public presentations and public
radio appearances. Formal dissemination of results will occur through scholarly
articles, reports, and professional presentations and through social media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.