* 2030509
* RAPID: The effect of contact network structure on the spread of COVID-19: balancing disease mitigation and socioeconomic well-being
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Matthew Michalska-Smith, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 11/30/2022
* USD 199,136.00

What makes COVID-19 spread rapidly in some places, yet slowly in others? How
should society lessen social distancing while limiting an increase in
infections? To answer these questions, this Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
project seeks to understand how patterns of interpersonal interaction
(“structure”) in social contact networks affect disease spread in a population.
The researchers will simulate a disease spreading through a variety of social
contact networks, and use machine learning to relate each network’s structure to
the number and timing of new infections. By limiting structures related to
increased disease, societies may be able to reopen other parts of their
economies while still curbing overall disease spread. The researchers will
produce an interactive web application for the public and decision-makers to
visualize trade-offs between reducing disease and maintaining social cohesion.
This research will support the professional development of an early career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to determine the inherent
risk of SARS-CoV-2 spread based on contact network structure. The researchers
will use machine learning to 1) identify network structures that influence
disease spread and 2) predict disease spread on empirical contact networks.
Important network structures will serve as targets for simulated disease
mitigation interventions (e.g. reducing structures that increase levels of
disease or increasing structures that reduce disease levels). Finally, the
researchers will investigate whether future outbreaks of COVID-19 or other
diseases could be alleviated through optimizing social contact networks ahead of
time. The outcomes of this research will inform and facilitate quick, efficient
interventions to reduce the social and economic costs of COVID-19. This research
will develop a general framework for relating disease to network structure.
Thus, results can be generalized beyond the current pandemic, serving to further
our understanding of potential future waves of COVID-19, as well as other
directly-transmitted diseases in humans, livestock, and
wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.