* 2030685
* RAPID: An Ensemble Approach to Combine Predictions from COVID-19 Simulations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Andreas Zuefle, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,998.00

Decision-makers and the general public rely on models to simulate the SARS-CoV-2
virus spread and predict the number of infections and fatalities. Model
predictions are critical to rapidly develop policy interventions that mitigate
COVID-19, to anticipate impacts on health care resources, and to strategize how
best to impose and lift public health guidelines. Existing COVID-19 models
produce radically different predictions, thus creating confusion and mistrust
over their use. Therefore, there is an urgent need to compare between the wide-
range of existing COVID-19 models and their predictions. The goal of this
project is to find a consensus among various model predictions and to make the
different model assumptions and uncertainty transparent. An interactive web-
based dashboard will serve as an open and accessible tool to inform the public,
fellow researchers, and decision-makers where existing models agree and disagree
on predictions. The predictions that are agreed upon by existing models can then
be used with greater confidence and trust as the basis for effective decision-
making to save lives and resources. Apart from the practical importance for the
implementation of effective pandemic control measures and public health
strategies, other broader impacts are professional development opportunities for
early career researchers and training opportunities for a post-doctoral scholar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To find a consensus among various model predictions, this
project will develop a novel ensemble prediction approach that (1) aligns
different COVID-19 simulation models and (2) uses a time series clustering
technique to unify model predictions. In the model alignment stage, a range of
open-source and publicly available COVID-19 simulation models will be selected,
aligned based on their parameters, and run as needed. A broad set of predictions
will be obtained from the model results, where each prediction represents a
possible world with a corresponding number of new cases, fatalities, and other
quantities of interest. The time series clustering stage will project possible
worlds into a feature space and apply clustering algorithms to find similar
possible worlds. For each cluster, a representative possible world will be
selected, enriched with measures of uncertainty, and visualized using the
dashboard. This project advances the theoretical knowledge base for model
alignment approaches and representative uncertain clustering for simulation
model predictions. The unification of model predictions into a scientific
consensus can be used to inform decision-makers better so that they can develop
life-saving interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the
Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of
Environmental Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.