* 2030590
* Scholarships and Support Strategies to Increase Retention and Graduation/Transfer of Students Pursuing Associate Degrees in Natural Science Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Curtis Shoaf, Parkland College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2025
* USD 649,771.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Parkland College, a comprehensive community
college in east central Illinois. Over its five-year duration, the project will
provide scholarships to four annual cohorts of 10 full time students who are
pursuing associate degrees in a natural science field. The Scholars will receive
scholarship support for up to two years. In addition to providing scholarships,
the project will support Scholars’ academic performance through five strategies:
faculty mentoring, peer mentoring, summer research opportunities, club
participation, and a customized project experience course. About 40% of students
at Parkland College are from groups that are not yet equitably represented in
STEM. Thus, the project has the potential to contribute to the national need for
more STEM professionals, while also increasing the diversity of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. At Parkland College, both fall-to-fall retention
rate and the graduation/transfer rate for natural science students receiving
Pell grants is about 21% lower than their non-Pell peers. The project expects to
improve the academic performance of low-income community college students in
STEM majors by providing Scholars with a coordinated collection of support
initiatives. Specifically, the project intends that the participants will reach
a spring-to-fall retention rate of 90%, fall-to-fall retention rate of 85%, and
150%-time graduation/transfer rate of 75%. Additionally, the project will seek
to ensure inclusion of students from groups that are not yet equitably
represented in STEM. The project will work with an educational researcher to
fill a gap in the STEM education research literature by examining the effects
that layering multiple strategies has on retention, graduation, and transfer
rates. To maximize the intellectual merit of the study, the project team will
develop research briefs and presentations for targeted audiences, including
academics, administrators, and policymakers. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.