* 2030677
* Scholarships, Mentoring, and Evidence-based Study Skills to Support Undergraduate Student Success in Science and Engineering at a Hispanic-Serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Taffeta Elliott, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2026
* USD 999,978.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, an public four-year,
STEM-focused Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). Over its five-year duration,
this project will fund scholarships to at least 34 unique full-time students who
are pursuing bachelor degrees in STEM disciplines including biology,
engineering, computer science, earth science, mathematics, and/or physics.
First-year students will receive four-year scholarships, and transfer students
will receive up to three-year scholarships. The project will provide students
with directed mentoring and workshops to guide students’ professional knowledge
and skill development. Students will also receive instruction about evidence-
based study strategies, to improve their study skills at a critical transition
in their first semester. The project's empirical research is designed to inform
universities how to improve study strategies and academic success of lower-
income students. A major intended outcome is increasing the number of of
traditionally underrepresented students who enter higher-paying careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project will evaluate the impact of three specific
interventions: 1) directed mentoring; 2) scholarships; and 3) presentation of
evidence on study skills by an authentic near-peer role model. Previous research
has shown that community-building and directed mentoring can increase retention
at large research universities. This project will determine whether mentoring
aimed at all STEM majors can succeed at a small, public HSI. Institutional data
shows that, when financial aid sunsets before graduation, many low income
students who no longer qualify for federal aid cannot afford to finish their
degrees. This financial shortfall results in a graduation gap between Pell-
eligible and other students that grows 11% between college years four and six.
This project will address this issue with scholarships and directed mentoring,
to facilitate course selection and clear plans to achieve graduation within four
years. Study skills will be addressed through video presentations to
experimentally manipulate whether the person providing evidence on study
strategies presents either by a researcher or a role model alumnus or
upperclassman from the institution who has improved their own performance on
required science and math coursework. Project evaluation will use data about
development of students in directed mentoring, the research on identity
messaging about study skills, and the effectiveness of the scholarships
themselves to increase retention and graduation rates of STEM majors. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.