* 2030254
* RAPID: The Impact of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic on Municipal Solid Waste Management Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Tarek Abichou, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 176,129.00

The coronavirus pandemic is challenging municipal solid waste management systems
(MSWMSs). In an effort to prevent its spread, most people are working from home,
which means that they are generating a larger amount of residential waste than
normal. Further, the capacity of MSWMSs is being constrained by the increasing
number of unavailable workers due to self-quarantining and the isolation of
local areas as a result of travel bans. With a pandemic, the function and
interplay of different system components (i.e., waste collection companies,
waste transfer stations, local government agencies, material recovery
facilities, and landfills) must become more adaptive to maximize the limited
capacity, which is key to accommodating excessive waste demand. In this RAPID
project, the project team will collect ephemeral data on the impact of the
coronavirus pandemic on MSWMSs in multiple U.S. states including Florida, New
York, and California. Since the impact of the coronavirus on MSWMSs and their
responses vary across states and from urban to rural setting, these data can be
used to (i) identify and characterize a broad range of regional waste management
challenges, (ii) track the emerging adaptive behaviors different system entities
take to adequately operate municipal waste services, and (iii) specify the
system requirements and characteristics (i.e., system composition, topology, and
control) that enable successful adaptation during a pandemic. This project will
yield a database of pandemic impacts and responses and associated attributes and
variables in MSWMSs that will guide researchers, private sectors, regulators,
and planning agencies toward the creation and implementation of resilient waste
management operations for pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary project
tasks are threefold. First, the team will identify and map entities, operations,
relationships, and controls in each system through virtual meetings with waste
management companies and solid waste management authorities, and review of waste
management guidelines. This step will establish a baseline structure for the
normal operation, which will help to distinguish entities' emerging behaviors
during the pandemic. Second, an online survey will ask system entities about
their waste-related challenges and responses; the survey will occur once per
month over a six-month period. If normal operations require adaptation of system
structure, an interview will be held to gain more insight into the collective
decision-making context. Third, a virtual workshop with a technical advisory
group will be organized at the end of this project to review MSWMSs' reported
adaptive measures and discuss recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.