* 2030241
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: OCEAN Sustainability Pathways for Achieving Conflict Transformation
* GEO,RISE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Ernest Dukes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 04/30/2024
* USD 394,303.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams to address critical issues in ocean
sustainability including, conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development. This complex challenge
required that the projects utilized integrated, transdisciplinary and cross-
sectoral approaches and bring together natural and social sciences as well as
policymakers, resource managers, industries, citizens and other societal
partners. This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in
consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the participating
countries to increase our knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways needed
to accelerate sustainable use of oceans and minimize the effects from global
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to investigate how existing
conflict resolution practices impact ocean sustainability by examining how
formal interventions (law) and informal practices (negotiation) can be harnessed
toward conflict resolution. These studies are based on the idea that ocean
sustainability prospects depend on building tailor-made capabilities to analyze,
productively manage, and transform ocean conflicts. Since ocean conflict
resolution is an under-developed field of scholarship and practice, the team
aims to use comparative analysis to study conflicts that traverse the Global
North and South, in South Africa, India, Brazil, Norway/Barents Sea, Baltic Sea
and United States. The project is projected to help develop insight into diverse
ocean conflicts through real-world collaboration of context-specific research
teams that include stakeholder partners, social and natural scientists, and
conflict resolution experts. The new knowledge gained will be used to develop
and test ocean conflict resolution tools and practices. The Oceans PACT project
will generate significant scientific and socio-political benefits in the case
studies that result from this proposal, ideally forming conflict resolution
practices that foster global ocean sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.