* 2030080
* RAPID: Exosomal tRNA fragments may constitute an innate viral defense against SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory RNA viruses.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Glen Borchert, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 10/31/2022
* USD 231,020.00

Viral infection can induce formation of specific transfer RNA fragments (tRFs)
that are packaged and released from host cells in exosomes. The project aims to
discover the biological role of exosomal tRFs, specifically investigating
whether uptake of these tRFs into uninfected cells triggers an innate antiviral
immune response against SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory RNA viruses. New
insights into the influence of tRFs on host defense mechanisms against viral
infections could be exploited to combat COVID-19 and future outbreaks of related
viruses. The project also offers training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, the latter through bioinformatics course-based
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on preliminary data
suggesting that tRF exosomal delivery constitutes a novel mechanism of innate
antiviral immunity whereby tRFs prime host cells for a more robust interferon
response. The research on SARS-CoV-2 will be guided by specific questions, for
example, about the extent of exosomal tRF uptake and bioavailability in
recipient cells, whether the tRFs hybridize with viral RNAs and activate
interferon production through association with RIG-I, and whether intracellular
tRFs inhibit viral replication in cells. Characterization of a novel host
defense mechanism could potentially inform strategies for therapeutic
intervention against COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is jointly
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.