* 2030474
* EAGER: Hydrological Globalization: Exploring Urban Adaptations to Arctic Melt
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Dominic Boyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 301,694.00

This anthropological project focuses on the redistribution of water, a key
physical process linking the Arctic region to coastal cities worldwide. In order
to evaluate responses to glacial melt and rising sea levels, this project will
“follow the water” to coastal cities most affected by Arctic melt using the
“gradient fingerprint map” (GFM). The GFM calculates how much water each global
melt basin is contributing to urban coastal sea-level rise. By tracking how
physical processes link the Arctic with urban centers to the south, this
research will test the validity of “hydrological globalization,” an
interdisciplinary social scientific concept that frames social adaptations to
hydrological processes, asking whether sites physically connected through global
water flow share responses in the form of discourse, policy measures, economic
planning, and infrastructure development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site-based
study involves ethnographic and document-based research, including interviews
with government officials, scientists, industry experts tasked with scenario
planning, and members of non-governmental organizations. These participants will
provide expert insight on the types of urban adaptations policy makers and
planners are using to respond to rapid sea-level rise. Media monitoring,
evaluation of national policies and legal documents, and study of local and
national activism will provide background and context for informant interviews.
This research will advance understanding of human responses to Arctic change and
how those responses vary culturally and geographically. Broader impacts include
presentations to public audiences at each site, involving compelling human-
focused narratives that illustrate the links between the Arctic and urban sites
to the south. Dissemination of findings through local media, white papers, and
reports to stakeholders targets broader international audiences and may inform
urban policy and planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.