* 2030804
* Increasing Graduation Rates of Undergraduate Chemistry and Physics Majors by Connecting College to Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Rui Kang, Georgia College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 02/28/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project will help meet the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
persistence and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with financial
need at Georgia College and State University. Over its five-year duration, the
project will provide scholarships to eighteen full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in chemistry and/or physics. The Scholars will enter
in two annual cohorts and receive up to four years of scholarship support. The
project seeks to increase student persistence by linking scholarships with
effective supporting activities, including tutoring, team advising, mentoring,
undergraduate research experiences, service learning, graduate school
preparation, internships, and community building. The project will also support
curriculum improvements designed to increase second-year student retention.
Through project evaluation and research, new knowledge will be generated about
factors that influence educational access, persistence, and academic and post-
graduation success of STEM undergraduates, including those from populations
traditionally underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Academic and social
support activities, such as summer bridge, undergraduate research, first-year
seminar, and mentoring, can increase student persistence and success in STEM.
However, limited data exist about the impact of such activities on low-income
STEM majors who gain increased access to them by receiving additional financial
support. Specifically, little is known how these support activities affect STEM
undergraduates' engagement, self-efficacy, persistence, and post-graduation
placement. To help fill this gap, the project will investigate the effects of
early community-building activities in a low-stakes social environment on
Scholars’ persistence, engagement, and sense of belonging. It will also study
the impact of a second-year research methods and scientific communication
seminar on Scholars’ self-efficacy and interest in undergraduate research. To
better understand the career pathways and goals of academically talented, low-
income students in STEM, the project aims to determine the impact that
participation in summer internships and undergraduate research has on post-
graduation job and graduate school placement. The project evaluator will use a
mixed-methods approach to examine project implementation (outputs), the
project's impact on participants (outcomes), and strategic impacts and
sustainability of the project. The results of the project will be disseminated
by publications in peer-reviewed journals, presentations in scientific
conferences, and posting on the project website. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.