* 2030140
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Modeling and Learning-based Design of Social Distancing Policies for COVID-19
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Cynthia Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Human contacts underlie the spread of any infectious diseases including
COVID-19. For COVID-19, the widely implemented social distancing policies are
designed precisely to drastically reduce individual travels and the resulting
contacts. In a number of States, these policies have effectively reduced the
peak number of infections. These policies have also come with huge costs on the
society, economy and peopleâ€™s lives: US economy has largely come to a halt and
the number of unemployment claims has now exceeded the worst of the 2008-2009
financial crisis. This rapid COVID-19 application will develop a novel meta-
population level model simulating the spread of COVID-19 and utilize
reinforcement learning to explore optimal congregation restriction policies for
social distancing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach will develop an
SIQR (Susceptible, Infected, Quarantined, and Recovered) model integrated with
reinforcement learning for continuous monitoring and policy adjustment. The SIQR
model is built on the classic literature of the SIR (susceptible, infectious and
recovered) and SEIR (susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered) models and
enhances their capability to capture the unique quarantine features for
COVID-19. The key focus of the proposed project is on the connection of the SIQR
model to reinforcement learning to realize a control loop that provides optimal
policy in spite of sparse and noisy observations. This is an important
contribution to this emerging, interdisciplinary science of infectious disease
modeling and control. The results of this project will have both immediate
importance for designing the response to COVID-19 and also contribute to the
broader development of an interdisciplinary education and research program
involving infectious disease modeling, reinforcement learning and machine
learning of big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.