* 2030070
* Using Fine-Grained Quantitative and Qualitative Data to Enhance Curricula and Broaden Participation in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,848.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Florida State University, a Carnegie I Research University. Over its
five- year duration, this project will fund four-year scholarships to 33 unique
Scholars who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computing. The project
objectives include: (1) identifying and recruiting students with financial need
and academic talent; (2) improving retention through cohort class enrollments,
dedicated tutors, and academic support; (3) providing internship and research
opportunities to Scholars; and (4) gathering feedback to refine the computing
curriculum. A distinguishing feature of this project is the application of
natural language processing, machine learning, and traditional analyses to
examine fine-grained qualitative and quantitative data related to student
success. These analyses are expected provide insights into student retention,
the computing curriculum, the effectiveness of current support systems, and how
to encourage women and other underrepresented groups to major in computer
science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high- achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Although a growing number of jobs require expertise
in computing, only 10% of STEM graduates study computer science. This project
seeks to increase the participation of low-income, high- achieving students in
computer science. To achieve this goal, the project strategies include high
school outreach, dedicated tutors, student support systems, cohort enrollment,
and replacing student loans with scholarships. This project will investigate the
effectiveness of these activities using randomized control trial experiments. As
part of this study, the project will use natural language processing and machine
learning approaches to analyze data from Experience Sampling Method surveys to
identify and remediate gender and cultural biases in the computing curriculum.
The expected outcomes of the project include identification of curriculum
changes to encourage diversity and quantification of factors that contribute to
student success in computer science. Project evaluation will include annual data
collection and analyses of cohort demographics, academic performance, retention,
use of support systems, reasons for separation, and placement. The research
findings will be published at conferences such as SIGCSE, ASEE, FIE, and AERA.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.