* 2030545
* RAPID: Personal SARS-CoV-2 Exposure Assessment using a PDMS Wristband
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Krystal Pollitt, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;People with COVID-19 can spread the disease
through droplets expelled when coughing. There is also a possibility that
infection of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 can be spread through smaller
droplets, called aerosols, released by simply speaking or breathing. While
larger droplets quickly fall to the ground, these smaller sized aerosols can
stay in the air for longer and travel distances far greater than six feet. This
is especially concerning because infected people with no or mild symptoms could
unknowingly be contributing to the spread of COVID-19. Airborne SARS-CoV-2
aerosols have important implications for healthcare workers and people that work
in proximity to the public, such as grocery clerks or transit workers. One way
to test a person’s risk for infection is to determine the amount of virus in the
air around them. This project will develop a low-cost wristband made from a soft
silicone rubber that can be used to rapidly detect a person’s exposure to
airborne SARS-CoV-2 aerosols. This wristband’s collection efficiency will be
determined in our lab, and the ability to detect airborne viruses in a real-
world setting will be tested with healthcare workers in a hospital COVID-19
patient ward. The simple design of the wristband could shape how COVID-19
infection is assessed. This research is critical, as cases in the US peak and we
prepare for a possible second wave of infections as shelter in place orders are
eased. Results from this project will be shared with hospital networks and more
broadly with public health organizations. Wristbands will also be given to
elementary school children during cold and flu season to test for SARS-CoV-2 and
other airborne viruses as part of a learning module on the spread of respiratory
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID proposal
concerns the urgent need for monitoring levels of airborne SARS-CoV-2-laden
aerosol as a critical strategy for assessing an individual’s risk of infection
and identifying hotspots of exposure. The PI's vision is to develop a wearable,
low-cost, highly deployable sampling device called the Fresh Air wristband. The
envisioned device would passively concentrate airborne constituents onto a
polymeric membrane sorbent bar while being worn. The critical component is the
composition of this membrane, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based material, which
was chosen given its efficient sorption of non-polar compounds that potentially
include lipid enveloped viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2. An important focus of this
project is identification of the physical properties and specific configuration
of PDMS-based materials appropriate for a passive sampler, useful for simple and
rapid exposure assessment of airborne SARS-CoV-2-laden aerosols. The goal of
this NSF RAPID project is to develop a wearable low-cost environmental sampling
device for detecting personal SARS-CoV-2 exposure to inform individuals of their
potential risk of COVID-19 infection by determining the sorption characteristics
of PDMS. The urgent nature of this work stems from the need to limit exposure to
SARS-CoV-2 in order to decrease the incidence of new cases, especially in health
care and other high-risk workers. Specific research objectives include the
following: (1) Determine the size-resolved efficiency of viral collection on the
PDMS-based sampler, and (2) Demonstrate utility of the Fresh Air sampler to
assess health care providers’ exposure to airborne SARS-CoV-2. The major
outcomes of this research project include an inexpensive exposure assessment
tool and a rapid portable test protocol that individuals or groups can use to
protect their health. Project results will be disseminated by sharing exposure
data and sampler design with stakeholders at the Yale New Haven Hospital and
more broadly to other hospital networks. To increase participation, the PI plans
to introduce wristbands into a 5th grade New Haven Public School class during
the traditional cold and flu season, analyze for Rhinovirus exposure, and
develop and nationally distribute a learning module on the transmission of
respiratory viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) grant supports research that will develop a wearable
low-cost environmental sampling device for detecting personal SARS-CoV-2
exposure with funding from the CARES Act managed by the Condensed Matter Physics
Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.