* 2030087
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: The impact of public vs private metabolism on the stability of microbial communities within natural hosts
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Michael Henson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2022
* USD 83,359.00

This project generates enhanced understanding of how different microbial species
cooperatively share nutrients. It adds to the knowledge base required to develop
effective strategies to combat pathogens that exploit cooperative interactions
to infect plants, animal and humans. By combining empirical experimental work
and rigorous computational modelling, the research investigates how competition
for limited nutrients influences the composition, stability and functioning of
microbial communities. Tackling this problem requires students to be trained
according to an interdisciplinary approach that combines synthetic biology,
microbial population ecology, molecular biology and mathematical modeling. This
project is training one graduate student and at least two undergraduate students
in cutting-edge experimental and computational methods in microbial systems
biology. The research results are being integrated into graduate and
undergraduate classes, including a mathematical modeling course recently
developed by the principal investigator. To broaden participation and enhance
diversity, NSF-funded programs for women and minorities students are leveraged
to identify and recruit project personnel. This project is a collaboration
between researchers at the University of Massachusetts Amherst (US) and the
University of Exeter (UK).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Complex communities of diverse
microbial species play essential roles in the proper functioning of natural
ecosystems and the health of plant, animal and human hosts which they inhabit.
To survive and grow, microbes must acquire limited nutrients from their
environment. Metabolic interactions such as nutrient competition are key to the
formation, stability and functioning of microbial communities. Nutrient
acquisition frequently involves secretion of costly metabolic compounds that
capture or breakdown resources in the external environment. This cooperative
strategy, termed “public metabolism”, is risky as the breakdown products can be
lost into the environment or exploited by other species. Preliminary data
support the hypothesis that nutrient acquisition strategies involving either
public or private metabolism represent two opposing approaches to survival, the
success of which is environment dependent. The goal of this project is to test
this hypothesis by applying a combination of experimental and computational
approaches to two tractable synthetic systems involving the environmental yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the plant pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae. Both in
vitro and in planta experiments will be performed and mathematically modeled to
yield general conclusions about microbial interactions and community stability
from system-specific observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UKRI
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the US National Science Foundation this
project is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Integrative Ecological
Physiology program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.