* 2030593
* RAPID: Online Social Networks, Relationships, and COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Rosenfeld, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 196,830.00

The unique situation of a majority of Americans called upon to shelter in place
during the COVID-19 pandemic has created society-wide social distancing in the
U.S. for the first time since the Spanish influenza pandemic of 1918. How will
social distancing affect marriages and other romantic relationships? This
project will analyze couple stability or instability under conditions of
extraordinary stress. We know that the coronavirus pandemic will have serious
and potentially devastating short term impacts on health, mortality, employment,
and economic production. It is possible, however, that social life and social
relations may prove more resilient during the crisis than people would
ordinarily expect. An understanding of the resilience of social relationships
under extraordinary stress will provide the public with more confidence that
future crises can be overcome. As family and relationship satisfaction is a key
contributor to general well-being and low mortality, this study seeks to
understand the ability of Americans to survive the pandemic with their
relationships intact, thus contributing to health and well-being of the U. S.
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We know very little about the extent to which
social relationships can endure during a crisis that entails sustained social
distancing. This project will field two nationally representative follow-up
surveys to approximately 1600 American adults. The first follow-up survey will
take place during the COVID-19 shelter-in-place period. The second follow-up
will be fielded once the shelter-in-place orders have been substantially lifted.
Both surveys will longitudinally follow subjects and relationships first
identified in the How Couples Meet and Stay Together (HCMST) 2017 survey. The
resulting dataset will have measures of couple satisfaction, couple stability
and breakup, couple co-residence, income, employment, online social network use,
and relationship history for the same set of subjects from before, during, and
after the COVID-19 lock down. The project will analyze transitions to breakup,
transitions to cohabitation, and transitions to marriage using multivariable
event history methods. The different state prevalence of COVID-19 cases and the
variable state responses to the pandemic will represent an important natural
experiment for the social effects of a lock down policy. Findings from the
project will inform sociological theories of relationship transition involving
marriage, cohabitation, and partnering, as well as relationship
satisfaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.