* 2030188
* Scholarships, Community, and Peer Academic Support for Success of Undergraduates in Computer Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Ivelisse Rubio, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,007,298.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, this project at the University of Puerto Rico in Piedras
will provide 33 students with up to five years of scholarship support, together
with targeted services. The overall project goal is to improve recruitment,
retention of undergraduates pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computer science or
mathematics and prepare them for employment or graduate school. This program
will increase the number of Puerto Rican students who enter the scientific
career pipeline in the high demand disciplines of computer science and
mathematics. As a result, the project can help to meet the expanding need for
these professionals and increase the diversity of the workforce in STEM-relevant
sectors both locally and nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
providing scholarships to high achieving, financially disadvantaged
undergraduate students, the project will sponsor activities to: 1) increase the
awareness of Scholars about further studies or industry careers; 2) strengthen
the Scholars’ academic and professional skills; 3) build a sense of community
and develop scientific identity; 4) highlight the social and applied aspects of
computer science and mathematics; and 5) support student learning through peer
advisors and mentoring. This project will expand the research focus of previous
S-STEM awards by: (1) including Scholars as early as their second semester in
college; (3) improving the coordination and coherence of group activities, and
support Scholars in the barrier courses with periodic peer-led collaborative
interventions; and (3) studying impact of the Peer-Led Team Learning model on
Scholar retention and academic performance. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.