* 2030903
* Pathways into the Sciences:  Supporting Persistence and Graduation of Women Pursuing STEM Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* John Glendinning, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 04/30/2026
* USD 979,041.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
at Barnard College, a private women’s liberal arts college. Many academically
talented women decide to change to non-STEM majors after initially expressing a
strong interest in STEM. This project intends to help women STEM majors persist
by providing financial and other supports. Specifically, the project team will
provide one- to four-year scholarships to 30 students, admitted in five cohorts
of six students each. The Scholars will pursue bachelor’s degrees in
Biochemistry, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, or
Physics. Scholars will also participate in Barnard’s Science Pathways Scholars
Program, a four-year cohort support program that builds on prior NSF S-STEM
awards. The project will also study how math anxiety, science self-efficacy,
imposter feelings, and competitive preferences affect Scholars’ experiences and
trajectories. In doing so, the project will increase understanding about factors
that affect the success of low-income students in STEM, particularly students
who are women. These findings will be disseminated to help other educational
institutions create more effective interventions that support student success in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase degree
completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need in STEM fields. The project aims to: (1) Provide scholarships and
programming, such as faculty mentoring and career planning, to support 30
academically talented STEM students who are eligible for Federal Pell Grants;
(2) Provide a comprehensive four-year program that will help Scholars excel in
their science education, thus enhancing perseverance and graduation; and (3)
Assess the effects of existing institutional support structures and the
replacement of work-study and student loans on Scholars’ academic outcomes. The
research plan is designed to examine how targeted financial aid and structural
interventions increase retention in the sciences of women with low income and
unmet financial need. Applying regression analyses and comparisons, the
project’s research study will examine how factors such as math anxiety and
science self-efficacy shift over time. It will also seek to determine whether
competitive preferences and/or imposter syndrome impact Scholar decisions to
take more advanced science courses after disappointing grades in introductory
courses, and to identify the effectiveness of financial support differentiated
from other types of support. Annual interviews will provide in-depth information
concerning women pursuing STEM careers. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.