* 2030036
* Dimensions U.S.-China: The role of symbiotic microbes in the invasion process of emerald ash borer and red turpentine beetle
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Brian Aukema, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,443,950.00

With increased global travel and commerce, invasive species are a growing
problem. This project investigates two invasive insects that infest, feed upon,
and kill living trees. The emerald ash borer has killed hundreds of millions of
North American ash trees since its introduction to the U.S. from East Asia two
decades ago. It is expected to cause more than $10 billion in damage to the
nursery and forestry industries as well as drastically change the composition of
natural forests. Conversely, the red-turpentine beetle, native to North America,
has become a major pest of pine forests in China since its introduction from the
U.S. in the 1970s. Unfortunately, very little is understood about how these
invasive beetles adapt to their new environments to become such destructive
invasive pathogens. Microbes associated with beetles, either found living inside
their guts or carried on the surface of the beetle from tree to tree, likely
play an important role. Fungi and bacteria associated with other beetle species
can degrade wood, cause tree disease, or produce volatile chemicals that attract
even more beetles to an infested tree. In contrast, other microbes may be insect
pathogens that produce toxins that could help control beetle populations. This
research will employ both culturing and genome sequencing of microbes associated
with these invasive beetles in both the U.S. and China in order to understand
their biodiversity and how they may function to aid their insect hosts in
becoming invasive species. The research also has potential to identify microbes
that could be deployed for biological control of these forest pathogens. The
project will share results with the public through exhibits at urban farmerâ€™s
markets, community workshops, and a public website. It will also train
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM and
build international collaboration through educational exchange and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their importance in multi-trophic
interactions, microbial symbionts of insects and the hidden roles they play in
shaping biodiversity and maintaining the stability of forest ecosystems are
often overlooked. This proposal will investigate the phylogenetic, functional,
and genetic diversity of microbes associated with invasive wood-boring beetles
to understand their role in facilitating invasion of their insect hosts. Aim 1
will use community analyses of phylogenetic diversity based on microbial
culturing and metabarcode sequencing along with functional assays to uncover
relationships between phylogenetic and functional diversity. The project will
investigate specific metabolic functions of microbial communities that either
contribute to the invasion process through degradation of lignocellulose in
wood, detoxification of plant defense compounds, and production of metabolites
that enhance beetle survival (e.g. vitamins and hormones) or that inhibit the
invasion process (e.g. insect parasitism or synthesis of insect toxins). Aim 2
will use computational approaches to compare networks of taxa and/or gene
functions in microbial communities from native and invasive ranges of each
beetle to ask whether the evolution of novel symbiotic interactions between
microbes leads to metabolic innovations that assist invasion. Aim 3 will use
genome sequencing of fungal species associated with the invasive range to ask
how microbial evolutionary genetic processes (e.g. horizontal gene transfer and
genomic rearrangements) may alter the phenotypes of their insect hosts and drive
the evolution of invasive symbioses. The project will elucidate how microbial
symbionts of beetles help extend the functional phenotypes of their insect
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.