* 2030326
* STTR Phase I:  Remote assessment of respiratory function in hospital patients based on speech acoustics (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Visar Berisha, AURAL ANALYTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is the development of new approaches for remote assessment of
respiratory function during pandemics. Current pulmonary assessment methods
require in-clinic visits and they induce coughing and droplet formation, thereby
increasing the risk of disease spread. To reduce transmission risk these
assessments have been limited to only those required for immediate treatment.
The algorithms developed in this project will allow doctors to remotely monitor
patients’ respiratory function via speech provided by patients using their own
personal mobile devices. The broader impact is amplified when the developed
algorithms are integrated into telemedicine platforms. The infrastructure and
algorithms to be developed in this project will enable new remote monitoring
paradigms that remove geographic and cost barriers and broaden participation in
healthcare, with the potential to relieve the magnitude of health disparities
for persons with respiratory conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop and demonstrate
a novel approach for remote assessment of respiratory function. The critical
technical innovation is the development of a panel of acoustic-based measures
that index respiratory function and can be collected remotely from a patient’s
personal mobile device without the need for additional hardware. For the purpose
of the COVID-19 use case, a mobile application on the patient’s mobile device
will guide the patient through a series of speech elicitation tasks, returning a
context-specific assessment of respiration to the healthcare provider. The
algorithms will be integrated within an existing API and be available to
strategic partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.