* 2030960
* An Assets-based Model to Improve Science, Technology, and Mathematics Baccalaureate Completion at a Hispanic-Serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Rosa Rivera-Hainaj, Our Lady of the Lake University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Our Lady of the Lake University, a private, Hispanic-serving
institution. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
20 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Chemical Biology, Mathematics, Biomathematics, and Computer
Information Systems and Security. There will be two cohorts of scholar
recipients. Students will be recruited from high schools serving low-income
students and will receive a scholarship starting their first year in college,
for up to a total of four years as they pursue their STEM baccalaureate degree.
Our Lady of the Lake University is seeking to help students majoring in science,
technology and mathematics bridge the divide between home/community and school
through financial support in the form of scholarships and early and ongoing
inclusion of families. This project will examine how to bridge the connection
between college and the home/community of low-income students for the purpose of
improving students’ retention and graduation rates. The project aims to increase
student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with effective
support activities, including a STEM Living Community, cohort seminar courses,
multi-tiered mentoring, peer tutoring, and career counseling. Additionally,
there will be the application of culturally responsible activities designed to
build upon the strength of students' home/communities, including virtual
interactions, encouraged communication, and family celebrations. Because Our
Lady of Lake University has a high population of students underrepresented in
their participation in STEM fields of study, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in those fields and to learn how cohort building,
mentoring, peer tutoring, and activities designed to keep students connected to
their home and community will support retention and graduation of this student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion and increase career readiness of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This project will
contribute to the knowledge of STEM student success in examining the impact of
an assets-based, culturally responsive approach toward understanding Latinx STEM
student baccalaureate success. After a thorough review of the literature on
discipline-based education research, teaching and learning, cultural community
wealth theory, and assets-based interventions this project aims to answer the
following question: How does leveraging socio-cultural and familial factors and
academic and student support activities affect the likelihood that students will
graduate in a STEM major? Quantitative and qualitative approaches will be used
to examine psychosocial constructs (self-efficacy, self-concept, sense of
belonging, family perceptions) and the role they play in persistence,
graduation, and intent to remain in STEM after graduation. Much of the
literature on student success initiatives centers on Predominantly White
Institutions and/or large, public institutions. This project will contribute to
the STEM education knowledge base by identifying strategies that affect
persistence and graduation rates for minoritized groups and low-income post-
secondary students. Through intentional outreach and recruitment in high schools
with high concentrations of poverty, this project will broadly impact the full
participation of academically talented low-income students that are
underrepresented in STEM. This project will be evaluated assessing the total
number of students enrolled, retention rates, graduation rates, and intent to
pursue graduate education or professional careers in STEM fields. The results of
the research will be published and made available to other institutions who wish
to implement a similar approach. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.