* 2030466
* RAPID: Structure, Function and Dynamics of SARS Coronavirus-2 Main Protease 3CLpro Determined with Mix-and-Inject Serial XFEL Crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Marius Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,566.00

An award is made to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) to investigate
the molecular mechanism of an essential coronavirus protease reaction in real
time. This project addresses fundamental questions how the SARS coronavirus-2
(CoV-2) proliferates. CoV-2 is the source of the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic,
which severely impacts public health and national prosperity. The CoV-2 main
protease, also called 3CLpro, catalyzes an essential reaction for assembly of
CoV-2 infectious particles. If the 3CLpro is blocked, the virus cannot assemble,
and its spread is effectively suppressed. The goal is to characterize the
3CLpro’s catalytic cycle at ambient temperatures with X-ray structures. This
research takes advantage of opportunities at X-ray Free Electron Lasers (XFELs)
such as the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) at Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center in Menlo Park, CA. XFELs are the strongest X-ray sources in the world
that make it possible to capture molecular reaction intermediates at near atomic
resolution within biologically relevant temperatures and time scales. The unique
opportunities at XFELs will advance the understanding of 3CLpro catalysis and
its function in the proliferation of the virus and contribute to the elimination
of the pandemic. This project will involve UWM graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers who will be trained in newest data collection and data
analysis methods at XFELs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In host cells the SARS-CoV-2’s
RNA genome is translated by host ribosomes into a long polypeptide strand that
must be cleaved into functional proteins. This is achieved by the CoV-2 3CLpro.
If the 3CLpro is inhibited, the newly formed virus particles cannot assemble
correctly and become non-infectious. This project structurally characterizes the
catalytic cycle of the 3CLpro at XFELs. XFELs are extremely powerful,
femtosecond-pulsed X-ray sources, which became available to a wider community a
decade ago. At XFELs, crystal structures that are essentially free of radiation
damage can be determined at ambient (near physiological) temperatures. Within
3CLpro microcrystals the catalytic cycle will be initiated by diffusion of
substrate. Since the crystals are so small, diffusion is not rate-limiting.
Microcrystals are mixed with substrate at various time delays before the mixture
is injected into the X-ray beam, a method known as ‘mix-and-inject’ serial
crystallography (MISC). MISC will be used to follow the 3CLpro enzymatic
reaction in real time with X-ray structures of reaction intermediates. The
binding of small compounds that inhibit the 3CLpro will be probed at near atomic
resolution at relevant temperatures. Results will (i) aid the design and
discovery of new inhibitory compounds that affect the function of this essential
protease and prevent the formation of infectious viral particles, and (ii)
contribute to the development of MISC as an applicable method at XFELs, to be
used for the structural characterization of reactions in biologically
significant molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.