* 2030029
* SWIFT: LARGE: Design and Operating Principles of a Wave-Controlled Holographic MIMO System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Ender Ayanoglu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,100,000.00

The capacity of massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO) networks is shown to be
theoretically unlimited as the number of antennas grows, provided that the
spatial correlation inherent in the propagation channel is exploited. This
proposal employs this observation using the assistance of novel “intelligent
reflecting surfaces” (IRS) that can adaptively modify the spatial
characteristics of the MIMO channel. The overall project goal is to improve
spectrum efficiency and co-existence. To achieve this goal, the proposed device
employs a metasurface with cells whose reflection properties can be programmed
to take an impinging electromagnetic field and reshape the reflected field. For
coexistence, a narrow beam of energy impinging on the IRS could be redirected
towards a receiver that might otherwise be blocked from the transmission.
Furthermore, the IRS can provide very complex reflection patterns to re-equalize
the wireless channel links. The novelty of the proposal is the fact that the
phase shifts are governed not by individual controls that would require numerous
bulky electrical connections, but by electromagnetic waves launched onto thin
waveguides on the reflecting surface. Given the boundary conditions of these
waveguides, the controlling wave is designed as a linear superposition of
periodic modes whose coefficients determine the phase shifts. A prototype of
this device will be built and algorithms for its control and the control of the
massive MIMO network will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be four
research activities. In the first, a novel IRS architecture with electromagnetic
wave control will be designed. In the second activity, reduced-dimension
algorithms for single-cell control of the IRS will be developed, together with
corresponding methods for estimating the channel state information. The third
activity will focus on the use of machine learning algorithms for incorporating
multiple such IRS into a multi-cell setting with many users, in order to
optimize the resulting huge number of parameters required for control of the
phase shifts as well as channel state information acquisition and control
functions such as base station handover. The fourth research activity will focus
on testing our novel IRS prototype in a point-to-point MIMO network to
demonstrate its ability to improve the link performance by means of the reduced
dimension control variables. The development of the proposed IRS and its control
will achieve high spectral efficiency while allowing for coexistence of multiple
different co-channel networks. At the same time, the proposed IRS will have
lower cost, higher energy efficiency, and simpler synchronization properties
than alternatives based on relays. Control of the IRS will involve a multi-layer
approach for scheduling and resource allocation in order to address issues such
as multi-user interference and fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.