* 2030391
* Supporting the Success of Undergraduate and Graduate Students in Computer Engineering, Computer Science, and Computer Information Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Miguel Gonzalez, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,779.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Houston Clear Lake, a Hispanic-serving Institution.
Specifically, the project will provide 46 students with two-year scholarships
and specialized support services. The Scholars will pursue BS and/or MS degrees
in computer engineering, computer information systems, or computer science.
Scholars will progress through the program in six cohorts, four cohorts of ten
undergraduate students each year beginning in the first year of the project, and
two cohorts of three graduate students in the third and fourth year of the
project. The project stands out because of its attention to encouraging
undergraduate students to pursue advanced computing degrees and in supporting
both undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduate and graduate students with demonstrated financial need.
In particular, the project intends to address the workforce needs of STEM-
dependent industries including software development, engineering, aerospace,
petrochemical processing, and biomedical industries. The project research plan
is designed to provide evidence to answer three research questions: (1) What
impact does membership in a Scholar cohort have on student success? (2) How does
inclusion of (and scholarship support for) graduate students influence the
success of undergraduate cohort members? and (3) How does financial support
increase and broaden participation in STEM degrees and careers? The project will
offer Scholars a range of targeted support activities through collaboration with
university offices, including Academic Affairs, Enrollment Management,
University Advancement, Student Affairs, Strategic Partnerships, and the
Department of Computing Sciences' Industrial Advisory Board. Dissemination
activities will be designed to reach audiences from the local to the national
level. Local dissemination will occur through faculty development days that
include university and community college faculty. The project team will present
project outcomes at regional and national meetings, and publish results in
journals such as the Journal of Research in Science Teaching. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.