* 2030632
* Scholarships, Strategic Course Sequencing, and Comprehensive Student Support to Increase Undergraduate Degree Completion in Computing and Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Wayne Machuca, Mount Hood Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 01/31/2026
* USD 647,754.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income STEM students at Mount Hood Community
College. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to 35
students who are pursuing Associate in Applied Science degrees in Cybersecurity
and Networking and Computer Information Systems. Scholars will be admitted in
three cohorts that include both full-time and part-time students, and receive up
to three years of scholarship support. Scholars will participate in a new
orientation course that integrates foundational information technology skills
into the college's existing orientation and learning community for new students.
The project intends to implement wraparound student services including
personalized education plans and career pathways, appreciative advising,
academic tutoring, and academic skills workshops. The project will contribute to
the body of knowledge about impacts of scholarships and wraparound student
services, with a focus on students pursuing degrees in information technology
and/or in integrated systems and technology management education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project aims for scholars to participate in co-curricular
enrichment activities such as cybersecurity competitions, the Portland Chapter
of Information Systems Security meetings and events, and other software
development and cybersecurity events and exhibits. The project intends to
address the problem of community college students' earning of excess credits
that are not aligned with a degree or career program. To this end, the Scholars
will create a personalized education plan within a career pathway curriculum.
This plan will map out the courses needed each semester through graduation to
ensure efficient and timely completion of their program. The project will
provide Scholars with appreciative advising, a best practice characterized by
the intentional collaborative practice of asking positive, open-ended questions
to help students achieve academic success. This advising will be combined with
academic tutoring and academic skills workshops to improve student outcomes,
including degree completion or transfer. The project's research plan includes
quantitative and qualitative techniques to investigate the impacts of project
activities on Scholars’ academic outcomes, development of relevant professional
capabilities, self-determination within their professional identities. An
evaluation plan will examine the implementation and management processes to
ensure fidelity to the project plan, identify compliance and performance issues,
and make recommendations to improve the project elements and services over the
course of the project period. Initial venues for dissemination will include
presentations to local chapters of professional organizations, professional
networking with peer institutions, and local and regional equity in education
and STEM education conferences (e.g., Oregon Science Teachers Association Annual
Fall Conference on Science Education). This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.