* 2030173
* Identifying Spatial Variation in Soft Tissue Mechanics and Predicting Failure: Application to Cardiac Rupture
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Colleen Witzenburg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2024
* USD 451,378.00

This award will support research that will increase our understanding of load-
bearing soft tissues, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
national health. Soft tissues such as tendons and blood vessels rely on their
complex mechanical properties to withstand loads such as weight, force, or
pressure. Unlike manmade materials, soft tissues can respond to changes in
loading. Cells can remodel their surroundings, altering the regional strength
and stiffness of the tissue. Unfortunately, disease and injury can lead to
remodeling that is insufficient to withstand continued loading, putting the
tissue at risk of tearing and rupture. This award supports fundamental research
needed to develop, test, and validate methods to quantify spatial variation and
to predict tissue failure. Quantifying spatial variation in material properties
is essential since tissues fail at their weakest location. Without this
capability, strategies to repair or replace injured tissue, tools to predict
rupture risk, and therapies to reduce rupture propensity have all been stymied.
Results from this research will benefit the U.S. health and society, impacting
the fields of tissue mechanics, material science, surgery, and tissue
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within a soft tissue, damage or
disease often causes cells to remodel their surrounding extracellular matrix,
which dictates mechanical response, in a non-uniform manner. For example, a
heart attack initiates a complex inflammatory response involving both the
degradation and synthesis of matrix proteins, altering regional stiffness,
strength, and anisotropy. Though homogeneity is a common assumption, both local
geometry and local material properties affect tissue failure. Therefore,
measuring the spatial variation in material properties is essential for failure
prediction. The work performed under this award will develop a nonlinear
generalized inverse mechanics method to determine the heterogeneous properties
of soft tissues and apply it to ventricular tissue after myocardial infarction,
testing the hypothesis that the transition in mechanical properties is spatially
more diffuse following late reperfusion therapy. This work will also develop an
algorithm to predict the location of failure and test the hypothesis that the
behavior of reperfused and non-reperfused ventricular tissue are the same at
sub-failure levels, but differ following tear initiation. The experimental
techniques and analysis tools developed will be broadly applicable to many
different tissue types and disease states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.