* 2030844
* RAPID: Environmental Surveillance to Assess Aerosol Transmission Pathways of COVID-19 Enabled by On-The-Spot Sampling and Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Hugh Fan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,933.00

The speed at which the COVID-19 pandemic has progressed suggests that there may
be more infection pathways than presently understood. Infection through the
inhalation of virus carrying aerosols is one possible path. However, evidence is
still lacking to fully understand the infection risks posed by aerosol
inhalation. Collecting air samples for the analysis of SARS-CoV2 (the virus that
causes COVID-19 disease) will help determine whether and how aerosols play a
role in the spread of COVID-19. Such knowledge will allow health care
professionals and other policy makers to implement practices to protect the
public health. The need for this information is urgent, as a second wave of
COVID-19 is projected for Fall 2020 with potentially more serious impacts due to
overlap with seasonal flu. The goal of this project is to develop specific and
rapid on-the-spot air sampling and detection technology to address a need for
aerosol monitoring. The project team includes scholars with complimentary
expertise in air sampling, device design, and virology. Successful completion of
this research will provide critical knowledge that can serve as an early warning
system of the presence of SARS-CoV2 and help the transition back to regular
economic and social activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 has impacted human
health on a global scale. Information on the transmission mode of SARS-CoV2 (the
virus responsible for COVID-19 disease) is urgently needed to protect the public
and prevent further spread of the disease. The goal of this project is to
identify the role of aerosols in the spread of SARS-CoV2 and involves the
development of a rapid aerosol monitor based on an existing module successfully
developed for Zika virus. The research team is composed of an aerosol scientist,
a mechanical engineer, and a virologist, who have the complimentary expertise
and needed facilities to rapidly achieve the goal. Project researchers will (1)
conduct air sampling at healthcare facilities that have cared for COVID-19
patients to assess if SARS-CoV2 virus is transmissible via aerosols; (2) develop
an on-the-spot virus nucleic acid detection module for analysis of SARS-CoV2
virus. The module will be validated by comparison with analytical results from
CDC-approved tests; and (3) deploy the air sampler detection module in public
venues for early detection of a possible second wave of COVID-19. This timely
study will provide significant information about the role of aerosol
transmission of the SARS-CoV2 virus and offer a powerful tool to rapidly detect
the virus in air. If aerosol transmission is proven to be a significant exposure
pathway in healthcare facilities, operations may be swiftly revised to better
protect healthcare workers fighting the pandemic. Early detection of outbreaks
and a potential secondary wave of COVID-19 will enable proactive measures to
protect public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.