* 2030914
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Social Distancing During Pandemics: Developing Methods to Balance Affiliation and Disease-Avoidance Motivations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Donald Sacco, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 43,383.00

People have a powerful need to interact with each other. They also have strong
desires to avoid disease. Social distancing is the primary behavioral method to
stop disease from spreading. Yet, social distancing goes against the natural
desire for social interactions. The tension between those dual motives can cause
psychological distress, and may lead people to violate restrictions on face-to-
face contact in their effort to relieve stress and loneliness. This is
especially likely for people who do not have access to highly immersive forms of
virtual socialization, such as internet-based video calls that let people see
friends and family. It may also apply more often for older adults (who are most
vulnerable to COVID-19) because of less familiarity with technology-based
interaction platforms. By better understanding how people resolve the tension
between the need to interact with others and the desire to avoid disease, this
project will inform the development of public health interventions aimed at
curbing the spread of disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contrasts the
need to affiliate with the desire to avoid disease. One aim is to inform the
development of interventions designed to avoid loneliness while engaging in
social distancing. Study 1 collects data from the same participants across
multiple days. Measures of loneliness, concerns with contracting an illness, and
amounts and types of social interactions will be collected. The research tests
the hypothesis that participants with limited access to virtual social
interactions (e.g., those with limited financial means, the elderly) will feel
most lonely and report decreased concerns about disease, which will be
associated with more frequent violations of social distancing behaviors. Study 2
experimentally manipulates feelings of inclusion versus exclusion to test for
effects of social isolation and for the concern of contracting the disease. Both
studies are based on large and representative samples of U.S. residents to
ensure the findings are applicable across different age ranges, geographical
regions, and socioeconomic groups within the country. The research elucidates
how various psychological processes work against each other and in interaction
to ultimately influence social behavior. The research further investigates how
people can safely satisfy their motives to affiliate without sacrificing safety.
The long-term goal is to inform the development of interventions that may be
developed to promote appropriate behavioral responses during the current and
future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.