* 2030786
* Broadening Participation in STEM Careers through High-Impact Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Richard Hill, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2025
* USD 998,996.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at University of Detroit Mercy, an private, urban university. Over its
five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to 20 unique full-time
students pursuing four-year degrees in engineering, mathematics, or computer
science. Scholars will enter in two cohorts and receive up to four years of
annual scholarship support. The project intends to increase Scholars’ retention,
graduation, and employment rates by working with existing on-campus resources
and external industrial partners to implement sustainable high-impact practices.
Scholars will engage in activities fostering personal, career, and academic
development including participation in cohort-building activities, group
counseling, multiple industry internships, and peer, faculty, and industry
mentoring. The project has the potential to broaden participation in the STEM
workforce and address a regional need for a skilled workforce. Results from this
project could inform other higher education institutions about how to implement
research-proven student retention practices to support diverse students in
resource-limited environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
project is to increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates in STEM fields. The project aims to: (1) support students
personally and professionally in the pursuit of STEM degrees; (2) improve
students’ professional identity and sense of belonging in the STEM community;
and (3) increase student interest in STEM careers. Research on successful STEM
undergraduate programs has identified high-impact practices, including cohort
building, residential communities, mentorship, and research experiences.
However, knowledge is limited regarding how to replicate such high-impact
practices in small institutions with limited resources that serve heterogeneous
student populations. This project will assess the hypothesis that such
institutions can emulate these research-proven practices in an effective and
sustainable manner. Specifically, the project seeks to explore the relationship
between industry internships, group counseling experiences, and non-residential
cohort-building impact on students’ STEM identity and success. This project has
the potential to provide new insights on the critical support systems most
influential in enhancing student persistence and placement in STEM careers for a
diverse undergraduate population. Project evaluation will use a mixed-methods
approach to analyze process data, student self-assessments, interviews and focus
groups, retention/graduation data, and post-graduate career placement rates. The
program model and research findings will be disseminated through presentations
at STEM education conferences and through publications in conference proceedings
and STEM education journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.