* 2030421
* Bioinspired Sensors for Image Guided Cancer Surgery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Viktor Gruev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence image-guided surgery (IGS) has shown enormous
potential to improve the outcome of cancer surgeries due to the low photon
scattering, enabling high signal to background and deeper tissue imaging. The
goal of this proposal is to further enhance cancer treatment by decreasing and
ideally eliminating, positive tumor margins and small metastatic tumors in first
surgeries by simultaneously imaging multiple, small-sized tumor-targeted
molecular probes with a novel bioinspired imaging sensor. The project involves
understanding how light modulates drug transport across the blood-brain barrier.
The results of this project may enable the development of new types of
nanoconstructs, which will enable a transformation in the treatment of brain
cancer and other types of cancer. The project participants will also work with
the St. Louis Science Center to develop a module on the biologically inspired
fluorescence sensor. Presentations will be provided to young people during
Summer Science Blast summer day camps and museum visitors during Nano Days
public fairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Gruev and his team are developing a
sensor that will identify small tumors and tumor margins during intraoperative
settings and present this information to surgeons for complete tumor removal.
They will accomplish this by functionally mimicking the visual system of the
mantis shrimp—considered the best predator in shallow waters—to develop a
single-chip multispectral camera with improved sensitivity and specificity to
image several tumor-targeted molecular markers. The project synergistically
combines advancements in nanofabrication technology, imaging sensors and tumor
targeted molecular markers. They will pre-clinically validate their technology
in animal models of breast cancer. The project participants will also work with
the St. Louis Science Center to develop a module on the biologically inspired
fluorescence sensor. Presentations will be provided to young people during
Summer Science Blast summer day camps and museum visitors during Nano Days
public fairs. This new imaging technology for cancer surgeries will be
incorporated in the curriculum of the new engineering driven medical school at
Carle Illinois School of Medicine, training future physicians on emerging
technologies for cancer care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.