* 2030245
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Small: Cross-Layer Interference Management: Bringing Interference Alignment to Reality
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Dinesh Bharadia, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,755.00

The demand for wireless data traffic along with the scale of users grows
exponentially, while the current approach to meet such scaling is to avoid
interference. Unfortunately, interference avoidance techniques cannot
accommodate these scaling needs. To support large-scale deployments, there is a
need to enable multiple users to share the same spectrum. In other words, the
interference must be mitigated and exploited rather than avoided. However, prior
theoretical efforts have resulted in minimal gains in practice. This project
bridges the gap between theory and practice. The PIs will jointly design and
develop antennas and algorithms in PHY and MAC layers potentially enabling
orders of magnitude more spectrum-efficient communications. The designed
solutions would enable connectivity to all classes of devices, autonomous
driving, health-care, and IoT, and will facilitate the connectivity cheaper for
all segments of society. The project will result in training graduate students
and fosters interdisciplinary research. The proposed activities are designed to
engage students from all backgrounds focusing on those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on developing
Interference Alignment (IA) techniques that work at the finite Signal-to-Noise
(SNR) regime. The proposal has two thrusts - one focused on the uplink and
another focused on the downlink. The PIs plan to use quasi-randomly oriented
antenna elements to accomplish the desired objectives. (1) Present new transmit
and receive antenna hardware structures at base-stations to create favorable
environments for interference management; (2) Develop new physical-layer
algorithms that exploit the characteristics of the proposed antennas and
increase by order(s) of magnitude the number of users sharing the same frequency
slot, without needing channel information at the transmitter; (3) Develop PHY-
layer algorithms and MAC-layer protocols to exploit the proposed antenna designs
to enable interference alignment for a large number of users; (4) Develop novel
algorithms that enable deploying the proposed research easily on existing next-
generation cellular (5G) and WiFi (WiFi-6) protocols; (5) Evaluate the proposed
techniques through simulations and real-world experiments with hardware and
software implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.