* 2030382
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Understanding and Facilitating Remote Triage and Rehabilitation During Pandemics via Visual Based Patient Physiologic Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Simon Ho, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 05/31/2021
* USD 8,425.00

This RAPID project plans to investigate visual-based physiological sensing
technologies to facilitate remote triage and rehabilitation during pandemics, by
using low-cost consumer-grade cameras to track such physiological conditions as
respiration rate, heart rate, and blood oxygen saturation levels from videos.
The physiological data can be visualized and archived, and shared by users with
medical practitioners to understand and support remote triage and
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research can enhance the
interaction between medical providers and patients, and help address a projected
surge in telehealth needs due to COVID-19. The PI team plans to conduct the
first-of-a-kind data collection, by incorporating the novel contact-free video
sensing into a biomedical cohort study that is being rolled out by a public-
health collaboration team. This cross-disciplinary opportunity of multimodal
data collection will offer insights on the relationship of multiple biosensing
modalities, and the data collected would facilitate the research on early
detection of COVID-19 and related diseases. The visual-based physiological
sensing will also help enhance the remote interaction between rehabilitation
therapists and patients during pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this effort lies in advancing promising engineering techniques of
video-based contact-free physiological monitoring to support the rising needs of
remote triage and rehabilitation during pandemics. The research findings and
techniques developed address an important missing component in telehealth, which
simultaneously achieves social-distancing, avoids hospital overcrowding, and
prioritizes personal protective equipment in response to pandemics. By
collaborating with another cohort study, an unprecedented multitude of data
collected by the joint effort will provide key insights toward understanding and
managing COVID-19 diseases and remote triage for future outbreaks. The
timeliness of this opportunity cannot be met by any regular NSF programs other
than the RAPID.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s broader impact lies in two
aspects. The multidisciplinary effort will provide important new knowledge and
insights toward understanding and developing technology capabilities for remote
triage and rehabilitation, which will contribute to the early detection, spread
control, and effective management and prevention of future epidemics. The
techniques developed through the project to support tele-rehabilitation will
have a strong potential to improve the adverse conditions and quality of life of
the affected citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.