* 2030023
* Collaborative Proposal: RAPID: Thermal Sterilization of Personal Protective Equipment Contaminated with SARS-CoV-2
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Daniel Preston, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 05/31/2021
* USD 80,000.00

As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread, medical workers in the United
States face a dire shortage of personal protective equipment, including masks,
face shields, and gowns. As a result, many doctors and nurses are reusing
personal protective equipment intended to be discarded after a single use and
thereby increasing their risk of contracting the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes
COVID-19. These medical workers, and also the general public, urgently need
reliable guidelines for sterilization of personal protective equipment to enable
safe reuse. Dry heat sterilization can be performed almost anywhere (including
home ovens and rice cookers), and viruses inside of crevices or within fabrics
are easily inactivated; this project will provide evidence-based guidelines for
the time required to achieve sterilization at a given temperature. The project
will also enable prediction of the lifetime of human coronaviruses across
various climates, which will be of extreme importance to epidemiologists in
predicting the spread of SARS-CoV-2 as well as the severity of a resurgence of
the COVID-19 pandemic that may accompany the return of colder weather this
upcoming autumn and winter.

This collaborative research project will produce a thermodynamic model that
combines a framework built on the Arrhenius equation and the rate law with both
existing and forthcoming experimental data to accurately describe the thermal
inactivation time of SARS-CoV-2. The proposed thermodynamic model will treat
viruses as large molecules that undergo thermal denaturation and will be used to
predict inactivation times for viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, by incorporating
physical properties of each virus as inputs to determine the dependence of viral
inactivation rate on temperature and other environmental conditions. The project
will aim to achieve three objectives, namely: (1) to model the inactivation of
SARS-CoV-2 due to thermal degradation, including the effects of humidity, pH,
surface material, and other conditions in addition to temperature; (2) to
experimentally demonstrate sterilization due to thermal inactivation of SARS-
CoV-2 on medical personal protective equipment and refine the thermodynamic
model by incorporating data from these experimental results; and (3) to
characterize thermal degradation of personal protective equipment during
repeated thermal sterilization cycles. This work will lead to an unprecedented
fundamental understanding of the thermal inactivation of viruses that will help
fight the current COVID-19 pandemic and provide the basis for modeling viruses
that cause future outbreaks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.