* 2030348
* Role of KCNB1-Integrin Complexes in neurodevelopment
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Federico Sesti, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2025
* USD 924,218.00

One of the enduring questions that puzzles neurobiologists is how the brain
achieves its highly organized structure. Brain cells (neurons) do not randomly
populate the brain; each developing cell undertakes its own journey to occupy a
precise position in the brain. When the brain begins to take shape in the early
embryo, neurons are generated in a specific zone that they migrate out from,
sometimes moving great distances to reach their final position. The newly formed
neurons extend thin projections, called axons and dendrites, to form connections
with other neurons, giving rise to highly organized networks of interconnected
cells. It is well known that neurons are guided by both long-range and short-
range chemical clues during their journey, but the migrating neurons also "talk"
to each other by exchanging electrical signals. The latter signals also guide
neurons' migration choices, and influence which other neurons they ultimately
connect with. Previous research shows that neurons use "sensors" (complexes of
electrically responsive proteins) to transduce electrical signals into movement
and networking responses, but how this happens is currently unknown. This
project will elucidate the ways in which these sensors work, and the mechanisms
they use to affect the formation of neural circuits in the mammalian brain. In
addition to these scientific goals, this project will support a well-established
training program for undergraduate and high-school students that exposes them to
prominent areas of research, gives them hands-on experience with experimental
techniques, and contributes to their successful pursuit of future careers in
science. The results of this project are expected to shed new light on a
previously unstudied, major aspect of brain circuit development that has
important implications for mediating congenital brain malformations and
developmental brain disorders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project deciphers a
novel mechanism of cortical development whereby macromolecular complexes formed
by voltage-gated potassium channels (KCNB1) and alpha5-beta5 integrins, dubbed
IKCs (Integrin-KCNB1-Complexes), transduce the spontaneous electrical activity
of emergent neuronal structures into biochemical signals that regulate circuit
assembly. It uses a combination of biochemistry, immunohistochemistry, confocal
microscopy and animal studies (KI mice harboring defective IKCs) to establish
mechanistic links between the developmental processes influenced by IKCs and
their resultant circuits and associated behaviors. Understanding how
macromolecular complexes consisting of K+ channels and integrins can shape
critical neurodevelopmental processes will provide a new window into the
molecular mechanisms that underlie the development of neuronal circuits and
their associated brain architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.