* 2030679
* Measurements of Midlatitude Thermospheric Dynamics and Temperature
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* John Noto, Computational Physics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,807.00

This project will continue the measurements of winds and temperatures in the
thermosphere (a region of atmosphere between about 80 km to 600 km above sea
level) at Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico (started in 1980) and at Haystack
Observatory, Massachusetts (started in 1989) using a highly sensitive instrument
called Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPIs). The two observatories have two
powerful radar systems called Incoherent Scatter Radars (ISRs) that can measure
the ionized part of the atmosphere in the same region (also called ionosphere).
Combination of such measurements are needed for realistic, physics-based
modeling of the thermosphere-ionosphere system, and for effective forecasting of
Space Weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This FPIs used at Haystack Observatory and
Arecibo Observatory are dual-beam imaging systems sampling the OI 6300Å (red)
and 5577Å (green) airglow emissions with spectral resolutions that resolve the
Doppler shift associated with the bulk flow of neutral species in the
thermosphere. The data products include airglow brightness, temperature, line-
of-sight wind velocity, meridional and zonal components of the wind velocity and
velocity gradients at the nominal emission altitudes of 240 km and 97 km.
200-300 nights of data will be generated each year during this three-year
project. This initiative maintains the FPIs, performs the observations, analyses
the data, and posts the data in the public Madrigal data base each morning after
data collection stops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New and archived data (since 1980
at Arecibo Observatory and 1989 at Haystack Observatory) will be used to achieve
four scientific goals: 1) Test the validity of vertical winds measured with a
monostatic FPI by performing a bistatic experiment to unambiguously isolate the
vertical wind vector. 2) Gather hundreds of vertical wind measurements each
month (past and future) and establish monthly velocity versus local time
empirical models from polynomial fits to the data. 3) Investigate whether a
long-term rotation of the average F-region wind vector detected in the years
1980-2010 continues from 2011-2023. If so, the long-term migration of the
magnetic field orientation will be evaluated as a possible cause. 4) Evaluate a
possible correlation between the Midnight Temperature Maximum and strong, upward
vertical winds in the F-region thermosphere. A fifth project goal is an
operational objective to establish real-time data product reporting for
operational Space Weather forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
enhances infrastructures for research and education. The FPIs are available for
community use at the facilities, and users can design and perform independent
experiments. In addition, accurate and accessible (even in real-time) neutral
wind measurements are an essential data element in responding to the challenge
of Space Weather forecasting, which carries significant potential for broad
societal benefit in the context of situational awareness for space-based
navigation and communication assets. The instruments maintained by this project
are also commonly used for projects in the vigorous Research Experience for
Undergraduates programs at each facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.