* 2030295
* Collaborative Research: Improving plant productivity and models of carbon exchange by resolving mechanisms of excess carbon release in photorespiration
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Aaron Liepman, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2025
* USD 134,992.00

During photosynthesis, plants use energy from sunlight to convert carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere into biomass. This biomass includes the food, fiber and fuel
required by humans and other life on this planet. During this conversion, the
initial step of photosynthesis can react with atmospheric oxygen instead of
carbon dioxide, which produces compounds that must be recycled. This recycling
process, called photorespiration, requires large percentages of the plantâ€™s
energy reserves and releases carbon dioxide, thereby reducing plant growth and
productivity. Photorespiration is affected by environmental conditions,
increasing relative to photosynthesis as temperature rises. This research
project explores the temperature response of photorespiration to determine how
it will respond under future climates and seeking strategies to improve its
efficiency. Findings from this proposal will be integrated into education
activities and disseminated widely. Diverse students will be engaged via a
research collaboration with a primary undergraduate institution serving under-
represented students. Additionally, the potential for this work to improve crop
productivity and the importance of models in plant biology will be disseminated
by continuing Sounds of Science performances. The Sounds of Science is a unique
collaboration where composers create music from research data provided by a
plant scientist. Presentations where the investigators present an overview of
the research and the compositions are performed will be recorded in partnership
with local public media and have the potential to reach a public audience of
~500,000 Michigan residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photorespiration is the second
largest metabolic flux of carbon in an illuminated leaf and occurs when rubisco,
the initial enzyme of carbon fixation, binds with oxygen instead of carbon
dioxide and produces a molecule that must be recycled. Photorespiration recycles
this molecule into Calvin-Benson cycle intermediates at the great cost of
carbon. Understanding the mechanisms of carbon dioxide release during
photorespiration is critical for predicting plant responses to climate change
and potentially engineering plants with improved carbon assimilation and
productivity. When temperature increases, photorespiration releases even more
carbon dioxide per rubisco oxygenation, but the mechanism of this increase is
unknown. The objective of this proposal is to resolve the mechanisms of this
excess carbon dioxide release at high temperatures using an innovative
combination of metabolic modeling, in vivo gas exchange, and isotopic labeling
approaches. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that excess carbon
dioxide release occurs from photorespiration at elevated temperatures when
intermediates react non-enzymatically in the peroxisome with hydrogen peroxide
produced from photorespiration. This hypothesis assumes that under ambient
temperatures hydrogen peroxide is efficiently detoxified by the enzyme catalase,
but under elevated temperatures catalase is unable to remove hydrogen peroxide
quickly enough to minimize non-enzymatic decarboxylation reactions. The results
of this project will reach across disciplinary boundaries with the strong
potential to improve earth-system models of carbon cycling and to identify key
traits for adapting photosynthesis to real-world growing
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.