* 2030575
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: TTP: Medium: Intrusion-Tolerant Outsourced Storage for Cyber-Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Stanislaw Jarecki, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 315,000.00

This project addresses the general problem of protecting a user's private,
potentially sensitive data, such as confidential documents, images, files and
folders, in the event of the compromise of an online outsourced storage service
on which the data is stored. Today, users typically authenticate to such
services using a password and the service stores a one-way hash of this
password. Given the weaknesses of passwords, storing password hashes allows for
an offline password dictionary attack once the storage service is compromised,
which exposes user's password and consequently also all her private data. To
improve the secrecy of the outsourced private data, the project's main novelty
lies in designing and developing an Intrusion-Tolerant Outsourced Storage (ITOS)
system, which enables the user to distribute her data, and/or the cryptographic
tokens which protect this data, among a set of trustees so that the password and
private data remain protected even when a certain subset of the trustees have
been compromised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon our previous foundational
work, this project investigates: (1) the design of provably secure and highly
efficient protocols for ITOS, and (2) implementation, pilot deployment,
evaluation and technology transfer of an ITOS system which builds upon these
protocols, in line with its “transitioning to practice” theme. The proposed
system can be transparently integrated with different storage systems including
popular services like Google Drive, OneDrive or Dropbox. Moreover, ITOS can
improve the authentication security for general web services. The resilient
storage system architecture will offer an improved level of protection and
accessibility to the data belonging to research scientists, students and staff
at Universities as well as everyday computer users employing commercial storage
services. The open-source library developed as part of the project will be of
immense value in future research on building fault-tolerant systems. Further,
the project’s research activities will be integrated with educational activities
in the form of advanced curriculum development and student mentoring in the
broad domains of Trustworthy Storage Systems, Secure Data Architectures and Data
Assurance. Proactive involvement of high school and K-12 students and minority
populations will help broaden the reach of the project. Regarding general
application of strengthening web authentication security, the project team is
also pursuing standardization activities by closely collaborating with Internet
Research Task Force (IRTF) stakeholders with interest in these
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.