* 2030862
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Forest productivity and expression in a low-emissions present: A RAPID response to the COVID-19 Emissions Reduction Event
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Sean McMahon, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2022
* USD 106,942.00

State and federal policies have significantly limited human activities to keep
the U.S. population safe during the COVID-19 pandemic. This has resulted in a
significant decrease of atmospheric inputs from the reduction in automobile and
air travel. The unprecedented and dramatic reduction in traffic in major
metropolitan areas where emissions are consistently high is transforming the
atmosphere, even at continental scales. The COVID-19 event presents a unique,
ephemeral, and rare opportunity to study how forests would respond to
dramatically cleaner air in the United States. This award will explore how North
American forests that have experienced a life-time of the byproducts of human
transportation respond by examining responses from the genetic and molecular
levels to the forest scale. The research will be conducted at a large forest
plot near the Washington DC metropolitan area with a long history of forest
research and adjacent to a National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) tower.
These linkages provide opportunities to scale the molecular research to
potential ecosystem responses to emissions reduction efforts. The Education
Office at Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC), which works with
thousands of high school students and their teachers every year will incorporate
results into classroom activities at the SERC Education Center.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Knowing how trees and forested ecosystems respond to a transformed
atmosphere is critical for providing projections of the Earth system under
ongoing global change. This proposal provides a unique opportunity to explore
the potential consequences of future policy by evaluating what could happen if
emissions were dramatically reduced. The project provides an unprecedented
opportunity to study the impacts from the genomic, physiological, population,
community, ecosystem level given the ongoing research at these levels and
leveraging existing infrastructure and data provided by the Smithsonian (Forest
GEO), US Forest Service (FIA plots), and NSF (NEON). The research will focus on
gene expression profiles of two species (beech and red maple) to explore whether
they will exhibit parallel shifts favoring maximal growth in all size classes
compared to pre-Covid-19 conditions. The research will examine how leaf
chlorophyll content at the end of the growing season will predict gene
expression differences. The research will also explore gene pathways that deal
with reactive oxidative stress (ROS) reactions, repair, and stress signaling and
the physiological responses for growth and reproduction for this and next
growing season&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.