* 2030638
* Collaborative Research: Partnership Pathways to Improve the Professional Preparation of Low-Income Students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics in Minnesota
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Alex Ajayi, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,075,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Augsburg University, Century College, Minneapolis College, and
Normandale Community College. These undergraduate institutions serve populations
that are 48-67% Pell-eligible and 40-62% students of color. Over 5 years, this
project will fund scholarships and provide research opportunities for 195 unique
full-time and part-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, Food Science, Mathematics, and
Physics. The project will recruit, retain, and support three 2-year scholar
cohorts at the three community colleges who will enter a Minnesota STEM Transfer
pathway leading to admission to a baccalaureate STEM program. The project will
also recruit, retain, and support a 4-year scholar cohort at Augsburg University
beginning at the start of upper-level STEM coursework leading to degree
completion and transition to the STEM workforce or graduate education. This
project builds on successful strategies for achieving early exposure to
undergraduate research and internship experiences for students and supporting
student professional development through cross-institutional partnerships, as
well as partnership with workforce development
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
recruitment, retention, transfer, student success, graduation, and entry to the
STEM workforce of low-income, high-achieving undergraduate STEM scholars with
demonstrated financial need. The project builds on established theories
regarding the importance and value of mentoring and other high impact practices
(HIPs) such as involvement in undergraduate research and internships. It also
recognizes that there is great talent and potential among students who begin
their academic careers at community colleges. Scholars will be connected to
internships and research experiences through SciTech, UpTurnships, MnDRIVE, and
Augsburg University’s undergraduate research programs. Professional development
for faculty mentors and assessment from the Center for the Improvement of
Mentored Experiences in Research (CIMER) will provide data to develop new
knowledge about how institutional and cross-institutional factors affect
students and mentors across different social identities. Knowledge generation
and evaluation utilizes the CIMER Assessment Platform, the Cultural Intelligence
Scale, HIP quality and equity measures, and other institutional metrics for
tracking transfers. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.