* 2030234
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SMALL: Autonomously Reconfigurable Hardware-Reduced Wideband Transceivers for Efficient Passive-Active Spectrum Coexistence
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Dimitris Pados, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 304,937.00

Commercial and military wireless systems, radio astronomy observatories, weather
radar systems, and other applications, frequently referred to as “passive
users,” need to operate in quiet electromagnetic environments with limited
interference. Passive users commonly strive to observe faint signals emitted by
distant non-coordinating transmitters and their frequency or time separation
from other sources may not be possible as they often continuously utilize large
swaths of radio spectrum to detect and monitor physical processes that have
electromagnetic presence at different frequencies. To fully reap the benefits of
spectrum coexistence in 5G and beyond, there is a need to employ passive-user
protection approaches that strike an optimal balance between two key objectives,
namely reliably protect passive users from interference and maximize spectrum
access opportunities for active users. This project addresses foundational
challenges in spectrum coexistence by developing a novel low-cost hardware-
reduced and multi-parameter reconfigurable ultra-wideband transceiver that
optimizes passive-active spectrum sharing across a broad frequency range. The
portability and adaptability of this new transceiver makes it attractive for
next-generation mobile wireless platforms, including a variety of autonomous
ground and/or airborne platforms, cellular base-stations, unmanned airborne and
satellite communication systems and specifically impact 5G, Wi-Fi and future
applications of connected autonomy. Through this project the PIs propose to
train undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students targeting Hispanic,
women, and other underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) through specialized outreach efforts and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together an interdisciplinary team of
researchers with complementary expertise ranging from Radio Frequency (RF)
front-end hardware design, to Physical (PHY) and Medium-Access Control (MAC)
layer optimization, to artificial intelligence (AI) theory and practice. To
avoid hardware constraints and lack of reconfigurability imposed by analog and
hybrid beamforming architectures the project develops a novel digital ultra-
wideband beamforming architecture that enables: 1) Efficient spectrum
utilization and interference-free passive-active coexistence through robust
space-time-frequency sensing and cross-layer optimization at the PHY and MAC
layers; 2) autonomous hardware multi-parameter tunability for ultra-wideband
operation across 5G bands; and 3) practical realization of low-cost, versatile
hardware-reduced wireless systems through new artificial-neural-network-aided
code multiplexed array front-ends. Robust spectrum sensing involves new L1-norm
principal-component analysis to assess the quality (validity and completeness)
of the collected/sensed spectrum data and produce high-confidence power
propagation and spatial coordination maps of active spectrum users. The project
leverages high-quality radio maps, autonomous sub-arraying, multi-band, and
multi-parameter reconfigurability across large bandwidths and incorporates
reinforcement learning strategies to address the cross-layer PHY/MAC and front-
end control problem for harmonious passive-active spectrum coexistence. The
complete outcome of this project is expected to be an autonomously
reconfigurable hardware-reduced platform that will allow integration of ultra-
wideband sensing and beamforming functionalities in small-form-factor software-
defined radio platforms. This new class of low-cost, versatile, hardware-reduced
wireless transceivers that integrate multiple radio chains into a practical
single lightweight package is enabled by the application of neural networks to
cancel both linear and non-linear components of inter-channel interference that
arise during the multiplexing of multiple non-orthogonal spread signal
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.