* 2030476
* Scholarships, Service Learning, and Community Engagement to Improve Student Success in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Christos Christodoulou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 12/31/2025
* USD 999,988.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of New Mexico, a Hispanic-Serving and Minority-Serving
Institution. Over its five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships
to 72 unique, full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in computer
science or engineering (civil, chemical, nuclear, and electrical and computer).
Scholars will be transfer students from two-year colleges and current upper
division students in the School of Engineering. They will be admitted in three
cohorts and receive annually renewable, one-year scholarships. Scholars will
have access to a suite of student support, career, and workforce development
activities. In addition, they will participate in a year-long faculty-mentored
learning community and engage in service learning and community engagement
activities. Such activities have been shown to benefit students through
relationship-building with local organizations as they work on technical
problems faced by communities. Given the University’s student population, this
project has the potential to broaden participation in the engineering and
computer science workforce. It also can directly benefit the local community
through service-learning projects. This project will advance knowledge in the
field of engineering education by studying how service learning and community
engagement experiences influence students’ attitudes and beliefs toward public
welfare, and whether learning communities and other organized academic
activities help shape positive academic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
specific aims are to: 1) develop Scholar cohorts through engineering faculty-
mentored learning communities, known to support persistence and academic
success; 2) provide a suite of career and workforce-development activities
focused on preparation for high paying jobs; 3) create an academic culture that
fosters the development of societal responsibility; and 4) generate new
knowledge regarding how to nurture community in educational practices and how to
integrate social relevance in engineering/computer science curricula. This study
will address three research questions: 1) How do paid service learning/community
engagement experiences influence Scholars’ attitudes and beliefs and does
Scholar interest change as they approach graduation? 2) How do these attitudes
and beliefs compare to Scholars who undertake unpaid Honors Thesis service
learning/community engagement experiences for academic credit? 3) To what extent
and in what ways do integrated project activities affect Scholars’ communication
skills? The project will be evaluated through a mixed-methods approach using
data collected about Scholar performance as well as observations and feedback
from Scholars and faculty mentors from surveys and interviews. Results of this
project will be made available to the university community through annual campus
presentations, to the public through local media outlets, and to the STEM
education community through conference presentations and a project website. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.