* 2030233
* SWIFT: LARGE: Passive and Active Spectrum Sharing (PASS)
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Keith Gremban, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,521,560.00

Radio frequency (RF) spectrum has become a scarce resource. The days of
exclusive spectrum allocations are gone – the age of spectrum sharing is upon
us. Sharing between systems that transmit – active systems – can be performed
using variations of a “listen before talking” protocol that checks whether a
particular RF frequency band is being actively used and only transmits if the
frequency band is unused. Passive systems, such as radio telescopes and earth
observation satellites, do not transmit. Sharing between passive and active
systems is therefore particularly challenging, because sensors cannot determine
if a passive system is in use. Consequently, passive-active sharing is static,
not dynamic, and performed by defining RF quiet zones around passive systems.
Additionally, many passive systems are sensitive to RF noise pollution, which
may result from leakage from unshielded devices, or the aggregation of faint
signals from a multitude of devices. However, little work has been done on
systematically surveying RF noise to understand where noise is increasing, the
extent of the increase, and the changes over time. The proposed Passive and
Active Spectrum Sharing (PASS) project will systematically survey and
characterize RF noise, and explore and evaluate alternatives for enabling
spectrum sharing between passive and active systems. The PASS research will be a
significant step forward in understanding and mitigating RF noise, and will
enable more dynamic and efficient sharing of spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed Passive and Active Spectrum Sharing (PASS) project will: (i)
systematically survey RF noise across multiple environments; (ii) analyze and
characterize RF noise and evaluate mechanisms to mitigate noise; (iii) explore
new and innovative approaches to dynamic spectrum sharing between passive and
active systems; (iv) analyze and quantitatively evaluate mechanisms to
coordinate bi-directional spectrum sharing between passive and active systems;
(v) explore hardware and software approaches to enhance the effectiveness and
security of spectrum sharing; and (vi) define the requirements and initial
processes to maintain a National Radio Dynamic Zone (NRDZ), a geographic region
within which bi-lateral spectrum sharing takes place. The results from this
project will provide experimental and analytical evidence on RF noise control
and spectrum sharing; enable more effective dynamic utilization of spectrum, and
inform the creation of an NRDZ. Further, the project will develop data
structures, processes, and software to enable future multi-institutional
collaboration on RF noise measurement and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.