* 2030129
* RAPID: National Drosophila Species Stock Center Covid-19 Relief and Recovery
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Patrick O'Grady, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 198,710.00

This award to Cornell University will provide RAPID funding to mitigate the
impact of the COVID-19 on the Drosophila Species Stock Center (DSSC). The DSSC
maintains a collection of ca. 1400 living stocks representing nearly 300 species
of Drosophila, a genus of about 1500 described species. The DSSC is an
internationally recognized collection and serves as a resource to address
questions on questions in evolution, ecology, developmental biology, physiology,
neurobiology, comparative genomics, and immunology. The DSSC also provides
technical expertise to a broader community in the areas of husbandry, natural
history, systematics, evolution, and ecology of Drosophila.

The DSSC provides living stocks for a large number of Drosophila species as
reagents for research programs around the globe. The DSSC also maintains over 60
Drosophila species that have had their whole genomes sequenced, increasing the
value of these stocks for research. The number of strains maintained at the DSSC
reflects factors such as close phylogenetic relationship to species with
sequenced genomes, the presence of genetically marked or transgenic stocks, and
the availability of stocks from a geographic diversity of sources. In addition
to the maintenance and sale of living stocks, the center provides an annual
Drosophila Species Identification Workshop in which participants learn the
basics of Drosophila identification, biology, and culture requirements. Through
this award, the DSSC can mitigate a temporary decline in research demand and
continue to serve as an important research resource.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.