* 2030098
* RAPID: Preliminary Scientific Assessment of the Monroe, Louisiana Tornado on 12 April 2020
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Todd Murphy, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 51,763.00

On April 12th, 2020, a strong tornado impacted Monroe, Louisiana and produced
significant damage. The tornado moved within very close range of instrumentation
operated by the University of Louisiana at Monroe (ULM), including a weather
radar and other instruments that provide measurements of wind and temperature at
the surface and aloft. This award will allow the investigator team to perform an
enhanced damage survey and initial scientific analysis of the unique storm
system that produced the tornado. The broader societal impact of the project is
through the identification of the factors that led to this strong tornado, in
order to provide better forecasts of severe weather in the future. Several
students will be involved in the analysis, ensuring the development of the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Monroe tornado of Easter
Sunday 2020 moved within 1 km of the S-band, dual-polarimetric radar operated by
ULM. Additionally, measurements from a Doppler wind lidar, microwave radiometer,
and multiple surface stations were collected. The tornado was embedded in a
Quasi-Linear Convective System (QLCS), which traditionally produce mostly weak
tornadoes. However, the Monroe tornado was a strong EF-3 tornado, leading to
question about how it reached that intensity. Several hypotheses related to
Quasi-Linear Convective System (QLCS) tornadogenesis will be addressed using the
measurements from this tornado: 1) A surging baroclinic boundary enhances the
near-storm QLCS environment, making it more conducive to tornadogenesis by
locally increasing low-level (i) wind shear, (ii) instability, and (iii)
convergence, 2) A relatively warmer QLCS outflow promotes stretching of surface
vorticity, and 3) Observable radar reflectivity structures, such as bowing
segments, can be linked the success or failure of QLCS
tornadogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, given the close approach of
the tornado to the ULM radar, links between the radar data and damage path can
be made, improving our understanding of how remotely sensed radar data
correlates to tornadoes in real-time. The project will collect aerial imagery
from UASs to address this issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.