* 2030149
* A Decadal Survey of Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 11/30/2023
* USD 300,001.00

This project supports the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine (the “National Academies”), through the Board on Physics and Astronomy,
to organize and conduct a decadal study of elementary particle physics (EPP) at
the request of NSF and DOE. The study will assess the progress and developments
in EPP over the past decade and explore promising new directions for the period
2022-2032. It will also discuss the international landscape for EPP and leading
roles that the United States can play in this field in the future. The study
will also evaluate how EPP could benefit from more fully engaging with other
fields of research and the societal benefits flowing from EPP, including the
training of a highly skilled workforce. Finally, the report will make
recommendations on how to realize the full potential of this critical research
area for the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will identify, articulate,
and prioritize the scientific opportunities in elementary particle physics and
will offer clear and broad guidance, both to those within the discipline and
policymakers outside of the discipline. It will evaluate the recent past and
future directions of the entire field by members from across the field,
potentially leading to fresh insights and new perspectives on the key questions
that drive the science. In addition, it will help identify the opportunities and
challenges associated with pursuing interdisciplinary research, ultimately
placing the field in the broader context of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
final report will have a significant impact on the future of elementary particle
physics across the field. It will identify new directions and new perspectives
for the field and formulate guidelines for pursuing it to advance the science
efforts in the United States and abroad. It will describe the impact that EPP
has on other scientific fields, and along with roles that other fields play, or
might play, in advancing EPP research. The committee will include scientists
with broad expertise to analyze and demonstrate the impact of elementary
particle physics and techniques in modern science and technology. Part of the
report will be addressed to a lay audience to enhance the public understanding
of the role of elementary particle physics in other sciences and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.