* 2030427
* Scholarships, Community, and High-impact Practices to Improve Undergraduate Student Success in Computer Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Emmanuel Collins, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Louisville. Over its five-year duration, this project
will provide 60 scholarships to 20 unique undergraduate students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Computer Science and Engineering. Two cohorts of
five first-year students will receive up to four-years of scholarship support,
and two cohorts of five transfer or junior students will receive up to two-year
scholarships. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective supporting activities including mentoring,
undergraduate research experiences, service learning, graduate school
preparation, and outreach efforts to complement the university’s emerging
collaboration with the local and national technological workforce. The project
also aims to improve both STEM retention rates and overall graduation rates of
scholars through exposure to improved computer science and engineering gateway
courses and access to state-of-the-art technological tools and resources. The
knowledge, experiences, and lessons generated by this project will enable the
project team to identify the most effective discipline-specific curricular and
co-curricular activities for supporting students. Improving graduation rates for
computer science and engineering students will help address workforce needs in
Kentucky and beyond. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project has four specific objectives: (1)
to increase the number of enrolled low-income, academically talented students in
computer science and engineering over a five-year period; (2) to achieve
retention rates of at least 90% in Year 1 and 80% in Year 2 and Year 3, and to
improve graduation rates significantly for participating S-STEM scholars; (3) to
ensure that at least 90% of the project participants obtain career-related
employment or enroll in a graduate program within six months of graduation; and
(4) to advance understanding of the effectiveness of the proposed educational
activities in improving the retention and graduation rates of low-income,
academically talented students in computer science and engineering. Students
from low-income backgrounds often work more hours, have fewer social
connections, and are less likely to take a full-time course load or enroll
continuously from one semester to the next. These factors adversely impact
retention and graduation prospects. In addition to providing students with
improved financial stability through scholarships and the potential for
emotional support through cohort identity and community, this project will adapt
and implement high-quality evidence-based practices to improve retention,
graduation, and employability. These strategies include the improvement of
computer science and engineering gateway courses, better preparation of students
for engineering co-ops and employment, training of undergraduate teaching
assistants for the purpose of gateway course support, bi-weekly cohort meetings
and networking to build a sense of community. The impact of program components
and services will be measured through use of instruments such as Likert-scale
surveys at the beginning and end of each semester to probe students’
satisfaction and self-confidence in learning, intention to persist in their
field of study, and the perceived impact of each activity or student support
service. External oversight will include monitoring of programmatic and research
activities, provision of timely, periodic feedback to inform improvement of
these activities, and summative reviews of the goals and quality of work near
its completion. Dissemination of the project’s progress and outcomes will be
provided at regional and national conferences, via educational materials and
implementation documents, and published reports in journals or conference
proceedings. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.