* 2030919
* Creating Adoptable Computing Education Integrated into Social Studies Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tamara Shreiner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The project aims to provide more students computing education by integrating
programming activities into social studies classes and to use the computing to
enhance students’ data literacy. Today, few students see computer science in
high schools. Even in states with 40% or more of high schools offering a
computer science class, less than 5% of students take that opportunity. Every
high school student takes history. This project is developing an on-line
education research curriculum for data literacy and data visualization tools and
providing on-going support to teachers. This project supports students
computationally to build data visualizations in history classes, with
programming explicitly. This project also tackles the challenge of supporting
social studies teachers to adopt the data literacy curriculum and the integrated
computing education activities. Over a three-year period, the project is
tracking teachers from a pre-service teacher data literacy course, into their
field experience, and on into their in-service placement. Over three years, the
project will describe the factors that influence adoption and non-adoption. This
project is unique in its focus on developing curriculum and technology purpose-
built for social studies with teacher involvement to improve adoption. The
potential of the project is both to provide computing education to a larger
number and more diverse range of students and to provide data literacy in a
history context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on three theoretical
frameworks. The Technology Adoption Model suggests that teachers will adopt
technology that has high perceived usefulness and high perceived usability.
Design-based research informs what data to collect and how to analyze it when
conducting a multi-year iterative study. Participatory design informs how to
involve teachers in the design process so that the curriculum and technology
meets teachers’ perceptions of usefulness and usability. The project takes an
iterative approach to developing an on-line education research curriculum for
data literacy and data visualization tools and also in the designed support for
teachers. The goal of the support to teachers (pre-service and in-service) is
both to develop their knowledge and to inform the design of the curriculum and
technology so that it can be adapted to increase adoption. This project is
supported by the CS for All program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.