* 2030180
* RAPID: D3SC: Identification of Chemical Probes and Inhibitors Targeting Novel Sites on SARS-CoV-2 Proteins for COVID-19 Intervention
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 04/30/2022
* USD 165,808.00

The life cycle of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2) involves a number of viral proteins and enzymes required for infectivity
and replication. Inhibitors that target these enzymes serve as potential
therapeutic interventions against coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). With this
award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry Division is
supporting the research of Drs. Mary Jo Ondrechen and Penny J. Beuning from
Northeastern University to apply computational methods to identify sites in
SARS-CoV-2 proteins that would be good targets for binding inhibitors. The
project uses artificial intelligence methods developed at Northeastern
University to identify pockets and crevices in the structures of viral proteins
that may serve as new targets for the development of antiviral agents. Large
datasets of natural and synthetic compounds are computationally searched for
molecules that fit into these alternative sites, and any compounds that fit will
be experimentally tested for their ability to inhibit the functions of these
viral enzymes. The project provides training in computational chemistry and
biochemical analysis to graduate students and postdoctoral
associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the unique Partial Order
Optimum Likelihood (POOL) machine learning (ML) method developed by Dr.
Ondrechen’s group to predict multiple types of binding sites in SARS-CoV-2
proteins, including catalytic sites, allosteric sites, and other interaction
sites. The goals of this project are to apply the POOL-ML method to identify the
binding sites on viral pathogen SARS-CoV-2 proteins using the three-dimensional
protein structures as input. Molecular dynamics simulations are used to generate
conformations for ensemble docking. Compounds from the large molecular databases
are computationally docked into the predicted sites to identify potentially
strong binding ligands. Candidate ligands to selected SARS-CoV-2 proteins,
including the main protease and 2ʹ-O-ribose RNA methyltransferase, are
experimentally tested in vitro for binding affinity and the effect of the best
predicted inhibitors on catalytic activities determined by direct biochemical
assays. All the SARS-CoV-2 protein structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) are
studied. Compound libraries for the study include: a) selected 2600+ compounds
from the ZINC and Enamine databases that are already being manufactured; b) a
library of 20,000+ compounds found in foods that the team recently gained access
to; these potentially hold some special advantages, including ready availability
in the public domain and low cost; and c) the March 2020 open access CAS
(American Chemical Society) database of 50,000 compounds with known or potential
anti-viral activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.