* 2030381
* RAPID: IIBR Informatics: Predicting All-atom Structure of SARS-CoV-2 Related Protein Complex from 3D Cryo-Electron Microscopy Data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Dong Si, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The outbreak of novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has caused a global
pandemic. Knowledge on the molecular basis of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
related protein complexes is essential to providing insight of the virus and how
it infects human cells, a first step in developing novel drugs and vaccines to
combat SARS-CoV-2. This study will enable development of all-atom structure
prediction of CoV-related protein complexes, including complex surfaces of human
cells the virus infects. Prediction results will be broadly and quickly
disseminated through interactive web applications to maximize the impact of the
research. The results will lead to a broad range of biomedical applications,
such as a better understanding of important biological functions, disease
processes, development of novel drugs and vaccines, and improved preventive
therapies leading to reduced health care costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to study ab initio all-atom structure prediction of CoV-related
protein complexes based on electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM). Methods based on
the state-of-the-art technologies of image processing for pre-processing the
data, deep learning for complex structure prediction, and dynamic optimization
for final refinement to reveal fundamental mechanisms of CoV-related
macromolecules will be developed. The project will also provide an open-source
and interactive web portal for public access of the developed tools. The work
could have immediate impact on steps taken to halt the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and
the current pandemic. Training opportunities for students at all levels,
particularly women and underrepresented minorities will also be carried out. The
results of the project can be found at:
http://faculty.washington.edu/dongsi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is
made by the Infrastructure Innovation for Biological Research (IIBR Informatics)
Program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.