* 2030574
* Financial Support, Mentoring, and Career Development for Scholars in Energy Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Gholam Massiha, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 05/31/2026
* USD 649,825.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
pursuing energy-related degrees in the College of Engineering at the University
of Louisiana at Lafayette. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 38 unique, full-time students who are pursuing bachelor's
degrees in electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, civil engineering,
chemical engineering, petroleum engineering, or industrial technology. Scholars
will include 18 freshman, 12 sophomores, and 8 juniors, who will receive up to
four years of scholarship support. The Scholars will be provided with effective
support activities including high-quality faculty mentoring, undergraduate
research experiences, service learning opportunities, connections to local
industries, guidance on graduate school preparation and career development, and
participation in targeted workshops and seminars. With individualized guidance
from faculty mentors, Scholars will create individual development plans
outlining their career goals and steps toward achieving those goals. The project
will support curriculum design aimed at improving overall student retention in
the College, particularly for first- and second-year students, who are at
greatest risk for transfer or drop-out. This project can help the United States
remain competitive in the field of energy technologies by graduating students
who can fill workforce needs in these fields. In addition, the project has the
potential to increase understanding about the roles of mentoring and individual
development plans in supporting STEM degree attainment and to broaden student
participation and success in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specifically
focuses on creating a sustainable and adaptive pathway that will provide
students with the necessary engineering skills and solutions-based approaches
needed by future employers in energy technology fields. To do so, the project
aims to: 1) Provide scholarships to students pursuing energy-related engineering
fields; 2) Implement evidence-based support services for Scholars; and 3)
Develop a model of strategies to support undergraduate student success.
Preparing graduates to enter the energy technologies workforce is an imperative
component of this project, reflecting the role of energy technologies in
Louisiana’s workforce and economy. Through cohorts, mentoring, field
experiences, internships, and workshops, Scholars are expected to develop
knowledge about current and future challenges of energy technologies. Although
the project focuses on energy technologies, the educational model that will be
implemented has the potential to work across other STEM disciplines. The
projects' research plan includes an investigation of the effectiveness of the
cohort engagement model when paired with financial support. The investigation
will seek to identify the impact that project activities, including workplace
training, research experiences, and new engineering courses, have on student
success. Project success will be assessed through an external evaluation that
compares outcomes of Scholars to those of peers. The project results and
outcomes will be presented in local, regional, and national conferences and
through the project's website. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.