* 2030568
* Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Big-Data in University of Massachusetts, Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Haiying Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 74,681.00

This high-performance computing (HPC) cluster at the University of Massachusetts
(UMass) Amherst will support a wide range of computation-intensive research
activities at the Department of Geosciences, especially the recently established
Seismology Research Group. Research activities across a wide diversity of UMass
Geosciences deal with big datasets, where computation plays an integral role.
This includes research laboratories in seismology, geomechanics, geomorphology,
hydrology, sedimentology, geography, and climatology. This overwhelming
computation demand is most effectively met with efficient HPC clusters. The HPC
cluster will provide cutting-edge, high performance computational power to a
wide range of research activities at the UMass Geosciences, including three
female and two early-career faculty members as well as their students and
postdocs. The HPC cluster will also be made available to a diversity of other
UMass campus users through the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing
Center (MGHPCC) and will greatly enrich UMass research infrastructure. The
instrumentation will provide hands-on interdisciplinary research training to
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. More broadly,
the outcome of this project will be integrated into a two-week Summer Seismology
Education Workshop, targeting undergraduate students from the Five-College
Community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong needs for HPC cluster exist from a large
number of researchers across multiple disciplines broadly related to Earth
Sciences at UMass. This high-performance computing cluster will meet their
research demands. The much-needed shared HPC cluster will support NSF-funded
research projects in several areas. This includes a new NSF/EAR CAREER grant to
develop a new understanding of the nature of variation within and along
subduction zones with advanced methods of seismic modeling. The cutting-edge
full-wave propagation simulation within 3D Earth structures, which relies on
high-performance computation, provides us a powerful way to constrain the three-
dimensional seismic features of the crust and mantle lithosphere. The requested
HPC cluster will also find immediate applications across a wide range of
research activities in Geosciences, including: (1) an NSF CAREER grant to
quantify soil erosion rates of the midwestern U.S.; (2) an NSF/EAR grant to
simulate fracture propagation with rock material; (3) a NASA-supported graduate
fellowship on extreme sea level hazard in the Gulf of Maine; (4) an NSF/EAR
grant on continental accretion and lithospheric evolution through geologic time
in eastern North America. And (5) two projects to investigate the terrestrially
dissolved organic carbon input to the Arctic Ocean and to characterize dynamic
socio-environmental flash flood risk. The HPC cluster will support the career
development of an early-career female seismologist as well as the new seismology
group at UMass Amherst. Expansion of seismology research and teaching has
outstanding potential to attract undergraduate and graduate students at the
Five-College Community (including UMass Amherst, Amherst College, Hampshire
College, all-female Smith and Mount Holyoke Colleges). In addition, PI Gao has
been a volunteer instructor, offering workshops for underrepresented 8th-12th-
grade girls through the Girls Inc. Eureka! Program (a national organization),
which is a strong STEM-based collaboration between Girls Inc. of Holyoke,
Massachusetts and UMass Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.