* 2030570
* Short-Exposure Imaging through Atmospheric Turbulence using Single Photon Image Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stanley Chan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

Ground-based long-range passive imaging systems are one of the most critical
sensing modalities in civilian and military applications, but they often suffer
from distortions due to a turbulent atmosphere. In the presence of atmospheric
turbulence, the captured images will become unstable, blurred, and ultimately
the details of the objects will be lost. Without any mitigation, the degraded
image quality will severely reduce our ability to make informed decisions,
identify threat objects, navigate in unknown environments, and perform
scientific measurements. Turbulence mitigation methods have been studied for
decades, but most optics-based approaches require coherent light sources which
are not always feasible, whereas post-processing methods are largely limited to
stationary scenes. When an object of interest moves or when the camera is not
stationary, both the capturing and restoration of the images remain very
challenging tasks. The goal of this project is to develop a new computational
imaging framework using the single-photon image sensors, by capturing and
recovering moving objects distorted by turbulence. By accomplishing this goal,
the project will fill the critical gap in the current imaging technology. This,
in turn, will empower new imaging abilities for surveillance, navigation,
defense, and remote sensing, all of which are critical to the economy and
homeland security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
methods to acquire very short exposure images, and new algorithms to recover the
dynamic scenes. This involves a new type of image sensors that offer state-of-
the-art photon resolving capability, which can operate with sufficient signal-
to-noise at even extremely short exposures. Four research thrusts will be
pursued: (i) to derive the theoretical limits of single-photon imaging through
turbulence, by analyzing the photon statistics and its interaction with the
atmosphere; (ii) to develop dynamic sampling mechanisms to acquire signals non-
uniformly, and to develop optimal exposure controls to enable high-dynamic range
imaging; (iii) to develop AI-enhanced image reconstruction algorithms; (iv) to
develop an evaluation framework to quantify the performance of image
reconstruction algorithms, including building fast turbulence simulators and
pattern recognition evaluation schemes. On the education front, the project will
create online STEM afterschool programs for 9-12th grade students, focusing on
computer vision and machine learning. The emphasis of online content delivery
will enable remote teaching when face-to-face meetings are difficult, and allow
teaching beyond geographical boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.