* 2030858
* Supporting STEM Undergraduates with Scholarships, Mentoring, and Collaborative Interdisciplinary Research Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Eric Pedersen, UTAH TECH UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 01/31/2026
* USD 933,393.00

This project will help meet the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with financial need at Dixie
State University. This University is an open-enrollment, comprehensive regional
university in Southern Utah. Over its four-year duration, the project will
provide scholarships to 60 full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in biology, mathematics, computer science, chemistry, and mechanical
engineering. The Scholars will enter in annual cohorts of about 20 students and
receive two years of scholarship support. Scholars will participate in evidence-
based practices known to promote academic success, such as mentoring and a
regular study hall. In addition, Scholars will participate in a series of
research and prototyping courses called Innovative Solutions. These courses will
span four semesters and immerse Scholars and their peers in a multidisciplinary
research project. This experience is intended to help them learn to collaborate
across STEM disciplines, a critical skill for success in many current and future
STEM careers. In the Innovative Solutions series, Scholars will learn about
research methods, modern prototyping techniques, and technology startup
fundamentals, while working in teams to solve modern real-world
interdisciplinary challenges. This project intends to develop a replicable model
that other institutions can use to integrate STEM disciplines and team-based
learning in ways that promote undergraduate STEM student academic success and
career preparation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. This project’s scope also addresses two common
challenges in preparing STEM students for STEM careers: their isolation from
other STEM disciplines throughout degree programs and insufficient opportunities
for real-world problem solving. To overcome these challenges, the project will
establish interdisciplinary cohorts from the biological sciences, chemistry,
computer science, engineering, and mathematics. The Innovative Solutions Course
Series will engage these cohorts in sequential one-credit courses that emphasize
interdisciplinary collaboration, critical thinking, problem solving, and
entrepreneurship. Designed as a project-based learning experience, the course
series will require participants to research, develop, test, and market a
solution to a real-world problem. The topics selected in the courses will be
contemporary challenges that enable students to be innovative contributors to
the scientific body of knowledge. The project’s research and evaluation efforts
will examine how the Innovative Solutions Course series affects Scholars’
academic success, communication and collaboration skills, content knowledge,
critical thinking, and opinions about science. The Innovative Solutions Course
series represents a scalable model for student research and engagement. Insights
gained from its implementation will be disseminated to the undergraduate STEM
education community through conference presentations and journal publications.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.