* 2030530
* RAPID: Optimizing distance learning programs to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on REU sites in biology.
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Erin Dolan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 77,892.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has undermined national capacity to offer onsite Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites. Due to the rapid onset of the
pandemic, BIO-REU principal investigators (PIs) were caught largely unprepared
to deliver REU learning through distance technologies. This proposal will
capitalize of the organizing activities started by BIO-REU PIs to provide
distance REU programs. Specifically, PIs are making substantial changes to their
programs to engage students in research at a distance, including shifting to
research projects that can be conducted at a distance, offering research
mentoring and professional development online, and providing informal avenues
for communication at a distance. The shift to distance programming is both
necessary and unprecedented. Substantive evaluation is needed in order to refine
these approaches to maximize student learning and minimize disruption to REU
offerings, which play a critical role in developing the research workforce. This
project will improve student learning and development in distance BIO-REU sites
by carrying out such an evaluation. First, the distance REUs will be evaluated
early in their programming through virtual focus groups with students and
mentors as well as observations of synchronous, distance activities. The results
of these evaluations will be reported rapidly to the BIO-REU PIs to enable
prompt adjustments and refinements of distance program activities. Then,
additional focus group and survey data will be collected to determine the extent
to which distance REUs are able to (a) build a sense of community in their
cohorts, (b) ensure student ownership of their research projects, (c) provide
quality mentorship at a distance, and (d) influence students’ professional
growth and their education and career interests. Data will be compared across
REU sites and with published studies of in-person REU sites to identify
strategies useful for improving student learning in distance REUs. Results will
be shared in reports to each REU site in order to make improvements and
published for the undergraduate STEM education community to apply lessons
learned in future undergraduate research programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will accomplish two major goals: (1) evaluating distance REUs in order
to improve student learning and research workforce development and (2) producing
new knowledge about the effectiveness of distance REU programming. Using
established approaches and measurements for evaluating undergraduate research
experiences, the project will involve conducting focus groups, observing program
activities, and collecting survey data from undergraduate researchers and their
research mentors at REU sites across the country that are operating at a
distance due to COVID19. Results from analysis of focus groups and observations
will be rapidly reported to REU site leaders to make immediate improvements to
better support student learning. Results from surveys and focus groups will be
used to determine the extent to which distance REUs are able to achieve similar
goals to in-person REUs, including building a sense of community, ensuring
robust student involvement in research, providing quality mentorship at a
distance, and influencing students’ professional growth and their education and
career interests. The project will produce tested strategies for engaging
undergraduates in research at a distance, which could be applied to other
circumstances such as serving students who are not able to travel to a distant
REU site or engaging students following natural disasters. The project will be
conducted in the context of biology, which is the domain of STEM with the
largest number of undergraduate researchers. This RAPID award is made by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.