* 2030562
* RAPID: Collaborative Research:  Mathematical tools for analysis of genomic diversity of SARS-CoV-2 virus in the context of its co-evolution with host populations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Simon Tavare, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Understanding the potential courses of the current coronavirus pandemic and its
possible recurrences in the light of public health interventions, such as social
distancing, requires knowledge of how the virus is likely to evolve in humans.
To this end, novel statistical and computational techniques are needed to
extract the information available in the viral RNA sequences now available from
patients sampled from many parts of the world. The work will focus on
descriptions of the mechanisms by which mutations accumulate in the viral
genome, in part through interactions with their hosts. The project will then
develop novel statistical approaches that will be needed to compare and contrast
these mechanisms. A deeper understanding of how the mutations in the viral
genomes are accumulating should provide better inferences about the nature of
different strains of the virus that will survive in the human population. This
information in turn can aid in the design of vaccines. Postdoctoral research
associates and international collaborators are involved in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New probabilistic and statistical methods will be
developed to estimate rates and patterns of evolution of SARS-CoV-2 based on
molecular phylogenies and mutation spectra within the virus population and among
different coronavirus species. The evolutionary past of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
will be reconstructed and used to infer its evolutionary potential for enabling
recurrences, taking into account the evolution of the human population and
animal virus resistance. A set of models of stochastic dynamics based on
branching process models will enable estimation of drift, mutation, and
selection patterns of the virus population in a host population. Spatial aspects
of the host dynamics will be based on agent-based models (ABMs), with a view to
better understanding how the evolution of the virus is driven by that of its
host. Novel statistical methods for inference about relevant parameters of both
the branching process models and the ABMs will be developed, starting from
implementations of Approximate Bayesian Computation approaches that can address
the difficulty caused by not being able to explicitly compute
likelihoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplement allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.