* 2030017
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Social interactions, social connectedness, and health outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Tom Kamarck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 8,295.00

Good mental and physical health depend on a strong sense of social
connectedness. The restrictions of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the resultant
social isolation and loneliness, have caused that connectedness to deteriorate.
Despite decades of research, relatively little is known about the
characteristics of social interactions that lead to improvements in social
connectedness and, ultimately, to improved health. This project seeks to gain
better understanding of how social interactions support social connectedness. It
examines the effects of the social isolation and psychological distress that
result from social distancing and stay-at-home policies. The research considers
activities people perform together, the types of people who serve as interaction
partners, the emotional tone and the modality of interaction (in person, phone,
text, or video). The study uses longitudinal surveys with a nation-wide panel of
U.S. adults to assess the ways in which social interactions provide the route
through which social ties are maintained, the regulation of relationships
occurs, and social support is exchanged. The project will ultimately inform the
development of health-related interventions in this and future pandemic
situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance theory about how
everyday social interactions influence general social connectedness, including
loneliness, perceived social support, and strength of social ties. In addition
to advancing theory, the research addresses the more immediate need to
understand the consequences of social distancing policies. Identifying the most
beneficial social interactions can help support just-in-time interventions to
improve social connectedness and related public health recommendations. To
achieve these goals, the research collects longitudinal survey data over a
three-week period in which U.S. adults complete multiple surveys each day to
describe the frequency and characteristics of their social interactions. End-of-
day surveys measure social connectedness (loneliness, perceived social support,
and tie strength) and mental health (positive and negative affect, depression,
anxiety, and perceived stress). Statistical techniques for longitudinal data,
including structural equation modeling and latent change score analysis, test
the relationship between interaction characteristics and the end-of-day surveys.
Insight gained by this research will inform future efforts in implementing
health-related behavioral change recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.