* 2030890
* Effects of Culturally Responsive Practices on the Success of Academically Talented STEM Students with Financial Need
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Vanessa Martinez, Holyoke Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Holyoke Community College. Over its five-year duration, the project will
fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time students and 9 part-time students
pursuing STEM associate’s degrees, with the intention to transfer to a four-year
institution to major in biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering,
environmental science, geoscience, mathematics, or physics. Full-time Scholars
will receive up to three years of funding and part-time Scholars will receive up
to four years of funding. The project will implement six central activities
intended to bolster student success: 1) a cohort-based, enriched STEM-focused
seminar; 2) intensive faculty and peer mentoring; 3) early undergraduate
research; 4) civic engagement; 5) tutoring in STEM courses; and 6) faculty
professional development on culturally responsive pedagogy. These activities
focus on improving students’ STEM identity, and are expected increase equitable
access to high achievement and other positive outcomes. Knowledge generated from
project findings and professional development workshops on culturally responsive
pedagogy are expected to be broadly transferable to STEM education from K-12 to
four-year institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will use culturally
responsive practices and activities to create a community of highly engaged
learners and enable them to achieve success academically and within the
workforce. Further, this project will investigate the hypothesis that a STEM
program designed around culturally responsive pedagogy will help Scholars
develop their STEM identity, confidence, and sense of belonging, which, in turn,
will impact their success, achievement, and retention in STEM. Findings from
this project will advance the understanding of the effectiveness of culturally
responsive practices in STEM education and will address research gaps in the
literature related to the connections between culturally responsive pedagogy and
student outcomes, including academic achievement. Project outcomes will also
highlight methods to increase retention and graduation of STEM students at the
community college level, their transfer to four-year colleges in STEM
disciplines, and their persistence into STEM careers. Formative evaluation will
be conducted each semester for ongoing improvement, to assess student
engagement, to review academic challenges, and to address other needs. Project
findings will be disseminated through conference presentations, a project
website, and journal articles. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.