* 2030741
* Financial and Programmatic Supports to Prepare Undergraduates for Work in Technology Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Lee Cottrell, Pittsburgh Technical Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/28/2026
* USD 647,764.00

This project will help meet the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with verified
financial need at Pittsburgh Technical College. This College is a non-profit,
private institution that offers Associate of Science and Bachelor of Science
degrees in more than thirty fields. Over five years, the project will provide
two-year scholarships to 25 full-time students who are pursuing Associate
Degrees in Information Technology, Network Administration, Information
Technology, Security and Forensics, Computer Programming, or Electronics
Engineering Technology. These Scholars will also benefit from faculty mentoring,
as well as participation in coordinated classes and service-learning projects,
such as teaching STEM concepts to public school students. Insights gained from
this project will help Pittsburgh Technical College better understand the
financial and academic supports that best support their students to complete
their classes and degrees, ready to enter the STEM workforce. In addition,
project activities and outcomes will be shared with other two-year colleges,
thus informing the efforts of other institutions to recruit, retain, and
graduate students in associate STEM degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project has three
objectives: (i) ensure that 85% of the Scholars are retained from semester to
semester; (ii) ensure that 75% of the Scholars graduate on time; and (iii)
ensure that 90% of all retained Scholars are employed in a STEM-related job or
transfer to a four-year institution within six months of graduation. The project
team hypothesizes that financial aid and specific programmatic supports will
differentially affect groups of students. To test this hypothesis, the project
team will conduct research to identify effective ways to increase student
retention rates and to distinguish which supports are most effective for
different student groups. The project will address two research questions: (i)
Are financial or programmatic supports more effective in retaining academically
talented students with high financial need in two-year, associate degree STEM
degree programs? and (ii) Does the effectiveness of specific supports differ
according to students’ gender, race, and residency on versus off campus? Project
results will be shared across the College and with the broader community of STEM
education researchers through conference presentations and journal articles.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.