* 2030139
* RAPID: Compounding Crises: Facing Hurricane Season in the Era of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Dana Rose Garfin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,890.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant provides funding to assess
participants’ crisis exposure, their threat perceptions, their self- and
response-efficacy, their emotional responses and their engagement in health
protective behaviors as relevant to COVID-19 and to hurricanes. As the 2020
hurricane season commences, millions of Americans residing in the Atlantic and
Gulf of Mexico coasts will face the likely possibility of dual crises – COVID-19
and hurricane exposure – with competing mitigation strategies. Experts project
that there will be four hurricanes that will develop into major hurricanes
(Categories 3, 4, or 5) in the Atlantic during the 2020 hurricane season (June
1st – November 30th). Concurrently, many in the Atlantic and Gulf Coast states
are seeing alarming increases in confirmed case of COVID-19. The confluence of
crises in communities at risk for hurricane exposure may create an untenable and
tragic situation where millions of people may be suddenly asked to flee from an
approaching major hurricane to shelters, potentially imperiling themselves and
others to COVID-19. Hurricane-force winds further compound the risk given the
high potential for Coronavirus to spread via respiratory droplets, potentially
creating super-spreading environments and fueling fears about going to shelters.
Repeated exposure to such crises can tax individuals’ emotional states, leading
to difficulties in functioning and decision making over time. The important
theoretical and practical question is: “How do people make proactive decisions
regarding the threat of a hurricane in the time of the COVID-19
pandemic?”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team conducts a prospective,
longitudinal, epidemiological study of residents (n=1,683) from Texas and
Florida, for whom the team has data on their exposure, behavior, and response to
previous hurricanes. Participants are members of Ipsos’s KnowledgePanel, and
complete two surveys: one at the beginning of the 2020 hurricane season and at
the height of the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic and the second after the
threat of a major land-falling Category 3, 4, or 5 hurricane. The researchers
assess participants’ crisis exposure, their threat perceptions, their self- and
response-efficacy, their emotional responses and their engagement in health
protective behaviors as relevant to COVID-19 and to hurricanes. Moreover, the
team uses publicly available datasets to create geocoded variables that link
participant location to objective indicators of disaster exposure to both
COVID-19 (e.g., deaths per 10,000, daily cases) and the physical parameters of
hurricanes (e.g., inundation flooding, wind speed, air temperature). This
project examines individual’s response to repeated exposure to hurricanes in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic, using pre-COVID, prospectively collected data,
objective markers of exposure, and a longitudinal design. The findings are
useful to policymakers, service providers, educators, and members of the media
to communicate messages and design interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.