* 2030851
* Collaboration Between Community Colleges and a University to Increase Transfer Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Jeffrey Simmons, Mount St. Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2025
* USD 899,926.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, and engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income community college transfer students
with demonstrated financial need at Mount St. Mary’s University, a small private
Catholic liberal arts university. The university will partner with two regional
community colleges, Montgomery College and Frederick Community College, to
strengthen the transfer process and promote transfer student success. Over its
five-year duration, the project will provide two-year scholarships to 27
transfer students, in three cohorts. The Scholars will pursue bachelor’s degrees
in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, computer science, cybersecurity,
environmental science, and/or mathematics. Community college and university
faculty will collaborate to recruit and advise all students interested in
transferring to a four-year institution. Upon acceptance in the fall of their
second year at the community college, students will receive extensive pre-
transfer support and some will be selected to receive scholarships. At the
university, all transfer students will benefit from supports designed to promote
retention and graduation of STEM students. As a result, the project has the
potential for impact well beyond the 27 Scholars. The project will educate
faculty about inclusive pedagogy to help promote academic achievement of diverse
students. Evaluation of the project’s activities will advance understanding of
effective strategies for supporting recruitment, retention, and success of
community college transfer students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Mount St. Mary’s
University will partner with Frederick Community College and Montgomery College
to implement the Transfer Pathways Program, an enhanced recruiting program
designed to increase transfer capital. Students accepted into the university
will receive extensive pre-transfer support designed to further increase
transfer capital and facilitate their transition. Upon matriculation to the
university, they will receive academic, social, and professional development
support designed to promote retention and graduation. Selected students will
also receive scholarships. The intended measurable outcomes of this project are:
1) To recruit and financially support 27 Pell-eligible STEM students from
Montgomery College and Frederick Community College; 2) To retain 90% of the
Scholars through graduation; 3) To place 90% of Scholars in graduate school or
professional roles in their STEM field within one year of graduation; 4) To
determine the effectiveness of the institutional partnership on promoting
enrollment, transfer capital, and engagement of academically talented, low-
income STEM community college transfer students. Because much of the research
examining transfer student success has involved large, public institutions, it
is important to understand how institutional partnerships between community
colleges and small private universities can promote transfer capital, student
engagement, and student success. Measures of these variables will be compared
pre- and post-participation in the Transfer Pathways program and between
community college students who participated in Transfer Pathways and those who
did not. Through publications and conference presentations, the partnering
institutions will widely disseminate research and evaluation results. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.