* 2030160
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: A "Citizen Science" approach to examine COVID-19 social distancing effects on children's language development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Yi Ting Huang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2021
* USD 47,504.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is a significant threat to learning and language
development for large numbers of children. Such challenges are compounded for
those facing social and economic adversity, factors that are associated with
decreased parental interactions, child development, and school achievement. This
study examines the scope and magnitude of learning impacts from COVID19 pandemic
by engaging families as “Citizen Scientists” who will track their children’s
language use during the crisis. Social-distancing policies vary by state,
enabling the researchers to compare how these different decisions affect
children’s language development. This will help policymakers and educators make
more informed decisions, both about crisis management and strategies to mitigate
negative effects of crisis-related policies. More broadly, this work will make
important contributions to the science of language learning, which in turn will
help clinicians and educators best address the needs of children from varying
demographics. Finally, by using a Citizen Science paradigm, this project
establishes a conduit for science outreach and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will recruit thousands of “volunteer
researchers” to record data about their own family environment, parent-child
conversations, and child language development using a web-based application
accessible through a laptop or mobile phone. In addition to collecting survey
responses, this app enables parents to make short audio recordings of their
child’s speech and build a scrapbook of developing language abilities over time.
When paired with comprehensive recruitment, this platform will assemble speech
samples that are both broad and deep and will support more accurate models of
relations between children’s learning and long- vs. short-term adversity.
Additionally, the varied timing of social disruptions across locations permits
both between-family and within-family comparisons of COVID-19 impacts, and
yields estimates of effect sizes and modulation by race and socioeconomic
status. The data will address questions of urgent societal interest, including
a) how COVID-19 policies impact language-learning environments; b) how family
stress changes children’s language and communication behavior; and c) what
impacts the COVID-19 crisis has on developmental outcomes. Moreover, since
social disruptions affect a wide demographic and are largely outside family
control, this project leverages the COVID-19 crisis as an unusually clean
manipulation of social and economic adversity. This avoids confounds that are
persistently problematic in existing research, and will deepen theoretical
insight into the factors that affect children’s language
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.