* 2030763
* Creating Opportunities for High-achieving Students in Science and Mathematics through Scholarships, Research Experiences, Leadership, and Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Gretchen North, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Occidental College, a private liberal arts college. It will do so by
providing financial, academic, and personal support to academically high-
achieving students with financial need majoring in Biology, Biochemistry,
Chemistry, Geology, Mathematics and Physics. Over its five-year duration, the
project will support two annual cohorts of ten second-year students with
scholarships of up to $10,000 per year for up to three years. The project builds
upon a successful prior Track 1 S-STEM award and will provide Scholars with
opportunities for scientific research, internships, intellectual growth, and
professional skill development. The project will generate and disseminate
knowledge about promoting student success and increasing students’ perception of
belonging in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The plan to achieve this goal includes
recruiting, inspiring, and developing a diverse group of low-income,
academically high-achieving STEM majors to identify as scientists and leaders in
STEM. The project will complement and strengthen support services at the College
by creating and implementing five initiatives: 1) a new first-year, writing-
intensive STEM-focused seminar course; 2) a new third-year seminar course for
STEM majors centered around scientific communication, career readiness, and
professional development; 3) providing guaranteed opportunities for scholars to
participate in undergraduate research, internship experiences, and disciplinary
conferences; 4) enhanced advising and strategic mentoring; 5) multiple
leadership opportunities in various settings and modalities, including peer-to-
peer, community-based, role-modelling, volunteer, and direct assistance. The
efficacy of the project components will be evaluated both formatively and
summatively using multi-modal approaches to collecting and analyzing data
associated with the project’s stated goals and objectives. The project has a
robust research agenda that centers on determining barriers in STEM, their
effects on retention and persistence, and how STEM identity evolves as students
traverse their academic trajectory. The research plan includes closely tracking
two entire classes of entering first-year college students through graduation to
monitor how an age-structured cohort may provide younger students with
inspiration and mentorship and older students with leadership skills and a
deepened understanding of scientific practices that will inform their subsequent
careers and education. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.