* 2030779
* ARTS: North American Inocybaceae: A systematic and taxonomic revision
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Patrick Matheny, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 07/31/2024
* USD 612,341.00

Fungi are staggeringly diverse with anywhere from 1-10 million species estimated
worldwide. However, only a fraction has been formally described. The Inocybaceae
is a family of mushroom-forming fungi estimated to contain some 300 species in
North America, but many of these have not been revised in decades, most are
known from very few collections, and species are difficult to identify based on
morphology alone. The Inocybaceae is important because its species form plant
root mutualisms with trees like pines and oaks in forested and urban settings,
and many species are toxic to humans and pets. This award will fund research to
revise and synthesize the Inocybaceae from North America, thus enabling a better
understanding of its diversity and provide resources for identification of
species and more inclusive taxa. Support will be provided to train graduate
students, undergraduates, and citizen scientists in the field of systematics and
taxonomy, which aims to understand how organisms have diversified over time and
their identification and classification. This research will also improve natural
history collections in the United States and enable the Inocybaceae to become a
model group for future studies in other research areas of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in this project will produce a modern
systematic revision of the Inocybaceae based on evolutionary theory. Individual
species will be revised based on input from natural history collections in
museums and herbaria augmented by fresh samples from the field and environmental
DNA. Numerous type specimens will be molecularly annotated to affirm their
taxonomic status and relationship to extant collections. This will result in the
first monograph of the family in 100 years, aid modern floristic treatments by
region in North America, and result in description of many novel species.
Measures of functional diversity will be made across the Inocybaceae and its
sister group, the Crepidotaceae, using stable isotope data of nitrogen and
carbon to evaluate the timing and number of shifts to the mycorrhizal habit.
Several hypotheses regarding macroevolution and macroecology will be assessed.
These entail a putative increase in diversification in temperate descendants of
tropical ancestors and adaptive or functional links between certain
morphological features and biogeographical traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.