* 2030307
* RAPID: Predicting Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Impact with Multiscale Contact and Transmission Mitigation
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2023
* USD 215,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The rapid spread of new coronavirus SARS-
CoV-2, which causes Coronavirus Disease (covid-19), requires a multidisciplinary
mitigation strategy from the clinical to physical host-to-host transmission
modelling. Data is required on the transmission of pathogen carrying airborne
mucosalivary droplets and aerosols generated during normal breathing, talking,
sneezing, and coughing. Synthetic exhalations will be measured leveraging
advanced prototyping to obtain data needed to model the spread of covid-19, and
the efficacy of personal protection devices and face coverings fabricated with
various weaves and materials will be tested. Physical data related to
temperature, humidity, and airflow on survival and dispersion of exhalations
will be obtained. The data will be integrated using supervised machine learning
methods, mathematical network simulations, and epidemiological data to develop
an individual-based method that can give pandemic management results. Physical
data will be published on transmission rates, including wearing of personal
protective equipment and face coverings with various weaves, to inform
mitigation strategies to alleviate covid-19 pandemic. Interactive Web based
resources will be used for immediate broad dissemination of data and learning
outcomes on covid-19 to the public, in addition to peer reviewed publications
and training post-doctoral and undergraduate researchers in methods leading to
pandemic mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The mode
of transmission and extent of environmental contaminations on the outbreak of
the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (covid-19), while sharing features with severe
acute respiratory syndrome and other infectious diseases, remains unknown. This
project will address fundamental rheology-matched metrics of transport and
survival of airborne exhalation droplets and aerosols that carry coronavirus and
on surfaces needed as input parameters for modeling mitigation. Impact of
personal protective equipment on individual prognosis, with physical data
related to temperature, humidity, and airflow-dependent dispersion distance of
pathogen bearing viscoelastic droplets corresponding to breathing, sneezing, and
coughing, will be obtained. The impact of the measured transmission rates on the
spread and recurrence will be investigated with epidemiological data integrated
with deep learning to implement a scalable, individual-based, stochastic,
spatial model. Resulting peer-reviewed publications will serve as trusted source
for calculation of covid-19 transmissibility and personal protection strategies.
Post-doctoral and undergraduate researchers versed in fluid dynamics, soft
matter physics, and network simulations will be trained toward mitigating
infectious disease spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) grant supports research that will result in spatiotemporal mucosalivary
droplet transmission range data required to develop covid-19 mitigation network
methods with funding from the CARES Act managed by the Condensed Matter Physics
Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.