* 2030567
* RAPID: Viral Particle Disrupting and Sequestering Polymer Materials applied to Coronaviruses
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Richard Page, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 181,849.00

This is an NSF RAPID award in response to the 2020 CARES Act and is managed by
the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research of the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1:
NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the first cases of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) appeared in late 2019, the disease has infected millions
globally. The virus responsible for COVID-19 can stay active, capable of causing
infections, on various surfaces for days, during which time indirect contact
transmission could occur. Coronaviruses contain both a surface envelope of
lipids and surface presented proteins which resemble spikes. Both of these
features of the virus can be used to trap and destroy the viruses within
synthetic materials. Synthetic polymer materials capable of inactivating and
sequestering the virus causing COVID-19 will be developed in this project. These
materials will form tough structures, with the materials containing synthetic
and natural groups to both disrupt the lipid molecules on the surface of the
virus and to bind and trap the coronavirus spike proteins. The polymers will
form a tough network, ensuring the material performs for an extended period of
time. This research involves design and synthesis of polymers as well as
characterization and study of their mechanical properties and focuses on
developing materials that could be adapted or coated onto existing high-touch
surfaces. Additionally, the project will create publicly accessible virtual
presentations and content on how polymer materials are critical for the health
care industry and innovations in materials for biomedical applications. With the
development of materials with excellent durability and robust ability to disrupt
and trap the coronavirus, a reduction in COVID-19 infection by mitigating the
indirect contact transmission mechanism is
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) exhibits active lifetimes of over 24 hours. This enables
transmission to occur hours or days after a virus containing droplet is
deposited from an infected individual. Materials that destroy the virus and
sequester the virus to the surface could reduce the transmission rate of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). This project will develop virus trapping
and disrupting tough networks which could be used to coat commonly encountered
surfaces. The polymer materials will disrupt the lipid envelope of SARS-CoV-2
viral particles and bind the spike on the surface of SARS-CoV-2 with high
affinity. Both purely synthetic materials as well as hybrid peptide/synthetic
materials approaches will be investigated. The polymers will include tough
network forming functionalities as well as peptide or synthetic polymers for
both lipid envelope disruption and spike protein binding. The scientific focus
of the project is to determine how a polymer material's microstructure and
functionality impacts its ability to: form tough and mechanically robust
networks; disrupt viral lipid envelopes; and immobilize SARS-CoV-2 through the
surface spike proteins. A library of polymer materials containing distinct
crosslink densities and macromolecular architectures will be used to determine
how polymer structure impacts a material's mechanical property, lipid particle
rupturing capability, and ability to bind to SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins. This
will guide the design of materials for optimal mechanical performance and
coronavirus disrupting capabilities, and will facilitate the design of surface
coatings that can hinder indirect contact transmission with long lifetimes of
the structures. To remotely engage with the public on the importance of polymer
materials, a series of monthly YouTube videos will be developed to convey how
polymer materials are critical to health and safety, highlighting developments
in materials for healthcare and biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplement allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.