* 2030424
* Workshop on Computational Structural Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Filip Jagodzinski, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 20,902.00

The day-long Computational Structural Bioinformatics Workshop will bring
together researchers and students working on a diverse set of problems including
biomolecular structure representation, prediction, and alignment, biomolecule
interaction and docking, and data mining and analysis of structural and genomics
data. At the core of all these endeavors is the goal to establish and explore
the relationships between protein sequence, structure, and function. The
workshop will be held on August 30, 2020 and will coincide with the 11th ACM
Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics (ACM
BCB). This award will support the development and dissemination of advances in
computational structural bioinformatics, and will fund workshop registration for
up to 20 undergraduate and graduate students who are co-authors of manuscripts
or poster abstracts accepted for presentation and inclusion in the conference
proceedings.

A main objective of this workshop is to provide a forum for undergraduate and
graduate students, and especially students from under-represented groups in
computer science and bioinformatics, to present ongoing work, and to exchange
project ideas and facilitate collaborations across labs and disciplines. The
workshop will include several sessions for oral presentations of accepted
manuscripts, as well as two poster sessions during which students will have the
opportunity to explain their projects and answer questions. A career and hot
topics round table discussion will provide students the opportunity to learn
from each other and discuss current research challenges and opportunities. A
synopsis of the student discussion session will be disseminated to the workshop
website after the conclusion of the conference. The workshop website is at
https://csbw.cs.wwu.edu/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.