* 2030447
* Pathways to Achieving STEM Success: Scholarships, Mentoring, and Development of STEM Identify to Support Undergraduate STEM Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Thomas McCarthy, Utica College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2025
* USD 649,868.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
and technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Utica College. Over its
five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to 14 unique Pell-
eligible students pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, biochemistry,
chemistry, or geoscience. The Scholars will enter in two cohorts and receive
four-year scholarships. Based on the University’s student demographics and the
project’s recruitment plan for attracting diverse applicants, the project has
the potential to broaden participation of students from populations that are
under-represented in STEM, including first generation in college students. In
addition to receiving scholarships, the Scholars will be supported through an
expanded new student orientation, success coaching using dedicated faculty and
peer mentors, dedicated first-year seminar sections, tutoring, undergraduate
research opportunities, career development and internships, and a seminar series
on research and professional pathways. These evidence-based strategies have the
potential to develop Scholars’ sense of identity in STEM and help them succeed
and persist in STEM. The project will also benefit more than 100 other STEM
majors, who will be invited to participate in STEM seminars and selected career
and professional development workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will recruit,
enroll, and support retention of the Scholars to graduation. It also aims to
place nearly all the Scholar graduates into post-baccalaureate STEM programs or
employment in STEM within six months of graduation. The project will generate
new knowledge about the differential impact of peer and faculty mentoring on
scholars’ sense of STEM identity and community, both of which contribute to STEM
persistence. A social science researcher will conduct a mixed-methods research
study investigating the differential impact of peer and faculty mentoring on
Scholars’ sense of identify/community in STEM. The study will include an
investigation of Scholars' STEM identity and psychosocial constructs that are
associated with persistence in STEM. This study has the potential to add to the
research base on the differential impact of peer and faculty mentors for the
same mentee. In addition, the project is expected to generate new knowledge on
the efficacy of mentoring in STEM and the extent to which peer and faculty
mentors contribute to mentees’ sense of community and identity. A comprehensive
external evaluation of the project will result in knowledge on the efficacy of a
multifaceted STEM support program for diverse, Pell-eligible students. Results
from the research study and the evaluation will be disseminated at local and
national conferences. The project team intends to publish pedagogy- and process-
focused articles on project results and lesson learned. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.