* 2030343
* Do metalliferous sediments record mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal activity? Constraining the roles of iron oxidation rate and 230Th scavenging
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 442,790.00

Do metalliferous sediments record mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal
activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-temperature vents at mid-ocean ridges are an
important source of heat and dissolved metals to the ocean interior. As
discharging hydrothermal vent fluids mix with bottom waters, chemical reactions
create metal-rich particles. These particles are carried up from the vents by
warm (buoyant) hydrothermal plumes that spread into the surrounding seawater.
The plumes carry the particles away from the vents, and the particles fall to
the seafloor along ridge axes and ridge flanks. As a result, mid-ocean ridges
are blanketed with metal-rich sediments, which reflect the combined influence of
hydrothermal activity, particle formation, plume transport, and sedimentary
processes. Recent studies show that metal fluxes to ridge crest sediments vary
on glacial-interglacial timescales. This suggests that climate-linked changes in
global sea level may modulate seafloor hydrothermal activity. However, the metal
flux records may be biased by other processes. Such biases would complicate
efforts to understand the impact of climate on seafloor hydrothermal activity.
The project would evaluate: 1) the influence of iron oxidation rate on metal
fluxes to mid-ocean ridge sediments, and 2) whether scavenging of thorium (Th)
from seawater by hydrothermal particles precludes the use of the radioisotope
230Th as a constant flux proxy in ridge settings. The proposed work could
transform understanding of how climate and sea level influence hydrothermal
output from mid-ocean ridges. The education-related broader impacts of the
project include the training and mentoring of a Ph.D. student and an
undergraduate researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ridge-crest metal flux records
from the Southern East Pacific Rise (SEPR), Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and Juan de Fuca
Ridge indicate that hydrothermal sedimentation increased during the last
deglaciation (~10-20 kyr BP). In addition, results from the SEPR also show that
deglacial fluxes of 230Th to ridge crest sediments were 2-3x higher than the
water column production rate. Although sea level-driven changes in hydrothermal
activity are the simplest explanation of the results, variations in the
oxidation rate of reduced iron may have modulated the metal flux signal. The
proposed study will test the oxidation rate hypothesis using transects of metal
flux records from the SEPR. If enhanced Fe(II) oxidation caused higher fluxes
near the ridge axis, then corresponding deficits should be found at off-axis
locations. Greater hydrothermal output, on the other hand, should yield greater
fluxes on both the ridge crest and flanks. The study will also constrain
oxidation rate changes using benthic foraminiferal B/Ca as a proxy for deep
Pacific carbonate ion concentration. The B/Ca results will fill a key gap in
existing records and improve our understanding of carbon cycling during the
deglaciation. Finally, the study will use 3He-normalized 230Th fluxes to assess
whether 230Th can be used to study sediment fluxes near mid-ocean ridges, a key
region for paleoceanographic studies. The study will lay the necessary
groundwork for evaluating how sea level influences hydrothermal output from mid-
ocean ridges. The project will support the training of a Ph.D. student and an
undergraduate researcher, including informal and formal guidance to develop
teaching skills, professional networking, and grant proposal writing
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.