* 2030480
* Real-space and Real-time Study of Two-dimensional Colloidal Quasicrystals
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* David Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2023
* USD 357,285.00

Quasicrystals are structures that lie between crystalline and disordered phases.
They exhibit some properties similar to those of crystals, but they do not have
the periodic structure of crystals. Quasicrystals can interact with light in
unique ways and exhibit rich optical properties that are not manifested in
crystals or in completely disordered materials. Although atomic quasicrystals
are predominantly metallic alloys, synthetic quasicrystals have also been found
in soft materials made from nanoparticles, micelles, and polymers. However, both
natural and synthetic quasicrystals are built from units that are too small to
be directly observed by optical microscopy. As a result, it has proven
challenging to fully understand the formation and stability of quasicrystals.
The goal of this project is to build two-dimensional quasicrystals from single-
component microparticles that are large enough to observe with optical
microscopy. The assembly of the microparticles into quasicrystals will be driven
using applied alternating current electric fields. The formation of the
Microparticles will be observed in detail and the experiments will be compared
with numerical simulations to understand the dynamics of quasicrystal formation.
Results of the project will address fundamental questions about quasicrystal
formation, such as how the long-range but non-periodic order emerges and evolves
and what stabilizes low and high temperature quasicrystals. The research will be
integrated with a variety of educational and outreach efforts, including an
activity to encourage participation of children with dyslexia in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to assemble
two-dimensional dodecagonal quasicrystals from particles whose sizes are
comparable to the wavelengths of visible light. Owing to the size of the
particles, the dynamic formation of quasicrystals can be observed directly with
optical microscopy. This provides a tool to address fundamental issues related
to quasicrystal formation from soft matter. Large high-quality two-dimensional
quasicrystals will be assembled from colloidal microspheres of different
materials by combining externally applied fields with geometric confinement. The
coordinates of all particles will be visualized as a function of time, the
underlying driving forces that stabilize colloidal quasicrystals will be
determined, and nucleation and growth mechanisms will be identified.
Complementary Monte Carlo and Brownian Dynamics simulations will be performed in
parallel to interpret experimental observations. Finally, the photonic
properties of the assembled quasicrystals in both visible and near-infrared
light spectra will be measured. This project will offer an opportunity to search
for physical principles that unify the formation of soft-matter quasicrystals
over a broad range of length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.