* 2030857
* EAGER: Portable device for rapid and label-free identification of COVID-19 using an ultra-miniature handheld Raman spectrometer
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Sharon Huang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

A major critical gap in fighting the spread of COVID-19 has been (and will
continue to be) the availability of safe and fast, point-of-care testing devices
to rapidly detect infection by SARS-CoV-2. To this end, the vision of this
project is to design and construct a portable optical platform to identify the
presence of a virus in real time. The objective of developing this novel
platform is to provide a robust prototype to identify viruses in a few minutes,
with larger than 90 % accuracy. The project will integrate three different
technologies, independently developed at Penn State University and Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), to establish feasibility of mass production and
deployment of such a device. Potentially this device could also in the future be
used to identify other, new emerging viruses and quickly mitigate outbreaks and
pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of virologists, data scientists, space
scientists and spectroscopists will leverage existing JPL technology developed
for the detection of water on the surface of the Moon, combined with a carbon
nanotube, virus enrichment platform, in conjunction with a novel 2D metal
surface able to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of virus Raman spectra.
Researchers will then obtain the Raman signature of different coronaviruses and
will develop a robust data repository and machine learning models that can be
used to store and process Raman spectra in real-time from different locations.
The goal of this effort is to enable the quick identification of viruses in a
label-free manner, with high sensitivity and specificity - this means no
specific antibodies or polymerase chain reaction would be necessary for the
detection of SARS-CoV-2. Development of these new capabilities will provide
insights into material, surface-virus interactions, the fundamentals of the
Raman spectra of viruses and machine learning models for virus identification
via Raman spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.