* 2030533
* Financial, Academic, Social, and Mental Health Supports to Improve STEM Undergraduate Student Retention and Graduation
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Brandi Baldock, Merrimack College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,523.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, this project at Merrimack College in North Andover
Massachusetts will provide 20 students with four years of scholarship support
and specialized support services with the goal of recruiting, retaining, and
graduating students with a four-year STEM degree. Students will progress through
the program in three cohorts, two of seven students beginning in the first and
second years, and a third of six students beginning in the third year. Research
questions will explore the complex interactions among financial, social,
emotional, and mental health factors and their influences on STEM undergraduate
student retention and academic success. A novel element of the proposed program
is the inclusion of a mental health professional as part of the program team to
provide wellness resources for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s
research goals are to quantify student grit, resilience, and other factors over
the course of the program and will use statistical analysis to probe the
interactions between these factors and student success. The Scholars will
participate in group programming designed to improve their resilience,
connection to the STEM field, and academic skills. The investigators will use
multiple statistical analyses, including repeated measures with a within-between
interaction, as well as qualitative assessments to test the hypothesis that the
Scholars will evidence greater psychological resiliency and academic achievement
outcomes relative to a) themselves over time and b) their matched controls.
Additionally, regression analyses will be used to assess what variables are most
predictive of student academic performance and structural equation modeling will
allow for the current project to assess the underlying theoretical model of the
relationships between variables. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.