* 2030547
* RAPID: Systemic Differences in Employee Outcomes from COVID-19 and the Effectiveness of Organizational Response
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Frances Fabian, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 03/31/2022
* USD 111,999.00

The spread of COVID-19 within the United States has forced radical changes in
people’s work structure, status, and lives. Three extremes include a) millions
of employees now working remotely (telecommuting), b) millions more furloughed,
laid off, or suddenly unemployed, and c) a third group of “essential employees”
continuing to work in public at great risk to their own health. Such rapid
changes in the structure of individual work conditions have led to unique
challenges and pressures for these three groups. Further, the divisions of
employees into each of the aforementioned groups may exacerbate societal
disadvantages already noted in science and practice, including socioeconomic
status (SES) and race because these divisions are seen in the types of jobs that
allow for (or mandate) continued work through social distancing requirements
instituted by federal and state governments. Thus, the current project will
examine how such rapid changes in work structure and status have differentially
affected employees across various levels of job structure, SES, and race. The
researchers will examine (1) how these changes affect employee outcomes
(including job attitudes, health and wellbeing, and job performance), and (2)
the ways in which organizational responses to COVID-19 helped to mitigate (or
exacerbate) these outcomes. This study seeks to advance the field of
organizational science by uncovering the ways in which continued changes in
occupational structure and organizational responses interact to influence
employees over time. Further, this project will provide information used to
potentially develop recommendations for organizational and government policy
regarding best practices in handling societal-level crises of this magnitude in
the future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this project are to
(1) empirically examine how rapid changes in work conditions due to COVID-19
have differentially affected workers across various levels of job structure,
SES, and race, and (2) examine how organizational responses to COVID-19 have
affected the relationship between such job changes and employee well-being. By
collecting survey and open-response data from employees (and those unemployed)
across four months, we aim to examine how job structure changes affect job-
related attitudes and behavior and well-being. Further, we seek to identify
factors that may affect these variables (e.g., financial security, changes in
childcare). Finally, we plan to incorporate managerial surveys to examine how
organizational policies, communication, and other response methods hinder or
foster successful coping with the surveyed employee-level
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.