* 2030735
* Empowerment of Undergraduate STEM Majors through Scholarships and Strengthening STEM Identity
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Katherine WadeJaimes, Le Moyne-Owen College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,555.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Le Moyne-Owen College, a private Historically Black College. Over its
five-year duration, the project will provide up to four-years of scholarship
support to 22 unique students in four cohorts. The Scholars will pursue
bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science, information
technology, and mathematics. Although the overarching project goal is to
increase the number of students who graduate in STEM, the project’s targeted
goal is to increase the number of students majoring in chemistry and
mathematics. In the project’s first two years, recruitment will focus on
students from STEM-focused high schools. In years 3 and 4, recruitment will
focus on students from community colleges. Recognizing the need to provide more
than financial support, the project will provide the Scholars with a suite of
academic and co-curricular activities to support their success. Many of these
supports were developed through prior NSF support from the HBCU-UP program and
the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation program. The project
intends that these activities will provide the Scholars with a support ecosystem
that will foster the growth and development of their STEM identities. The
project team will investigate the hypothesis that fostering STEM identity will
increase student interest, retention, graduation, and careers in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous research on STEM identity, the
research component of the project includes an in-depth longitudinal qualitative
study of science identity development as students progress in their STEM major.
Identity can be defined as how one views oneself and is viewed by others as a
result of participation in certain activities or groups or becoming a member of
a community. Research has shown that a strong positive STEM identity correlates
with successful pursuit of a STEM major or career. By following the Scholars
across their time in college, the research results have the potential to lead to
insights about how STEM identity changes over time. The purpose of the research
is to advance understanding about the factors and/or activities associated with
retention, student success, transfer, academic/career pathways, and degree
attainment within a historically black colleges and universities context.
Project results will be disseminated through the University website,
conferences, and publications in STEM education journals. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.