* 2030611
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: TAURUS: Towards a Unified Robust and Secure Data Driven Approach for Attack Detection in Smart Living
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shameek Bhattacharjee, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2024
* USD 242,834.00

The “smart living” vision aims to improve human quality of life. Cornerstone
cyber-physical systems (CPS) like smart homes, smart grid, smart transportation,
or smart healthcare generate voluminous amount of time series data through
sensor-actuator devices, the so-called Internet of Things (IoT). Such data may
be a target of low-profile stealthy attacks hiding behind high randomness of
benign smart living IoT data trends, thereby thwarting the accuracy of analytics
dependent operations of various applications. The intertwined dependence on data
analytics, potential civilian impact of wrong decisions and competitive economic
motivations (e.g., by nation adversaries) make the underlying IoT and CPS
domains extremely vulnerable to data integrity and availability attacks as
addressed in the innovative TAURUS project. This collaborative project will
create a tremendous impact by developing a new science of security for emerging
IoT-based applications in smart living. It addresses stealthy attacks from both
cyber and physical exploits hiding behind high randomness due to human
behavioral differences and codifies a unified model at community scale under
various attack types and strengths. Thus, the TAURUS project will drastically
reduce the number of concurrently running security solutions and corresponding
cross coordination to secure IoT applications. Additionally, the project will
recruit and mentor undergraduate and graduate students, including women and
underrepresented minority students, as well as train K-12 students through
various schemes at partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of
TAURUS project lies in the unified, lightweight, data-driven approaches towards
security analytics across IoT domains in smart living. The invariant-based
unified anomaly or intrusion detection theory is unique as it captures both
linear and non-linear relationships in data from multiple IoT devices. It also
ensures sharp deviations under various attacks yet remaining undisturbed under
no attacks, while hiding differences in data skewness, symmetry, dynamics, and
configuration across different IoT domains. The proposed response mechanism will
gather evidence on the presence, type, severity, and strategies of threats.
Finally, based on biological information theoretic concepts extracted from the
evidence, the TAURUS project will develop a novel unified trust framework to
identify compromised IoT devices with high accuracy under stealthy attacks.
Validation of the developed solutions will use real datasets from smart meters
and phasor measurement units in smart grid, and vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-
to-infrastructure data in smart transportation. The proposed security framework
is potentially applicable to other smart living IoT context such as smart homes
and water distribution networks. A dedicated website will maintain codes,
simulation and real-world datasets for two years beyond the project period.
Instructions on data cleaning, preparation, and transformations will be
available in a GitHub repository. Research findings and results will be
disseminated via TAURUS website and publications in peer-reviewed high quality
conferences and journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.