* 2030702
* Supporting the Graduation of Transfer Students Pursuing Bachelor's Degrees in Mathematics, Computer, and Natural Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2025
* Shannon Pittman, Athens State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 02/28/2025
* USD 649,828.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Athens State University.
This University is an upper-division university that exclusively serves transfer
students, most of whom are adult learners. Over its four-year duration, the
project will fund scholarships to 30-45 different full- or half-time transfer
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer
Science, Information Technology, or Mathematics. These Scholars will receive two
to four years of scholarship support, depending on whether they are taking
courses full or half-time. To facilitate degree completion, scholarship support
will be coupled with other supports, including structured faculty mentorship,
access to laptops and online tutoring services, cohort and peer support
activities, project-based learning opportunities focused on research and career
preparation, and an online learning community that connects participants with
peers and community mentors. This project has the potential to advance
understanding of the support initiatives that are most effective for transfer
students and adult learners in STEM fields. Such information may be
generalizable to STEM transfer students at four-year institutions. Athens State
University has a high population of low-income students and is located within
the science and technology hub of the Huntsville Metro Area. Consequently, this
project can provide a pathway to degree completion that expands access of low-
income, high-achieving students to regional STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The specific project goals are to improve
recruitment, retention, academic success, and graduation rates of academically
talented, low-income transfer students in STEM fields through (1) financial
assistance and access to critical technology, (2) project-based learning
opportunities (including research and work-based learning), (3) peer support,
and (4) faculty and community mentoring. Although support initiatives that
specifically target transfer students and adult learners have been shown to
generally increase student success, more research is needed to determine which
types of support are the most effective at increasing success in STEM fields.
Because Athens State University is a transfer-only institution, this project is
uniquely positioned to identify specific factors contributing to the success of
transfer students in STEM fields. The project will investigate whether and to
what extent specific support structures increase academic success. To do so, it
will use institutional data about recruitment, retention, and graduation rates,
along with the results of Scholar surveys. The overall outcomes of the project
are expected to be an increased understanding of effective ways to support
transfer students in STEM majors and an increase in access to STEM careers for
marginalized populations. An external committee will conduct yearly formative
evaluations of project implementation and effectiveness and will also conduct a
summative evaluation at the end of the project. Results of this project will be
disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at
local, regional, and national conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.