* 2030830
* RAPID: Effective Recovery for Organizations from the COVID-19: Optimizing Strategic Responses
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Gwendolyn Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 120,925.00

How do business organizations recover from a crisis? Studies of crises show that
human communities differ significantly in their responses; a crisis presents
individual organizations and communities of organizations with a common problem,
yet solutions may be elusive. This project will advance basic knowledge about
the effectiveness of organizational recovery in response to the COVID-19
pandemic and global economic crisis. The project will help organizations and
managers to better understand the conditions under which organizations
responding to a crisis of unprecedented magnitude may recover more effectively.
Results will equip organizations and managers with knowledge and skills about
how to choose strategic responses to crisis, by highlighting the insights
derived from study conditions. In collaboration with the University of Florida
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Center, the project will disseminate results to
business and scientific communities by providing free-of-charge webinars that
explain to managers and researchers the strategic responses that can help
organizations, particularly small-and-medium sized enterprises, to more
effectively recover from the current crisis. Project findings and activities
will help to ensure the economic competitiveness of the United States and
promote our nation's safety and security. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;When crises
occur, business organizations need to move strategically to recover, but leaders
and managers may be unclear as to which actions to take. The project will
provide prescriptive theoretical directions for the development of processes and
actions toward effective recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and global economic
crisis. The project will classify, explain, and evaluate organizations’
strategic responses to the current crisis for effective recovery and answer
three research questions: First, among the multiple paths toward organizational
recovery, which ones are more effective? Second, what organizational and
environmental factors are most conducive to effective recovery? Third, would
dynamic adaptation (e.g., switching resource allocation from the organization’s
own rebuilding to community-based self-organizing efforts, and vice versa) be
effective for recovery? Interview data will be used to inform, validate and
improve a computational model designed to explain and evaluate the effectiveness
of strategic responses of organizations. The project will use this model to
compare a wide range of variation in responses, and probe the conditions under
which certain responses could be more effective for organizational recovery. The
project will produce: (1) a multi-level taxonomy of strategic responses to
crisis for organizational recovery and (2) an explanation and evaluation of
strategic responses to crisis for effective recovery. Using a mixed-method
approach, the project will not only corroborate a computational model with
interview data, but also use the model to extend understanding beyond case
observations. Findings will inform theories of organization regarding business
strategy, especially within the context of crises and extreme
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.