* 2030596
* Cardinal Science Scholars: Scholarships and Supports to Increase Undergraduate Students' Retention and Graduation in STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Joan Esson, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,348.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
and technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Otterbein College, a
private liberal arts college. Over its five-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to twenty-two full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in biological sciences, biochemistry and molecular biology, chemistry,
engineering, and physics. The Scholars will be admitted in two annual cohorts
and receive up to four-years of scholarship support. In addition to
scholarships, the project will provide Scholars with opportunities to engage in
academic and non-academic activities demonstrated to increase retention and
graduation in STEM. Activities include participation in a summer immersion
orientation program, mentoring by peers and STEM faculty, enrollment in a STEM
Seminar course, and opportunities to engage in undergraduate research and
internships. The combination of scholarships with participation in student
support is intended to contribute to students’ academic and career success and,
in turn, to increase the number of highly qualified STEM graduates ready to join
the workforce or enroll in graduate studies. The project plans to increase the
diversity of students in STEM by enhancing its current recruitment strategies to
encourage students from traditionally underserved groups to attend the college.
To advance understanding of student success in STEM, this project will examine
how students’ beliefs in their ability to succeed in STEM affect their
expectations for success and persistence in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to: (1) recruit academically talented STEM students
who are low-income with financial need, including students who are first-
generation in college and students from underserved groups; (2) increase scholar
engagement and connection to their majors, peers, faculty, and STEM
professionals; (3) achieve improved retention, graduation, and STEM graduate
school/workforce placement; and (4) foster Scholar success by reducing their
beliefs in an intrinsic and fixed intellectual ability in STEM (field-specific
ability beliefs) and increasing their expectations for success in their majors.
Drawing on Expectancy Value Theory, the project will conduct a mixed methods
comparison study to investigate whether students’ intrinsic field-specific
ability beliefs in an academic domain relate to their expectations for success,
with resulting influence on retention in STEM. It is hypothesized that a
decrease in students’ beliefs about their intrinsic field-specific ability will
increase their expectations for successful persistence in STEM. The mixed
methods evaluation will utilize Stufflebeam’s (2007, 2017) management-oriented
approach, which focuses on context, input, process, and product for project
improvement and accountability. Project findings will be disseminated through
the project website, presentations to local, regional, and national
stakeholders, professional meetings, and publications. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of Future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.