* 2030584
* Enhancing Undergraduate Enrollment, Persistence, and Graduation in Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Christopher Reid, Bryant University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 05/31/2026
* USD 649,727.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Bryant University. Over its
five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships to 18 undergraduate
students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in Actuarial Mathematics,
Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Biology, or Environmental Science. First-
year students will receive up to four years and transfer students up to two
years of scholarship support. The project proposes to improve low-income STEM
student success by better understanding barriers that keep students from
engaging in available high-impact practices. That information will be used to
mentor students toward such activities. This approach to mitigating barriers,
coupled with community building, is expected to improve graduation rates for
low-income STEM majors. Through its research activities, the project has the
potential to contribute to a better understanding about how to support qualified
low-income students to attend college, major in STEM, earn a STEM degree, and
pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims: (1) Reduce low-
income students’ financial burden through scholarship and other forms of
financial support; (2) Implement sustainable curricular and co-curricular campus
programming to alleviate known barriers to success; (3) Provide STEM Scholars
with meaningful curricular opportunities known to enhance academic success and
increase post-graduation opportunities. Little is understood about why
qualified, low-income students with interests in STEM, when provided with an
opportunity to apply for a scholarship to assist in paying for college, may
choose to not apply for the scholarship and/or to major in STEM. This project
plans to use qualitative analyses of focus group and interview data to increase
understanding of these decisions and outcomes. The project has the potential to
advance understanding of student attitude as a mediating variable on high impact
practice participation and STEM student success. Dissemination of project
results emphasize reaching STEM faculty and administrators, high school STEM
teachers and guidance counselors, and college admissions departments.
Dissemination will occur through targeted presentations and formal publications.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.