* 2030166
* Workshop on Unified Curriculum and Course Design for Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Michael Gennert, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

The field of Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering (MRE) has seen continuous
growth for almost half a century, and MRE is now embedded in nearly all
manufacturing operations. However, it is only within the last decade that
educational institutions have started to recognize this field as a distinct
engineering discipline, as more universities and colleges offer MRE degree
programs. Despite this increased interest, MRE still lacks a well-defined and
unified framework for undergraduate degree programs. This project's main
motivation is to overcome this challenge in order to train future engineers,
with a strong multidisciplinary theoretical and experimental skillset. Graduates
with this skillset will be crucial for American competitiveness, because they
will be capable of design, development, and implementation of transformative
autonomous technologies that improve human health and welfare. This vision will
enable MRE to become one of the most impactful disciplines of engineering,
attracting diverse and innovative students, graduating professional engineers
who will design, develop, and implement transformative autonomous technologies,
and improving human health and welfare. To realize this vision, this project
proposes to educate the educators by conducting an intensive workshop to prepare
current and future MRE faculty to effectively design and teach courses in this
discipline. The project team will familiarize participants with the most recent
technological and pedagogical advances in undergraduate MRE education through a
combination of lectures, active learning, and hands-on lab exercises. This will
serve to build a diverse, inclusive MRE community, increase the number and
breadth of colleges and universities that offer MRE education, strengthen the
MRE offerings at colleges and universities that already teach MRE, and empower
faculty to lead MRE curriculum initiatives at their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will empower
participants to serve as change agents, educational innovators, and thought
leaders at their institutions. It will do this by engaging attendees in active
hands-on learning of state-of-the-art MRE education concepts, techniques, and
approaches. As a result of the workshop, the MRE educational community will be
enlarged and engaged, leading to enhanced opportunities for students to become
Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering professionals. The workshop will meet
several societal goals as well. First, by educating the educators, it will
leverage a workshop of 25 participants into an improved education for 10s of
thousands of students over time. Robotics, as demonstrated through the media,
competitions, and public perception, has immense potential&lt;br/&gt;to draw
large numbers of students into STEM fields. These students will in turn
contribute to the nationâ€™s long-term economic competitiveness and vitality by
developing new mechatronic and robotics technologies and applications. Last, by
promoting diversity and inclusivity, the workshop will lead to broader
participation in engineering by underserved
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.