* 2030660
* RAPID: Testing Science Communication Strategies and Impact among Policymakers During a National Crisis
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Daniel Crowley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,950.00

Given the magnitude of the current crisis caused by COVID-19, it has arguably
never been more important for scientists to communicate to policymakers their
research on virus transmission, prevention, and social and economic consequences
that families face. The time sensitive nature of policymakersâ€™ acquisition and
use of information sources regarding COVID-19 presents a unique opportunity to
study effective science communication practices and their impact. This proposal
aims to capitalize and expand upon recent successes of a theory-based model, the
Research-to-Policy Collaboration (RPC), by: (1) facilitating science
communication and dissemination among federal and state policymakers, (2)
studying mechanisms for improving science communication strategies and (3)
testing the impact of science dissemination efforts and added value of scientist
interactions with state and federal policymakers. By getting critical scientific
information regarding a current national crisis into the hands of individuals
who can act on it, science-based policies may improve the lives of individuals
affected by the COVID-19 crisis. We need to identify ways to effectively reach
policymakers and inform research communication strategies that can achieve
social impact. Scientific information often takes over a decade before it is
used in decision making. Effective research dissemination approaches have the
potential to shorten that time horizon and improve the societal impact of
revolutionary, cutting-edge scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study
methods involve (1) deploying rapid-cycle randomized controlled trials (RCT)
that examine open- and click-rates of emails that disseminate scientific
information on COVID-19 to approximately 3,500 federal legislative staff and
state legislators and staff who are identified as being assigned to health-
related policy issues, and (2) examining the use of research in bill language
and public statements (e.g., press releases, social media). Federal legislators
will be randomly assigned to three groups: (i) dissemination + interactions,
(ii) dissemination only, and (iii) control group. This sampling strategy builds
on a current study investigating congressional-researcher interactions
facilitated by an active RPC implementation. The proposed study will investigate
science dissemination as an add-on component to that interactive approach. State
legislators have not been assigned to receive researcher interactions via the
active RPC implementation. To increase the reach of time-sensitive information,
75% of state legislators assigned to health-related committees will receive the
dissemination and 25% serve as a control group. Observed use of research
evidence (URE) will be quantitatively assessed in bill language and public
statements, including social media, based on language that was used to validate
a URE codebook in prior work. This includes a pre-test period of 1 year prior to
US-based responses to COVID-19 (approximately March 1, 2020) and 1-year post-
test period following the initial COVID-19 outbreak (March 2021). While the
literature illustrates that timeliness and relevance are essential to URE,
particularly in times of crisis, studies are needed to examine the impact of
science communications and dissemination during such periods of crisis. The
proposed work would build the literature base by prospectively assessing the
impact of strategies for enhancing evidence use. Importantly, most studies of
URE in policymaking have been done retrospectively by asking policymakers to
explain how they access research and use it when developing policies. The
proposed study will be a substantial asset for the URE field because it will:
(1) advance knowledge of what mechanisms are most effective for conveying
important and actionable scientific evidence to policymakers at both the federal
and state levels and (2) improve our understanding of the impact of real-time
science dissemination and interactive approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.