* 2030345
* Dimensions US Sao Paulo: Evolutionary and genetic origins of diverse trophic specializations in blow flies
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* David Watson, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,935,432.00

Blow flies (Diptera: Calliphoridae) are found in nearly every environment as
decomposers of carrion and organic matter. A minority of species appear to have
independently evolved a parasitic lifestyle and some, such as the New World
screwworm, are devastating pests of livestock. This remarkable diversity in
dietary habit is seen across many of the ~1,200 species known globally, and as
such blow flies can serve as excellent models to understand the evolutionary and
genetic origins of feeding specializations. However, due to the significant lack
of phylogenetic, genetic, and ecological information, the origin and
evolutionary history of these diverse feeding habits in blow flies is
understudied. This research will use blow flies as a model group to address an
unresolved question surrounding the evolutionary and genetic origins of their
dietary diversity. The factors contributing to the rise of this diversity in
blow flies will pave the way for similar studies in other animal groups across
the tree of life, to further fuel our understanding of global biodiversity.
Through this project, students will be trained in international scientific
research, an on-line data resource for blow flies will be created, and several
outreach activities will be undertaken to engage the general public in the
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with scientists from Brazil,
this project will investigate the causes and consequences of diverse feeding
habits across three integrated dimensions of blow fly research: 1) phylogenetic:
reconstructing the evolutionary history of blow flies and mapping feeding habit
transitions across the family; 2) genetic/genomic: identifying genes associated
with specialized feeding habits, and assessing whether they are consistent at
the family, population and strain level; and 3) functional: using CRISPR/Cas9 to
knockout the identified genes to determine their roles in food source
preference. Further, we will investigate the role of the gut microbiome in
mediating diet adaptations and maintaining diverse biotic interactions.
Integration of research findings across laboratories studying multiple lineages
of blow flies, will allow key questions surrounding the origin and maintenance
of diverse feeding habits and their impact on lineage diversity to be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.