* 2030175
* Probing the Molecular Basis of the "Burying" Mechanism: An Additional Route to Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Particle Growth
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2024
* USD 869,455.00

This project is focused on the investigation of a novel mechanism for the growth
of new particles in the atmosphere. Uncertainties in the growth mechanisms of
solid and semi-solid secondary organic aerosol (SOA) particles limit the ability
to predict their impacts on visibility, health and climate, and hence the
development of optimal control strategies. The research will provide the basic
kinetic and thermodynamic data that will aid in developing and improving this
predictive capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the surface
composition of organic particles is central to understanding the interaction of
incoming gases with the surface and how this affects their uptake and
contribution to particle growth. On a molecular level, it is expected that the
residence time of gases on the surface of highly viscous particles will play a
major role in their net uptake, yet there are few data on the fundamental
parameters that determine this residence time. The ultimate goal of this
research is to elucidate a hypothesized "burying" mechanism that incorporates
gas phase species into highly viscous particles. A central aspect of this
“burying” mechanism is the nature of the gas-surface
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the experiments are
to: (1) measure uptake coefficients as a function of temperature for a series of
gases of selected structures and functional groups on self-assembled monolayers
(SAMs) having well-defined terminal groups that are also common components of
SOA particles as well as on SOA itself; (2) carry out temperature-programmed
thermal desorption studies of the selected gases initially adsorbed on the SAMs
to obtain kinetics data that will allow rate constants for desorption at
different temperatures to be determined; and (3) carry out studies of the impact
of lower volatility species with unique signatures on the uptake of organic
nitrates into SOA particles formed from the ozonolysis of selected biogenics,
with a focus on α-pinene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.