* 2030305
* SBIR Phase I:  At home, single dose mRNA vaccine patch (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Kathryn Kosuda, Vaxess Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to provide a new vaccine for the
COVID-19 pandemic. To date millions have been infected, with hundreds of
thousands of deaths. Leading vaccine candidates in clinical trials require two
doses, resulting in either: 1) increased spread due to lack of isolation, or 2)
incomplete vaccination due to non-compliance. Successful development of a
single-dose, self-applied vaccine would not only have a significant positive
impact on global COVID-19 immunization efforts, but may also trasnsform the
general approach to vaccine delivery and distribution. This project advances the
understanding of using a novel at-home device as a vaccination tool for many
diseases, broadly aiding public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to combine a silk-based
microneedle patch with an mRNA-lipid nanoparticle (LNP) construct to meet the
global need for a robust COVID-19 vaccine. Combining the unique properties of
silk fibroin, a low-cost biomaterial, with a single-dose, self-applied
microneedle patch represents a novel approach to vaccination and will result in
improved protection by allowing the target antigen to slowly release over two
weeks. Additionally, the use of mRNA encoding SARS-CoV-2 peptides that produce
neutralizing antibodies against the spike protein and mitigate potential issues
from antibody-dependent enhancement will ultimately result in a safer and more
effective vaccine. The goal of the proposed research is to demonstrate lead
formulations of a silk-mRNA-LNP complex that will be thermally stable and
identify a release profile of target antigen to improve SARS-CoV-2
immunogenicity. Results from preliminary in vitro formulation screens and in
vivo dosing and scheduling will be used to develop the formulations for the silk
microneedle patch in Phase II studies. This project will identify lead candidate
silk-mRNA-LNP shelf-stable formulations with improved immunogenicity that is at
least equivalent to traditional, non-formulated injections, while offering
critical insight into broader implications of mRNA-based vaccinations and
sustained release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.