* 2030033
* RAPID: COVID-19: Sterilization Mechanism of Corona Discharge for Masks and Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Ying Zhong, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 167,568.00

This project will provide fundamental understanding and technical validation for
a portable sterilization technique, the corona discharge, to be safely and
effectively used for sterilization and recharge of the used face masks, N95
respirators, and PPEs. The overall purpose of this RAPID project is to urgently
advance a safe, sustainable and high-efficiency sterilization technology by
conducting collaborative and systematic research on the sterilization mechanism
of corona discharge (CD). CD can efficiently and rapidly sterilize various PPEs
to help resolve the massive shortage problem upon an outbreaks of public health
emergencies, and offers an efficient sterilization solution for shared surfaces,
confined space, and possibly open air to prevent COVID-19 spread. This would
drastically mitigate the PPE shortage at hospitals, and allow citizens’ access
to masks, which will help to flatten the curve of SARS-CoV-2 infection and
support economic recovery. The project will bring awareness to public on the
potential risk of reusing masks without static charges, which reduces the
filtration effect. Through established collaboration with research institution
the PIs have access to a local hospital and possibility to obtain field data on
the efficiency of their CD prototypes. The PIs are collaborating with CD unit
manufacturer to bring timely impact on mitigate COVID-19 pandemic. PI will
actively involve underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish sterilization
mechanism and efficiency of corona discharge to levels required for safe
hospital use of face masks and PPEs. This collaborative RAPID proposal linking
the fields of Mechanical Engineering and Biological Sciences will: 1)
investigate sterilization and recharging effectiveness on masks by CD, and its
effect on the filtration mechanism and efficiency of masks; 2) study how CD
kills bacteria and viruses by tracking the interaction of different components
in corona and microbe to identify the most effective sterilization method; 3)
study how substrate material and surface condition affect CD sterilization
mechanism and efficiency, as well as the sterilization effect for contaminated
air. The PIs have preliminary results showing sterility assurance level (SAL) of
lower than 10-3 vs. E. coli within seconds for general use, and potentially 10-6
with extended treatment time for surgical use. The planned comprehensive
sterilization mechanism study will also provide a better understanding of the
interaction among photons, electrons, free radicals, ionized particles, etc. in
corona discharge with protein, nucleic acids, and other components of viruses,
bacteria, and possibly fungi, identify the most effective sterilization method,
and prompt the development of more efficient targeted sterilization technologies
for pathogens with different membrane or protein compositions. The in-depth
study of the sterilization effect and mechanism on different kinds of
microorganisms living on various surfaces and in different environments will
help researchers discover more technologies that deactivate contagious bacteria
and viruses and reduce the transmission of contagious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.