* 2030969
* Accelerating Chemistry Engagement and Success:  Scholarships and Support to Increase Graduation and Transfer at a Minority Serving Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Melissa Harman, Riverside Community College District/Riverside City College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2026
* USD 999,985.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. The project will take place at Riverside City College, a public Hispanic
serving community college in Riverside, California. Over a five-year duration,
this project will provide scholarships to 40 full-time students who are pursuing
associate degrees in chemistry or biochemistry. These Scholars will be recruited
in four annual cohorts of 10 students and receive up to two years of scholarship
support. The project aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, while
generating knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students. Riverside City College has
a high population of underrepresented students. Consequently, this project has
the potential to broaden participation in STEM fields and to increase
understanding about how efforts to develop students' science identity can
support graduation and transfer of this student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. There are four specific aims: to increase student success in
chemistry/biochemistry through curricular and co-curricular adaptations; to
enable students to complete the chemistry/biochemistry pathway, earning their
Associate of Science for Transfer degree within two years and transferring into
a baccalaureate degree program; to develop science identity, STEM self-efficacy,
and career awareness of students, including those from diverse, underrepresented
backgrounds; and to contribute to the body of knowledge about effective
techniques and evidence-based practices that improve the recruitment, retention,
and success of academically talented, low-income STEM students. Research shows
that transfer students who are engaged with their institution are more
successful and that developing students' identity as scientists improves both
their engagement and retention. The overarching research question of this
project is to explore how Scholars’ participation in project activities enhances
their development of science identity, science self-efficacy, community cultural
wealth, and transfer capital. This work has the potential to advance
understanding about how combining financial support with academic supports and
social integration at the community college and university levels affects
student graduation and transfer. This information can inform state and national
discussions regarding ways to decrease college debt while increasing STEM
bachelor’s degree attainment for low-income and traditionally underrepresented
minorities. The project will be evaluated though a mixed-methods approach using
data from surveys, observations, participation records, and student performance
records. These data will be analyzed using descriptive and inferential
statistical techniques such as gap analysis and repeated measures analysis.
Results of this work will be disseminated through multiple local and national
venues such as newsletters, conference presentations, and peer reviewed
publication. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income, academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.