* 2030141
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: LARGE: DYNAmmWIC: Dynamic mmWave Spectrum Sharing Techniques for Public Safety Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Eylem Ekici, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 has, once more, highlighted the importance of public safety
communications (PSC) in protecting public safety personnel and ensuring life-
saving services. As 5G networks transition to higher frequencies, including the
mmWave spectrum, integration of PSC solutions into this new spectrum becomes a
challenge. Increased data rates, reduced delays, and improved density would lead
to the realization of life-critical PSC use cases such as high-quality real-time
video streaming and ultra-low-delay communication. These use cases increase the
potential demand for PSC in the mmWave spectrum. Conventional spectrum
management solutions, such as allocating dedicated PSC bands, are not
sustainable. This project develops dynamic mmWave spectrum sharing solutions for
public safety communications (DYNAmmWIC) to allow for novel PSC use cases in the
mmWave spectrum and design the mmWave spectrum with sharing as the first-class
citizen. This vision requires the coexistence of innovations in the radio,
network operation management, and network architecture levels. The developed
solutions in this project have the potential to fundamentally transform mmWave
spectrum usage and accelerate the readiness of the wireless industry for 6G
solutions while saving significant costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
explores four main goals to provide a complete radar-5G-public safety
communications (PSC) coexistence solution from radio hardware to the network
architecture: (1) A joint-radar communication (JARC) system is developed by
using the same waveform for both radar sensing and data transmission in
commercial and public safety vehicles. (2) A mmWave spectrum sharing solution is
developed to dynamically manage the coexistence of operations for PSC, radar
sensing, 5G, and V2V communications, pedestrian access, and backhaul in the
mmWave spectrum. (3) A novel mmWave next-generation radio access network (NG-
RAN) architecture is developed, allowing higher RAN co-operation and integration
through proven orchestration tools for rapid development iterations of solutions
on a real testbed. (4) A comprehensive evaluation plan complements the developed
techniques. The JARC system, implemented at OSU, will augment iLNK, a city-wide,
remotely accessible wireless testbed. iLNK is developed at UNL in collaboration
with the City of Lincoln, which has proven to be a valuable remote teaching tool
during the COVID-19-related restrictions. PIs will work to roll-out educational
modules that can be conducted on the remotely accessible iLNK testbed, lowering
the barrier to wireless education. This project will be conducted by a highly
diverse team of PIs with a long track record of productive collaboration and
impacts on diversity. Proposed solutions are rigorously tested to demonstrate a
next-generation PSC model to local and national
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.