* 2030541
* RAPID: Subtyping and Identifying Shared Genomic Sequences of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Yuanfang Guan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,705.00

People are threatened by an unprecedented pandemic: COVID-19 (caused by SARS-
CoV-2). This virus is now threatening not only physical health, but also
psychology, education, economy, and every corner of the infrastructure of
society. So far, there is no treatment for this disease, while vaccines and
neutralizing antibodies are perceived as one of the eventual solutions to this
crisis. A critical piece of knowledge supporting vaccine and antibody
development is understanding the genome of this virus. What is the common
sequence shared among the SARS-CoV-2 strains across the globe? What are the
subtypes? Are the genome variances overlapping with important genomic regions
for vaccine design? Using state of the art machine learning approaches, this
research will identify the shared, representative sequence across SARS-CoV-2
strains and group them by major types. This project will connect this
information to the important genomic regions identified in the literature that
can be used for vaccines, and thereby continuously inform the ongoing effort of
vaccine development, antibody selection, and therapeutic development. The
research from this study would provide society benefits through monthly updates
onto web interfaces that allow the vaccine developers, the biomedical research
community as well as the general public to conveniently get access to the above
information. This project will support training of a graduate student in
bioinformatics and provide outreach opportunities to K-12 students and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be a continuous effort to monthly
subtype SARS-CoV-2 strains and update the shared sequences of SARS-CoV-2, in
order to facilitate vaccine development and antibody design. Specifically, this
research will be focusing on three objectives: 1) identifying and updating the
common sequences of SARS-CoV-2 by forcing the common sequence to have the
minimal evolutionary distance with all strains, or covering as many sequences as
possible 2) subtyping the SARS-CoV-2 strains into major groups, which will be
important to inform treatment, management and prevention measures; 3) connecting
the subtyped and common genomic sequences of SARS-CoV-2 to epitopes identified
in the literature. To develop vaccines or neutralizing antibody treatment, it is
critical that the major variations are covered and considered. The algorithms
and visualization tools will overlay the curated list of potential epitopes on
top of the subtypes and the shared sequence of the virus genomes, and directly
support the effort of vaccine and antibody development. This RAPID award is made
by the Systematics and Biodiversity Science Cluster in the Division of
Environmental Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.