* 2030582
* Scholarships and a Learning Community Approach to Support Success of Undergraduates in Mathematics and Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Carmen Cid, Eastern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2026
* USD 649,957.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Eastern Connecticut State University, a primarily undergraduate, public
liberal arts institution. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 10 unique full-time undergraduate students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Biology or Mathematics. Scholars will be selected in two
annual cohorts and first year Scholars will receive up to four years of
scholarship support. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM
through a learning community that provides advising and mentoring and fosters
strong relationships among Scholars and faculty. Scholars will be mentored by
faculty and peers as they develop a road map to achieve their career goals. The
Scholars will also have access to a comprehensive range of supportive activities
including undergraduate research experiences, preparation for STEM graduate
studies and careers, STEM-focused seminars, and site visits to STEM-related
academic institutions and industries. In addition to developing the Scholar
learning community, the project also plans to revise STEM curricula to better
support retention of all first-year STEM students. The project has the potential
to increase the persistence of low-income, academically talented students in
STEM, as well as to help reduce the national shortfall of STEM graduates. The
effectiveness of the project activities on STEM persistence will be studied and
shared publicly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project aims to transition students into
the STEM workforce or graduate studies and to learn which practices during their
undergraduate careers facilitated their confidence and persistence in STEM. Low-
income students, especially first-generation college students, typically enter
college lacking the confidence to view themselves as belonging to the STEM
field. This project is designed to add new knowledge about developing students'
STEM identities. The project includes a research investigation of a cohort-
based, interdisciplinary learning community that integrates students pursuing
biology and mathematics majors. The study will examine how Scholars’ STEM
identity is affected by engaging in a cohort-based learning community that
promotes robust relationships among students and faculty. The project also will
identify the activities that support STEM identity development and STEM
persistence. The working hypothesis is that a cohort-based learning community
that helps Scholars build strong relationships with faculty and peers will
increase STEM identity, leading to increased retention and success in STEM.
Research methods include a mixed methods approach to answer the research
questions, using information from surveys, observations, and interviews with
student participants, peer and faculty mentors. Results from this project will
be made available on the University website, at regional and national meetings,
and via published manuscripts in science education journals. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.