* 2030601
* RAPID: NMR Characterization of SARS-CoV-2 Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Jeffrey Hoch, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The award to the University of Connecticut supports research that will help in
understanding the role of non-structural proteins in the SARS-COV-2 virus. The
researchers will use advanced chemical analytic techniques to look at protein
structure in solution to complement other on-going research that looks at either
frozen or crystallized protein samples. Results from these studies will
contribute vital information to our understanding of SARS-COV-2 biology and may
help to inform on the selection and development of therapeutic treatments. Data
from these studies will be rapidly disseminated through publicly available
repositories as part of the broader impact plan so that other researchers can
leverage the experimental outcomes in their own studies. The resources and data
will also be used to support graduate student training activities. The study
findings will be published in peer-reviewed journals and shared at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use heterologous protein
expression systems and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques to
investigate the role of non-structural proteins encoded by the SARS-COV-2
genome. Empirical assessment of dynamics and disorder in solution using NMR
spectroscopy will be used to complement or validate predictions based on crystal
structures, and yield insight into catalytic mechanism, allosteric regulation,
and antigenicity. Chemical shift profiling studies will be performed to aid in
the identification of metabolites that bind to SARS-CoV-2 proteins to advance
functional annotation. Resources and data generated from this study will be
deposited in the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank (BMRB) or shared
through other means as a public resource. This RAPID award is made by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.