* 2030094
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SMALL: Continuous-tuning matrix-beamforming MIMO enabled multi-mode injection-locking passive Wi-Fi sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 247,719.00

Wi-Fi based sensing is attracting great interests for emerging applications such
as vital signs monitoring, gesture recognition, through-the-wall imaging, and
indoor localization. However, the state-of-the-art Wi-Fi sensing systems either
require modification to the Wi-Fi access point, or do not have enough
sensitivity/resolution to reliably support applications such as long-term micro-
motion sensing. Conventional single mode operation also faces challenges in the
presence of multiple human subjects. To tackle these challenges, in this
project, a novel multi-mode passive Wi-Fi sensing system leveraging continuous
tunable matrix beamforming and multi-mode injection lock detection technologies
will be developed to transform current and next generation Wi-Fi infrastructure
to enable many sensing applications for smart health care, human-machine
interface, localization, public safety, and smart living. The proposed sensing
system features low cost, low power, wide dynamic range, high sensitivity,
continuous multiple-object tracking, and multiple-mode configuration with less
computational effort. The research outcome may benefit the long-term U.S. health
program and aim to make modern living and office environment smart with minimum
added hardware costs and no extra spectrum resources. On the educational side,
the project will create rich impacts on education for K-12, undergraduate, and
underrepresented groups. It will also cultivate entrepreneurship mindset and
integrate industrial experience into students training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new innovations in passive Wi-Fi
sensing technology based on existing wireless infrastructure to boost its
spectrum utilization efficiency. To be specific, the following innovations will
be pursued: a) An advanced Nolen matrix beamforming and a group delay
compensation inspired wideband methodology will be invented to support
concurrent multiple target sensing across a wide Wi-Fi frequency band.
Furthermore, 3D detection will be enabled by 3D design of the proposed
beamforming array. b) A phase shifter-relaxed and control relaxed circuit
topology will be developed to steer the multiple beams generated by the proposed
matrix network, which facilitates 3D tracking characteristic for passive Wi-Fi
sensing with low power consumption, low computation load, low hardware cost, and
a compact size. c) A passive injection-locked detection architecture and
advanced signal processing algorithms will be invented to meet the high
sensitivity and wide dynamic range requirements that challenge conventional
sensing approach. Empowered by matrix beamforming, the proposed architecture and
signal processing will break the boundary and enable low-power passive sensing
of micro-motions. d) A passive/active switchable detection architecture is
proposed to support multiple operation modes such as micro-Doppler, frequency-
modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) and frequency-shift keying (FSK) detection in
various application scenarios. e) 3D glass technology, antenna-in-package (AiP),
and flexible wearable tags will be developed to integrate a passive Wi-Fi system
platform with compact size, low cost, and high
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.