* 2030762
* Multilevel Mentoring to Improve Belonging, Metacognition, and Science Identity of Bachelor Degree-Seeking Science and Mathematics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Jessica Rettig, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-prepared scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Denison University, a private, liberal arts
college. Over its five-year duration, this project will provide scholarships to
32 undergraduate students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Biochemistry, Chemistry, Geosciences, Mathematics, or Computer Science. These
Scholars will be admitted in four cohorts of eight students and receive up to
four years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase student
graduation in STEM fields by linking scholarships to a multilevel mentoring
program designed to help students acclimate to campus, progress academically,
grow as researchers, and prepare for the STEM workforce. This project has the
potential to increase understanding about how to broaden participation in STEM
fields and to learn how multilevel mentoring can support retention and
graduation of low-income students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of the project is to increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates in STEM fields. The four primary aims of the project are to: (1)
provide financial support to low-income students; (2) create a cohort structure
designed to increase Scholars' feelings of belonging; (3) Implement a multilevel
program of peer, academic, research, and career mentoring; and (4) engage in
formal assessment and evaluation to explore the role of mentoring in developing
Scholars' sense of belonging, science identity, and metacognition, while also
increasing persistence and STEM graduation. Though each component of this
project has been demonstrated to affect student persistence in STEM, little is
known about the use of multilevel mentoring on metacognition and science
identity. As such, this project may increase understanding about how effective
mentoring may support STEM student success by affecting key factors such as
science identity and metacognition. Project results will be made available
through an established regional network of liberal arts colleges, presentations
at national professional conferences and publications in venues focused on post-
secondary STEM education. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.