* 2030093
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Curating Complex Data Sets for Machine Learning Applied to Flexible Assembly Design and Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Joseph Davidson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 129,277.00

In highly competitive markets, such as the automotive sector, product
development time, quality, and cost are all critical. Successfully meeting such
goals requires rapid exploration of design alternatives. The ultimate goal of
this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project is to
advance data-driven design space exploration in automotive structural design
using Artificial Intelligence. The development of Data Science to advance
Machine Learning is highly dependent on the availability of large data sets that
meet certain technical goals for algorithm training and validation. While
training data sets are widely available for social networks, consumer
preferences, and finance, such data sets need to be artificially curated for
engineered products. This project will produce large data sets of alternative
design configurations for particular engineering design objectives interrelated
with technologically verified performance metrics. The research will focus on
the application domain of flexible assembly design, a multi-stage design and
manufacturing process widely used in the automotive and appliance industries. No
specialized expertise will be needed for using the resulting deep learning tools
once they have been trained and validated. In addition to advancing Data
Science, another impact of this work will be democratization of complex
structural design and analysis by supporting design and manufacturing decisions
made by individuals without advanced degrees. It will also enable the next
generation of engineers to be educated about applying advancing Machine Learning
to engineering design and manufacturing and adapting data-driven tools in
product development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate data
curation characteristics (e.g., volume, modality, granularity, heterogeneity,
balance) while simultaneously considering the application domain and
capabilities of the related Artificial Neural Net algorithms, including
convolution, recurrent, generative adversarial networks, multi-layer
perceptrons, and pooling architectures. To generate the required data sets, an
automated simulation pipeline will be formulated that meets curation criteria.
The results will be verified through industry benchmarks and experimental data
from the industrial partner (Honda). Mathematical methods will be devised to
extract key performance parameters from the simulation data. Additional methods
will be designed to investigate abstractions, decompositions, and partitions of
each data sample into sub-sets suitable for processing in parallel through
federated Artificial Neural Nets, or individually through distributed machine
learning networks, as chosen by the research community. All data sets will be
published through Amazon Cloud for use by other engineering design researchers
to advance design science in their respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.