* 2030148
* RAPID: Ensuring the Success and Sustainability of STEM Graduate Students and Graduate Academic/Research Programs in Response to COVID-19
* EHR,DGE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Ann Davoren, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,466.00

The COVID-19 crisis has had a significant and negative impact on STEM graduate
students and their research programs. Universities have been forced to rapidly
adapt. Some are developing innovative practices to support graduate students and
maintain their programs, yet others are struggling. This National Science
Foundation Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award to the National Opinion
Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago aims to support and sustain
quality graduate student education in the U.S. during the crisis and into the
future. Graduate school deans will be systematically surveyed about their
successes, struggles, and concerns for the future. The findings will be
published and distributed to universities nationwide. The report will provide
academic leaders with an opportunity to learn from each other. It will document
novel and effective solutions developed in real-time during the pandemic and
identify the new approaches that should be more fully explored and possibly
institutionalized to best support STEM graduate students and sustain graduate
programs into the future.

NORC will follow a reliable and proven research strategy that has been utilized
in prior STEM education research, follows established research protocols and
methods, and has been successfully executed by NORC in past projects. The Center
will design, administer, and analyze an online cross-sectional survey to be
completed by graduate school deans on behalf of 300 doctoral- and master’s-level
universities in the U.S. that matriculate significant numbers of STEM graduate
students. Initial qualitative interviews with four graduate school deans from
diverse institutions will inform the development of the survey instrument. Using
both closed- and open-ended questions, the survey will focus on impacts and
innovations across three key areas of inquiry: (1) graduate student academic and
research progress; (2) graduate student health and well-being; and (3) graduate
program continuity and sustainability. Data analysis will include descriptive
analyses and statistical tests to identify potential differences across
institutional types (e.g., size, highest-degree awarded, minority serving).
Qualitative data from the surveys will be coded and organized into the three key
areas of inquiry. The survey results will then be shared, vetted, and further
refined by a working assembly (virtual or in-person) of approximately 30
representatives from participating institutions. The result will be a final
report to be disseminated through NORC’s website and to STEM graduate programs
throughout the country.

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award is made by the Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program in the Division of Graduate
Education/Directorate of Education and Human Resources using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.