* 2030425
* RAPID: Development of a Nonlinear Activity Response Model for Coronavirus (COVID-19) Scenario Projections Based on the Observations of the Shutdown-Reopening Cycle of China
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Yuhang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,811.00

This RAPID project will investigate the cycle of shutdown and reopening of
businesses in China due to COVID-19, and assess the usefulness of studying this
cycle for providing guidance for policymaking in the U.S., European countries,
and the countries where the medical testing capability is severely limited. The
response to COVID-19 has varied significantly from the epicenter (Wuhan and
Hunan province) to the other 25 provinces, 4 provincial-level megacities
(Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing), and 5 autonomous regions for
minority ethnic groups. The proxy data for response activities includes the
processed TROPOMI tropospheric vertical NO2 column data and inverse modeling of
daily NOx emissions in China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypotheses of this
project are that (1) the COVID-19 infection data (including coronavirus positive
test, hospitalization, and mortality data) and government policies largely shape
the responses by the society and businesses; (2) near real-time monitoring of
tropospheric column NO2 provide timely high spatiotemporal data for gauging the
activity responses by the society and businesses, which are unavailable through
conventional means; (3) with the large datasets of varying degrees of COVID-19
infection, governmental policy, and activity responses in different regions of
China, a nonlinear response model will be developed and this model can later be
corrected with data from US and other countries to provide policymaking guidance
through scenario analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.