* 2030722
* EAGER: Covariational Deep Learning for Protein Structure Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Debswapna Bhattacharya, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,276.00

This project will advance current capabilities in protein structure prediction.
Only about a third of known protein families with no experimentally-available
structures are amenable to homology modeling; that is, have other proteins with
sufficiently similar sequence profiles for which structures have been resolved
in experimental laboratories. For the majority of known protein families, the
so-called dark proteome, this is not the case. Structures are missing. Being
able to obtain them experimentally or computationally is key to understanding
the roles of proteins in key cellular proteins, obtaining a detailed view of
molecular mechanisms, guiding efforts on therapeutic development, engineering
proteins with specific functions, and more. This project will advance such
efforts for the dark proteome with novel informatics techniques that are capable
of harnessing useful signals hidden in protein sequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evaluate the hypothesis that
covariational signals in multiple sequence alignment can be harnessed to advance
free modeling. Deep neural network architectures will be utilized for this
purpose. Research activities are organized in two thrusts: (1) development of
distant-homology fold recognition methods by alignment of inter-residue distance
bounds predicted using 2D deep fully residual networks (FRNs); and (2)
development of protein model quality estimation methods driven by per-residue
distance errors predicted using 1D deep residual neural networks (ResNets). The
project benefits researchers in diverse communities that are working at the
interface of computing and biology. Planned activities include free
dissemination of novel bioinformatics tools and research results, broadening of
participation of K-12 students in computing through creative mentoring and
outreach, and increasing public understanding of interdisciplinary science via
Samuel Ginn College of Engineeringâ€™s GINNing podcast
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.