* 2030723
* Building Scientific Identity and Microbiology Research Skills of Undergraduate Women in Chemistry and Biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Kathleen Boyle, Mount Mary University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2026
* USD 999,760.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Mount Mary University, both a women’s and a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
22 unique full-time students who are pursuing a bachelor’s degree in biology,
chemistry, or food science chemistry. The Scholars will enter in five cohorts of
about four students and receive up to four years of scholarship support. The
project will support Scholars to develop a professional STEM identity by
providing: (1) faculty mentoring, financial mentoring, and wrap-around support;
(2) peer tutors; (3) an Authentic Research in Microbiology Seminar; and (4)
internships, a Science &amp; Industry Seminar Series, and industry advisory
board. The project activities are expected to increase persistence and
graduation of women in STEM whose unique and diverse perspectives will
contribute to the integrity of scientific advancement and innovation. The
project will also introduce evidence-based approaches to undergraduate STEM by
institutionalizing Authentic Research in Microbiology seminars to support
persistence of all students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific goal of this
project is to increase undergraduate Scholars’ retention and advancement by
accomplishing the following aims: (1) recruit and enroll low-income,
academically talented undergraduates who matriculate into Mount Mary University;
(2) retain and graduate Scholars who are prepared to enter the STEM workforce or
pursue graduate school; and (3) investigate how identity affects scientists who
are women. This project will advance knowledge by exploring if an inquiry-based
seminar series can increase scientific skills and a sense of belonging as a
scientist. As a result, this work will address gaps in the STEM education
research literature about how a multi-year research seminar affects low-income
female scholars’ persistence and success, their ability to overcome impostor
phenomenon, and their self-identify as scientists. The project will use
validated assessment instruments to evaluate the strength of the project’s
approaches. Results will be published and shared with the academic and
scientific communities. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.