* 2030556
* Scalable Randomized Scheduling of Mobile Sensors with Observability Guarantees
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Autonomous aerial, ground, and underwater robots have emerged as promising
platforms for a myriad of sensing applications. Aerial drones can monitor
natural calamities like tornadoes and forest fires, and underwater robots can
detect harmful algal blooms and track invasive fish species. The information to
be gathered is typically governed by some nonlinear dynamic processes. A natural
question to ask is, given a limited number of mobile sensors, how should they be
dynamically placed to best observe the quantity of interest, especially with
limited energy while requiring the robots to remain connected? The space of
possible sensor placements is vast and constraints on energy and connectivity
add to the challenges. This project will develop efficient algorithms to
schedule the mobile sensors under these constraints and evaluate their
performance in tracking a moving target through field experiments. The
interdisciplinary nature of this research will be integrated with outreach and
educational activities to broaden participation of K-12 and undergraduate
students, especially from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project combines the investigators’ complementary expertise in control, network
theory and fast randomized computation as the project will result in a fresh
perspective and a generalizable, principled framework for scalable scheduling of
mobile sensors with observability guarantees. The project goals will be realized
through four integrated research thrusts that span theoretical investigation,
algorithmic development, and experimental validation. Thrust 1 focuses on
integrating a Gramian-based nonlinear observability metric with randomized
sampling for efficient computation of near-optimal sensor placements under
sensing and communication uncertainty. Thrust 2 extends the framework to
accommodate energy and connectivity constraints, where special emphasis will be
on distributed approaches for computation. Motivated by the fish-tracking
application, the theory and algorithms developed in Thrusts 1 and 2 will be
validated experimentally with a fleet of autonomous surface vehicles tracking a
moving acoustic tag. Thrust 3 of the project involves the development of the
experimental testbed, including the robots and their associated models and
controllers, while Thrust 4 evaluates the developed mobile sensor scheduling
algorithms via both simulation and field experiments in Higgins Lake,
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.