* 2030096
* RAPID: COVID-19 Transmission Network Reconstruction from Time-Series Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 04/30/2024
* USD 160,736.00

Covid-19 has spread rapidly since it was detected in Hubei province in China. To
estimate potential impact of Covid-19, researchers have employed models to
predict numbers of people infected, and the potential morbidity caused by the
virus. Importantly, results from models guide policies for controlling the
spread of the COVID-19 virus, where it is also recognized that conclusions
reached vary considerably based on the model being employed. Here, for effective
mitigation and prediction of the spread of the virus it is important to
construct the transmission network of COVID-19 which informs the routes the
virus takes in introducing or re-introducing infections to different regions and
populations. An accurate estimate of the transmission network will help in
developing models with higher fidelity and accuracy and can help in effective
mitigation strategies. The project will develop a data-driven approach for
reconstruction of transmission network of COVID-19, to complement and aid model-
based approaches. Here, relative interdependence and independence of infection
in a region from other infections in other regions estimated solely from data
history will be employed. Such a data-driven approach has the potential to
evolve significant complementary insights and guide strategies for COVID-19
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are numerous parametric models being
employed to analyze/predict evolution of the Covid-19 based viral infection. In
this project, the focus is to unravel the evolution of the transmission network
of infections as inferred from data. A primary approach is based on filtering
and multivariate optimal estimation. The first step of the methodology is to
identify the pathway by which an agent can affect another agent where all
intermediate agents that facilitate transmission of infection from one agent to
another are identified. In the second step the focus is on estimating the
dynamics of the transmission whereby aspects such as the delay in expression of
infection from the time the agent encounters an infected agent are unraveled.
Tools from graphical models and their relationship to filtering over networks
will be brought to bear on the problem. The data-driven algorithms are agnostic
to models bringing complimentary set of insights into the Covid-19 transmission
from the model-based approaches currently being employed. The
filtering/optimization-based methods will be used on data generated by standard
epidemiological models such as the Susceptible-Infected-Removed
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.