* 2030599
* RAPID: Longitudinal Modeling of Teams and Teamwork during the COVID-19 Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Aaron Striegel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 197,667.00

The ability to effectively work as a team is essential to meet the demands of
the modern world and workforce. However, the COVID-19 crisis has drastically
changed how teams collaborate, including periods of extended remote work, mixed
remote and in-person teams, blurred home and work boundaries, elevated stress
and anxiety, and extreme uncertainty about the future. The swift onset of the
crisis required individuals, teams, and organizations to abruptly adapt to
rapidly changing circumstances with little to no preparation. The proposed
research will investigate disruptions to teamwork and how teams adapt during the
COVID-19 crisis and in the ensuing recovery period. The project will investigate
30 real-world teams over a three-month period while in the midst of the crisis
and for an additional one-month follow-up as events unfold. The goal is to
understand how teams respond to changing contexts, how teams support each other,
how conflict is managed, and how teams develop, adapt, and sustain the rhythms
of teamwork during COVID-19 and in the ensuing recovery period. This
foundational research will be essential to help organizations establish team
structures and collaborative processes that enable them to more successfully
address disruptions in the current and in future crises. The project will
provide unique opportunities for interdisciplinary training of students in
computer science and psychology, will broaden participation by recruiting
diverse students, and will share a rich and unique dataset with the broad
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are to: (1)
understand states, processes, and behaviors (e.g., team cohesion, communication
patterns, collective stress) of teams during the COVID-19 crisis with a focus on
factors associated with team performance; (2) investigate how individuals and
teams experience and adapt to major COVID-related life events, such as school
closings, enforcing of social distancing, budget cuts, illnesses, and so on; and
(3) identify patterns in team states and behaviors over time, detect disruptions
to these patterns, and study how new patterns emerge during the crisis and in
the ensuing period of recovery. The project will use wearable sensors to track
heart rate, sleep, physical activity, and relative location (home or away),
communication tools (e.g., team calendars, email metadata), ecological momentary
assessments (EMAs), validated survey instruments, and semi-structured interviews
to investigate team states, team processes, team behaviors, and team
performances in context and over time. The findings will contribute basic
knowledge on teaming under the unique context of COVID-19, what factors are
associated with team performance, and whether changes teams adopt are temporary
or permanent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.