* 2030828
* RAPID: Aptamer-Linked Nano-Plasmon Sensor for Rapid Detection of SARS-CoV-2
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Feng Ding, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 190,065.00

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been
wreaking havoc around the globe, infecting more than 2 million people with
COVID-19 and taking hundreds of thousands of lives to date. One of the major
challenges in stopping the pandemic is the development of diagnostic tools for
the rapid detection of the coronavirus at point-of-care in real time. Existing
tests for active infections rely on the detection of virus genetic materials
with amplification methods that often require long turn-around times in a
centralized laboratory setup. The limited and delayed detection of SARS-CoV-2
infections so far has become the bottleneck for stopping the continued community
transmission of the virus. In this RAPID application, the investigators will
break this bottleneck by developing a novel nanomaterial-based sensor with the
capability to detect virus proteins in real time. Validation of the method for
detecting actual virus will allow fast screening and isolation of COVID-19
patients, critical for breaking the chain of transmission during current and
future pandemics, including potential new waves of the SARS-CoV-2 after the end
of the current quarantine. This research project will also provide training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students at the interface of
physics, biology, and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing test for
active SARS-CoV-2 infections relies on the detection of virus RNAs by the
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction method, which usually requires
long turn-around times in a centralized laboratory setup. In order to break this
bottleneck and to stop the pandemic, alternative approaches for fast virus
detection are required. The investigators plan to develop aptamer-linked nano-
plasmon sensors for real-time detection of virus proteins that are highly
abundant in virus-infected cells, including the receptor-binding domain of the
spike glycoprotein and the nucleocapsid protein. This novel approach combines
several lines of technological advancements in nano- and bio-engineering: 1) the
localized surface plasmon resonance coupling between two linked gold
nanoparticles that is sensitive to their inter-particle distance; 2) single-
stranded DNA or RNA aptamers with well-defined secondary and tertiary structures
that can recognize specific proteins with strong binding affinities comparable
to antibodies; and 3) naturally-occurring riboswitches comprised of an aptamer
and a regulatory domains in gene regulation that can change conformations upon
binding the target molecule by the aptamer domain. The principal investigator
will utilize high-affinity aptamer sequences that have been reported in the
literature to specifically recognize the targeted virus proteins and design
conformationally “switchable” sequences by mimicking riboswitches and
introducing regulatory sequences. Using the computationally designed sequences,
the co-principal investigator will synthesize the nano-plasmon sensors and
experimentally validate the functionality in recognizing the targeted virus
proteins. Compared to antibodies used for sensor design, nucleotides are much
easier and cheaper to synthesize, which is critical for producing testing kits
in large quantities. Upon successful completion of the proposed research
project, the developed sensors will offer an alternative approach for rapid
detection of SARS-CoV-2 at the point-of-care in real time and can also be used
as a scientific tool to study the virus infection mechanism. Moreover, funding
of this application will foster student training at the interface of physics,
biology, and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET)
Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.