* 2030836
* STEM Scholars: Boosting Persistence and Achievement in STEM for Community College Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Rita Fincher, Samford University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the regional need for scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with verified financial need
at Samford University. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund
scholarships to 27 different full-time transfer students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, environmental science,
marine science, math, and computer science. The students will enter in three
annual cohorts and each Scholar will receive two to three years of funding. The
project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking
scholarships with effective support activities, student services, academic and
career mentoring, and preparation for summer research and internships. Community
college students who transfer to four-year institutions often have a first-
semester drop in average grades and are at risk for leaving for leaving without
completing a degree. This project will apply research about how to help students
recognize and develop their learning strengths. In addition, it will evaluate
whether increasing such self-awareness can contribute to academic success and be
a generally successful approach for increasing degree completion. A large
percent of students who transfer from community colleges are from low income and
other populations that are underrepresented in math and science. As a result,
this project has significant potential to broaden participation in STEM fields
and to learn more about how mentoring, framing career goals, and fostering
student awareness of their own learning can increase transfer student
persistence to graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with verified financial need. There are five specific aims: 1)
build on existing relationships to form a shared STEM community between Samford
University and local community colleges, and to promote recruitment of transfer
students, including from groups underrepresented in STEM; 2) leverage existing
student support programs and services at Samford University to maximize student
retention and graduation; 3) promote student academic success through training
in self-regulation of learning; 4) increase transfer students’ first-semester
GPA at Samford to be more similar to their community college GPA; and 5) employ
an existing STEM foundations course on career building to maximize the number of
students entering STEM careers or graduate education. Many transfer students,
including those entering Samford University, struggle with a post-transfer
decrease in GPA sometimes called “transfer shock.” To mitigate this decrease,
the project features a three-stage “Boost Sequence” of experiences, including a
summer metacognition/career development workshop, orientation, and transfer
success seminar, and a first semester STEM course to strengthen preparation in
programming or chemistry. The Boost Sequence is intended to support both
academic performance and metacognitive skill development. The impact of the
Boost Sequence will be evaluated by comparing post-transfer GPA and
metacognitive skills of Scholars with comparable non-Scholar peers. It is
expected that helping students gain skills to control their own learning will
increase their academic success as measured by GPA and support persistence to
graduation. Project results will be disseminated by website, in publications,
and at disciplinary and educational conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.