* 2030875
* Community Building in Support of Undergraduate and Graduate Scholars in Mathematics, Computing Sciences, and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Carol Wade, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at SUNY Brockport. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 60 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s or
master’s degrees in Mathematics, Computer Science, Computer Information Systems,
or Physics. Up to three years of scholarship support will be provided to Upper
division undergraduates and masters students. Scholars will participate in
monthly meetings in which they will work collaboratively with Scholars in
different majors to develop solutions to complex sociocultural problems. In this
work, they will use their common language of core mathematics as well as their
cultural and discipline-specific knowledge. Scholars will be strongly encouraged
and supported to complete internships, research projects, and/or other STEM
field experiences. The project is designed to increase the sense of community
and confidence among Scholars who began college at SUNY Brockport and who
transferred from other schools. It is expected that these experiences will help
Scholars remain active in pursuing their chosen disciplines, leading to at least
60 new STEM graduates who are prepared for STEM employment or graduate study.
The intellectual merit of the program centers upon advancing knowledge about
building community within and across the fields of mathematics, physics, and
computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims: to make
studying a STEM field financially accessible to students; to increase peer
community support, particularly among transfer students and across the
disciplines of Mathematics, Computing Sciences, and Physics; and to increase
opportunities and support for internships, student research, and other field
experiences for these Scholars. Financial support and experiential learning
opportunities are known to have a positive effect on student success in STEM.
However, there is not a lot known about the impact of community intervention
specific to transfer students in STEM fields or to students who entered from
high school but are at an institution in which nearly half of their peers are
transfer students. This project will study the experiences of Scholars who will
be placed in roles as collaborators with their peers, specifically in the
context of using their STEM backgrounds. The research questions center around
how high-impact practices can support persistence of the Scholars in meaningful
problem solving and the resulting impact on retention and degree completion. The
project will explicitly explore how targeted sociocultural community building
affects Scholars': 1) degree persistence in Mathematics, Computing Sciences, and
Physics; 2) completion, development, and motivation to solve complex problems;
and 3) perception of the nature of mathematics and science. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of the effect of community on both transfer
and other students in STEM and to provide a roadmap for a strategy to improve
the community support for STEM students. This project will be evaluated using
both formative and summative assessments tabulating data from financial aid,
registration and records, and data submitted by faculty. Results of this project
will be made available by publication in practitioner journals and presentations
at conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.