* 2030854
* Making the Master's Degree in Artificial Intelligence Accessible to High-Achieving Low-Income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Nancy Romance, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Florida Atlantic University, a Hispanic Serving Institution. The project
will support 20-30 college juniors as S-STEM Scholars. Scholars will be selected
into two Cohorts and qualify for three-year scholarships to complete an
accelerated program to earn a BS in engineering plus an MS in Artificial
Intelligence. Accompanying the scholarships, Scholars will have access to a
system of evidenced-based best practices designed to enhance their academic
performance, persistence, degree completion, and readiness for high quality
careers in Artificial Intelligence and related fields. The practices include
curricular enhancements (e.g., hierarchical mentoring, undergraduate research)
and co-curricular opportunities (e.g., sharing success seminars, internships,
financial literacy). This system of practices is designed to build Scholars’
sense of belonging and identities as members of the engineering community, as
well as increasing their readiness for STEM careers. The project is intended to
bring graduate education in artificial intelligence well within the reach of
high-achieving low-income students, thus altering in powerful ways their career
trajectories and contribution to STEM. The project will build new knowledge by
examining the magnified impact of student scholarships combined with a
coordinated system of evidenced-based curricular, co-curricular, and industry-
related support on student academic success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving students with demonstrated financial need. The project
will select, provide scholarships to, and support Scholars as they complete the
accelerated BS/MS degree program culminating with a masters’ degree in
Artificial Intelligence. The project will collect quantitative data on each
cohort of Scholars and will use qualitative research approaches to assess
Scholars’ satisfaction, motivation, development of personal competencies such as
self-efficacy, and workforce preparedness. The project will be evaluated using a
mixed methods approach. The project will advance knowledge about how best to
prepare the first generations of graduate researchers in artificial intelligence
and contribute to the development of a new set of guidelines for preparedness
and career entry within this emerging STEM fields and related fields. Project
results will be disseminated through professional conferences and publications
and a designated project website, as well as through social media and other
public awareness channels. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.