* 2030439
* RAPID: Mixed-Dimensional Heterostructure Materials based SERS for Trace Level Fingerprint Identification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Paresh Ray, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Current novel coronavirus infection (COVID-19) diagnostic tests, used worldwide,
take significant time, typically more than a day, to confirm results. There is
an urgent need for a rapid coronavirus test platform throughout the world at
this moment. This RAPID project will develop sensitive, fast and simple-to-use
optical techniques to detect viral-RNA using Raman spectroscopy, which has
capability for specific identification of COVID-19. The goal of this project is
to design new material-based robust optical platform to detect trace level virus
RNA. This will be accomplished by measuring the Raman signal from COVID-19 RNA.
The expected outcome is a nanomaterial based technology underlying a portable
device for accurate and immediate diagnosis of viral infections from COVID-19.
The proposed research will enable approaches that mitigate the negative impacts
of COVID-19 on public health, society, and the economy. This Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) grant supports research with funding from the Partnerships for
Research and Education in Materials (PREM) Program in the Division of Materials
Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, with co-funding
from the HBCU-EiR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel material-based
technologies for sensitive and rapid identification of COVID-19 is very
important to tackle COVID-19 epidemic threat. The current project will
contribute towards the development of novel mixed dimensional heterostructure
based surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) platform for highly efficient
and immediate fingerprint identification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Specifically, the
objectives include development of innovative 2D-0D, 1D-0D, and 2D-1D
heterostructure building blocks and creating novel heterostructure-based SERS
platform-based technology. The mixed-dimensional heterostructure material will
offer opportunities for revolutionary advances in designing SERS platform. The
SERS platform will provide accurate identification of the COVID-19 RNA, which
can be used in both clinical and field settings. The RAPID program will serve as
the bridge among scientific research, technological development, and educational
activities for African American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is
being awarded using funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act supplemental funds allocated to
MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.