* 2030521
* CAREER: Machine Learning Assisted Crowdsourcing for Phishing Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Gang Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 420,353.00

This project aims to address the growing threat of phishing attacks, messages
that try to trick people into revealing sensitive information, by combining
human and machine intelligence. Existing detection methods based on machine
learning and blacklists are both brittle to new attacks and somewhat lenient, in
order to avoid blocking legitimate messages; as a result, widely used email
systems are vulnerable to carefully crafted phishing emails. To address this,
the project team will develop systems that automatically block obvious scams
while forwarding less certain cases to groups of crowd workers trained to detect
phishing mails. To support these workers' decision-making, the team will develop
novel explanations of the system's decision making that will highlight the
aspects of both the message and its algorithm that triggered the need for human
judgment. The system will also aggregate these crowd decisions to generate real-
time phishing alerts that can be shared to both individual users and to email
systems. The project will lead to advances in interpretable machine learning, an
important topic given the increasing role that artificial intelligence and
machine learning systems play in society, and also increase our ability to
characterize the evolution of phishing attacks and the vulnerability of internet
platforms and users to those attacks over time. The project team will also use
the work as an important component of new courses on usable security and
outreach programs to high school teachers and students to both educate them
about and increase their participation in cybersecurity
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is organized around three main
objectives: empirical characterization of phishing risks, developing accurate
and interpretable machine learning models for phishing detection, and developing
reliable crowdsourcing systems for phishing alerts. The team will assess
phishing risks through developing analytics tools on the effective adoption and
configuration of anti-spoofing protocols in email systems, using adversarial
machine learning methods to conduct black box testing on existing phishing
detectors, and creating reactive honeypots that entice and respond to phishing
attacks in order to collect data on not just the initial phishing emails but on
attackers' behaviors throughout the course of a successful phishing attack. The
data collected on phishing emails will be used to develop the machine learning
models, using Convolutional Neural Network and Long Short-Term Memory based deep
learning techniques to generate both suspicious features and confidence
estimates of individual decisions. The suspicious features will be used to
generate interpretable security cues such as text annotations or icons by first
creating simpler and more interpretable machine learning models such as decision
trees that mimic the local detection boundary near the target emails in the
feature space. Rules in the decision tree will be mapped back to interface
elements and email content to provide the warnings, and these will be compared
to generic email security warnings in a series of user studies that also model
people's ability to detect phishing using a variety of cues, features, and
media. Those individual models, along with the confidence estimates from the
phishing detection model, will then be used to drive a crowdsourcing-based
system where the models of individual users' quality will be aggregated to make
reliable judgments around emails the models judge as too suspicious to pass but
not suspicious enough to automatically filter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.