* 2030043
* Effectively Communicating Science Workshops (2021-2024); Saint Paul, Minnesota
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* John Sonsteng, Mitchell Hamline School of Law
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 447,741.00

This project supports a series of workshops that bring together a diverse group
of science professionals and experienced law school faculty to develop effective
practices in communicating complex science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) concepts to non-scientists in a range of challenging communication
settings. To communicate and teach effectively, scientists must understand how
to explain their work to audiences who are not scientists and lack understanding
of complex scientific principles. Scientists must not be an advocate for one
side or the other, but they must be able to convey the substance, quality, and
accuracy of their work. The main objective is to improve participantsâ€™ abilities
to communicate and teach complex STEM concepts to non-scientists in a variety of
formal settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the workshops, participants learn
and practice the role of both scientists and non-scientists in order to: 1)
develop and build upon skills necessary to effectively communicate their
expertise; 2) understand the culture and perspectives of nonscientists; and 3)
develop a deeper understanding and appreciation of the different challenges in
communicating and teaching complex STEM concepts to non-scientists. The
workshops demonstrate the merit of experiential learning and provide hands-on
practice opportunities with individualized feedback and coaching during the
workshops. Participants also discuss ethical issues concerning communicating and
teaching STEM concepts to non-scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts (B.I.) involve providing an immersive hands-on learning and
demonstration experience in communicating complex science in a novel
communication venue for scientists and in collaboration with legal
professionals. This collaboration helps bridge the gap in understanding the
culture norms and ethical considerations of the two professional communities
that increasingly interact over technical issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.