* 2030199
* Advancing the Elastic Wave Characterization of Critical Buried Concrete Pipelines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Arun P. Jaganathan, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,775.00

This funding will support research that creates new knowledge related to the
investigation of buried concrete pipes, which promotes science and advances the
national prosperity and welfare. Concrete pipes constitute an integral part of
our infrastructure. The large diameter pipes buried under major urban areas act
as critical arteries of the underground space, and their failure has the
potential to create major disruptions. This project will demonstrate and advance
an elastic wave-based technique to accurately quantify the unknown elastic
properties of buried concrete pipes and liners used for their rehabilitation. In
this technique the dynamic response of a pipe is measured, and the unknown
parameters are calculated by matching the response against the theoretical
predictions. The ability to measure the in-situ properties accurately will
provide the opportunity to improve the remaining life prediction of these
utilities, enhance their asset management practices and reduce the overall cost
of maintenance. This research project provides opportunity to generate
intellectual property, increase U.S. competitiveness, and broaden the
undergraduate civil engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multichannel
surface wave analysis technique is an inverse parameter estimation technique
that is widely used in geophysics for investigating the layered half-space and
plate like elastic mediums. During this project, this technique will be
investigated for buried concrete pipes using longitudinal and circumferential
waves. Its implementation in a space restricted pipe segment introduces several
challenges. For example, gathering a dense waveform record, which is essential
for creating a high-resolution dispersion image, is a challenging task. To
overcome this problem, the recent advances in sparse sensing techniques will be
investigated for this pipe application. The scientific contributions of this
project include the development of analytical solutions for selective wave
propagation problems necessary for conducting the waveform inversion, design of
sensor array optimized for concrete pipes, and new signal processing algorithms
to enable the effective characterization of concrete
pipes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.