* 2030775
* Improving the Academic Success and Graduation of Transfer Students in Undergraduate Mechanical Engineering Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2025
* Edward Davis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 10/31/2025
* USD 999,715.00

This project will help meet the national need for skilled engineers by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income transfer
students at Auburn University. Over its five-year duration, the project will
award scholarships to 28 full-time transfer students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in mechanical or materials engineering. Two annual cohorts of Scholars
will be selected from students who are entering the University in their second
or third year of engineering study. The Scholars will receive up to three years
of scholarship support. In addition to financial challenges, many transfer
students also face challenges with acclimation to campus life, connecting with
study groups, and accessing academic support programs and research/internship
opportunities. This project will help Scholars navigate these challenges by
combining financial support with resources and activities to help them develop
relationships with other transfer students and with faculty, as well as develop
skills for success as an engineer. Examples include orientation and first-
semester success seminars, research experiences, career development resources,
and faculty and peer mentoring. As they move through their program of study,
Scholars will transition from being mentored to being a mentor, promoting their
identity as a member of the Auburn University community and as an engineer. The
classes, workshops, and seminars developed as part of this project will be open
to all transfer students, thus increasing the project’s impact and
sustainability. It is expected that this project may be a model that other
institutions could replicate or adapt to improve transfer student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The specific aims are to: (1) improve the academic performance
of transfer students in the Department of Mechanical Engineering; (2) improve
transfer students’ acclimation to campus and engagement in campus life; (3)
promote participation in research among transfer students; (4) connect transfer
students with faculty and peer mentors; (5) enhance transfer students’ use of
academic support services; and (6) provide professional development activities
for transfer students. The project intends to achieve these objectives by
increasing student engagement and sense of belonging. The project will collect
and analyze data on the characteristics and benefits of a cohort experience and
the differences in perception of these experiences between transfer students and
students who enter the university from high school. Over the course of the
proposed project, activities that contribute to or detract from a positive
cohort experience will be identified. This information will enable the design of
high quality, impactful cohort experiences tailored to transfer students. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.