* 2030663
* Scholarships and Supports for Self-Efficacy Development and Career Launching to Increase Undergraduate Degree Attainment in Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Kyle Swanson, Metropolitan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2025
* USD 649,676.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated
cybersecurity professionals by supporting the retention and graduation of high-
achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Metropolitan
State University. This University is a four-year Asian American and Native
American Pacific Islander Serving Institution. Over its five-year duration, the
project will provide up to two years of scholarship support to 30 undergraduate
juniors and transfer students who are pursuing a bachelor's degree in
cybersecurity. The Scholars will be selected in three annual cohorts. The
project aims to increase student persistence in cybersecurity by linking
scholarships with effective support activities, including mentoring, cohort-
based industry-relevant certification training, intensive training on a state-
of-the-art cybersecurity emulator, and a structured career-launching work
experience after the scholarship support ends. Mentoring/advising will include
faculty mentors, student mentors, and professional advisors, with a focus on
providing relevant and timely guidance that will advance Scholarsâ€™ academic and
career success. Examples of mentoring/advising topics include successful college
student behaviors, emotional support for Scholars during transition points or
times of academic/personal challenges, support activities within certification
courses, and reflections on future career pathways including introductions to
professionals for job shadowing. Because Metropolitan State University has a
high population of underrepresented students, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in the cybersecurity field and to advance knowledge about
how to support retention and graduation of this student population in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase cybersecurity degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project aims to study how
outcomes such as Scholars' enrollment intensity (i.e., enrolling in a higher
number of credits per year compared to peers) and self-efficacy are impacted by
intensive co-curricular support and career-focused expectations. Drawing from
Social Cognitive Career Theory, this project will test and contribute to the
body of literature on whether co-curricular supports that explicitly target
self-efficacy and outcome expectancy as drivers of personal career choice
actions are effective at increasing persistence and degree completion for low-
income, academically talented students in technology-rich fields. The project
aims to identify the barriers and enablers for applying to and completing the
cybersecurity program. This project has the potential to generate new knowledge
about the role of scholarships and enrollment intensity among low-income
academically talented students with the overarching goal of understanding the
factors that enable or impede cybersecurity degree attainment. The project will
be evaluated using appropriate instruments to anchor the evidence triangulation
process, based on artifacts from learning and teaching episodes, interviews,
surveys, and focus groups. The results of this project will be disseminated
through the institution website, presentations at local conferences, Minnesota
State System collaboration meetings, regional and national science education
conferences (e.g., Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education or
SIGCSE), and articles published in peer-reviewed journals. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.