* 2030879
* Increasing Access to Graduate Degrees, Professional Development, and Research Experiences: Pathways to Achievement in Chemical Industries
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Lynn Schneemeyer, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Montclair State University, a Hispanic Serving Institution and a
majority minority institution. Over its five-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 37 unique full time and part time students who are pursuing
master’s degrees in chemistry. The Scholars will receive scholarships of up to
two years. The project aims to enable low-income students to pursue a master’s
degree in chemistry through 1) scholarships, 2) flexible degree track options,
3) increased tutoring, 4) summer research stipends, and 5) a cost-effective
15-month master’s degree track. This project is also significant because it will
increase opportunities for students to participate in short-term research
projects that fit into the students’ academic and work schedules. Research
participation is known to be a high-impact practice in chemistry education, but
many master’s students currently forgo this opportunity. The project will
generate knowledge about strategies to increase research participation of
graduate students, particularly low-income, working master’s students. Faculty
members will offer Scholars additional opportunities to participate in data
analysis or modeling projects, so that the Scholars’ research experience fits
into their academic, work, and personal schedules and can be conducted from
home. The project will contribute to building the skilled future workforce
needed by the chemical and pharmaceutical industries in Northern New Jersey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving graduate students with
demonstrated financial need. The project has two specific aims: 1) to create
flexible options that allow low-income, academically talented, students with a
bachelor’s degree to advance their studies and obtain a Master’s of Chemistry
degree; 2) to change and adapt an existing Master’s of Chemistry program to
better prepare students for modern chemistry research positions in industry and
academia. This project is motivated by recent research suggesting that students
with a Professional Science MS are in demand. Professional Science MS programs
cultivate the knowledge and skills desired by industry and government for their
employees. Additionally, it is well known that professional skills including
teamwork and communication are critical for success in modern chemical industry,
but students in traditional Master’s of Chemistry programs often lack
professional development opportunities to develop such skills. This project will
identify the skills that students need to be competitive for positions in
Northern New Jersey chemistry and pharmaceutical biochemistry industries and
advance the understanding of best practices to cultivate these skills. The
project will gather data from interviews, focus groups, and surveys with
undergraduate students, master’s students, faculty, and local professionals.
Using these data, the project will investigate how chemistry professionals and
students value a program that offers fewer chemistry-specific courses while
offering students formal coursework in professional skills. Results of this
project will be made available by presentations, publications, and informal
dissemination through university visits. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.