* 2030880
* Supporting participation of underrepresented youth in computing using tangible computational craft kits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sherry Hsi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,901.00

Most computers do powerful things but hide their inner workings. Even if
students can look inside a computing device, they would find it difficult to
understand and manipulate its behavior. This project will develop tangible
computing kits to allow students to observe and work with otherwise invisible
computing concepts and principles. Students will design, create, modify, and
troubleshoot projects using these low-cost electronics components. The project
will support inclusive participation in computing by providing learners with
these new kits and activities based on culturally-relevant pedagogies. This
research will study the impact of this approach upon learners' technical
competency beliefs — their self-concepts and beliefs about their knowledge,
skills, and ability to learn and work in computing. Strong beliefs in these
areas are needed to lower barriers for successful participation in immediate,
near, and far future computing education
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines recent innovations in
material science, human-computer interaction, and maker-oriented technologies to
create new materials and building blocks for physical computing projects.
Underrepresented middle school-aged youth — primarily Black, Latino, and female
— will use these tools to develop understandings about the functionality and
principles that underlie computational objects. Design-based and mixed methods
research will be used to study how these tools and culturally-relevant design
activities influence middle school youth's practices, participation, and changes
to technical competency beliefs. This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.