* 2030859
* Computing Innovation Fellows 2020 Project
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* Elizabeth Bradley, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 16,737,291.00

The current coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is disrupting aspects of daily life
and work, including having a serious impact on the current faculty-recruiting
season in the computing-research community. A Computing Research Association
(CRA) survey completed on April 1st 2020 counted about 100 academic-computing
job positions being pulled from the market due to hiring freezes, and
universities continue to forecast major financial losses for the upcoming
academic year, with likely negative impacts on the academic-computing job market
for the next year as well. Thus what is needed is a bridge that keeps highly
trained researchers in the academic pipeline to preserve future computing
innovation and to meet the training needs of future computing professionals, as
these will be the backbone of the future economy. CRA and its Computing
Community Consortium (CCC) provided such a bridge for the severe economic
downturn a decade ago, using NSF funding to administer three cohorts of
Computing Innovation Fellows (CIFellows). That postdoctoral project kept 127
young scholars in research with career-enhancing programs. The current project,
CIFellows 2020, is intended to provide similar support for the academic-
computing pipeline in light of the damage it is sustaining in the wake of the
current pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIFellows 2020 project takes
inspiration from the original CIFellows project but adapts it to the current
uncertain situation, by incorporating more flexibility, allowing the option of
doing a postdoc at the applicantâ€™s current institution, and providing a
significant mentoring/cohort-building component that is based on best practices
that emerged from the original effort. Fellows may come from any research area
under the umbrella of NSF Computing and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE). Fellows will engage in a 1-2 year postdoctoral experience that furthers
their career development in new ways. An application process will be
implemented, and selection of successful applicants will be made using a
technical program-committee style with strict adherence to conflicts of interest
and based on a holistic evaluation of merit and diversity along many dimensions,
with major emphasis on intellectual merit and broader impacts in applicant
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.