* 2030731
* Supporting the Success of Mechanical Engineering Students through Sustainable Pathways that Emphasize Research and Innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Michael Rust, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 01/31/2026
* USD 649,111.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Western New England
University. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to
18 undergraduate students who are pursuing mechanical engineering degrees. Two
cohorts of incoming first-year students will be supported for up to four years.
Two new course-based experiences will provide Scholars with research experiences
and develop their entrepreneurial skillsets. The project will also strengthen
the existing student support programs at the University, including faculty and
peer mentoring, learning communities, student conference participation, and
career consultation. Project activities and services are expected to boost the
self-efficacy of low-income students early in their college careers, thus better
preparing them to tackle challenges in college and future careers. This project
intends to advance understanding of the relationship between the proposed
activities and student retention and degree completion. The findings from this
project will contribute new knowledge about activities that improve the
persistence and graduation rates of college students from low-income
communities. The project will broaden its educational and economic impacts by
establishing a community outreach program to increase the number of high school
and middle school students entering STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. It aims
to support students pursuing STEM degrees and careers and contribute to economic
growth in technology on a local and national level. The combination of research
activities, entrepreneurship skill development, and student services is intended
to improve the pathway to success for low-income STEM students. The goal of the
research experience is to deepen the students’ technical knowledge in the
engineering field through laboratory-based research activities. Additionally,
the complementary entrepreneurship curriculum will teach students to identify
innovative opportunities, as well as strengthen their workplace skills and
execution ability. This project will advance the understanding of the impact of
undergraduate research combined with entrepreneurial skillset development on
low-income student success. It will utilize validated assessment instruments to
evaluate the implemented curricular and co-curricular activities and will
improve the activities based on student and faculty feedback. The benefits of
the project will be disseminated both internally and externally. The effective
evidence-based practices determined by the project will be implemented across a
wider student population at the University. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.