* 2030083
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Approaches to Online Implementation and Social Support in Undergraduate Engineering Courses
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Julie Martin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 04/30/2022
* USD 89,518.00

The pandemic of COVID-19 is disrupting undergraduate engineering education
globally. Students have been asked to move out of their campus residences and
back home to take courses online. While some students may quickly adjust and
continue to do well in their courses, others may struggle to feel connected to
campus and their courses. Recent research has found that peers are a major
support for engineering students and supportive social relationships and
networks are critical for navigating through engineering education and careers.
This research will provide an understanding of how engineering instructors are
supporting student connections in their courses and what other social supports
students have during this time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores how
choices made by engineering instructors during the COVID-19 pandemic are
associated with undergraduate engineering students’ academic social capital and
achievement of learning outcomes. This work uses a multiple cross-case
comparison of three undergraduate engineering courses taught in different ways.
Data is collected from three team-based engineering courses at Purdue
University: a large first-year course, a medium-sized senior-level capstone
course, and a small service-learning course that has first year through senior-
level students. Data collection consists of student surveys, interviews with
students, faculty, and graduate teaching assistants, course documents such as
syllabi and schedules, and student assignment scores. The findings from this
study will make online and in-person instruction more inclusive and easier for
instructors because it will help make future decisions to ensure that all
students have the resources they need to be successful in the course and to
persist in their major. Findings and recommendations will be shared with
instructors of the courses studied, potentially influencing the learning
experiences of more than 3,000 students each year. The research team will use
the results of this research to create a list of best practices for online STEM
instructors which will be disseminated to the public through social media,
professional organization outlets, and archival journals. Ultimately, findings
will inform STEM instructors about what they can do to support the success of
all undergraduate students by helping them to build academic social capital,
whether during online or in-person instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.