* 2030327
* SBIR Phase I:  A Workplace Wearable Device For Social Distancing and Contact Tracing in Essential Businesses During COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Haytham Elhawary, One Million Metrics Corp
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2021
* USD 255,993.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to protect the public during the COVID-19
pandemic through contact tracing. This project will develop wearable technology
to provide proximity alerts when workers are in close contact, creating
awareness around social distancing. It will also record every contact between
workers to provide contact tracing should a worker test positive for COVID-19.
These tools protect front-line workers from the spread of the virus, along with
their families and communities. The technology will extend existing wearable
technology to reduce overexertion injuries in the workplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will estimate distance between workers through a machine learning
algorithm combining signal strength from Bluetooth technology with motion sensor
data from accelerometers and gyroscopes to measure worker activity prior and at
the end of each contact event. The project will develop distance detection
algorithms and a set of performance requirements to optimize design of a rapid,
accurate solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.