* 2030271
* Within Our Reach: Leveraging Scholarships and Supports to Increase Community College Student Engagement, Capacity, and Continuity in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Susan Young, Community College of Aurora
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2025
* USD 995,631.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Community College of Aurora, a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Over
its five-year duration, this project will fund scholarships of up to three years
to at least 80 unique full time and part time students. These Scholars will be
supported in a cohort of Scholars pursing Associate of Science degrees
(Chemistry, Engineering, Geology, Mathematics, Physics) or a cohort of Scholars
pursuing Associate of Applied Science degrees (Computer Information Systems,
Computer Science, Cyber Security, IT &amp; Tech Support, Computer Networking,
and Computer Programming). The project aims to address critical attrition points
for STEM students by providing financial resources, supporting academic success,
and growing STEM identity. The project will expand on outcomes and lessons
learned from previous NSF-supported projects by including new peer-to-peer
support elements. Potential broader impacts of this project include: increased
numbers of STEM students transferring to and achieving success at four-year
institutions; an increase in the diversity of the local STEM workforce; and
contributions to the Colorado Commission on Higher Education’s Master Plan
strategies to increase STEM credential attainment, particularly among Hispanic
and Black students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need by empowering students to take a focused,
deliberate approach to the academic and career readiness steps needed to realize
the potential of their talent. To achieve this goal, the project will utilize
evidence-based strategies and build on existing initiatives, including the ECC
Trilogy model of engagement, capacity, and continuity, which serves as a
framework for the College’s overall STEM programming and co-curricular
activities. As a result, the Scholars will have access to a suite of cohort-
based support services aimed to expand awareness of STEM career opportunities
and enhance their capacity to pursue STEM education and career pathways. The
project will implement a new peer-to-peer support model, including teaching
assistantships and peer mentoring, designed to build Scholars’ leadership
skills, foster positive STEM identities, and increase connection with the
college community. The project results are expected to inform improvements in
STEM faculty and student support strategies by evaluating the impacts of peer
support, advising, and co-curricular activities on community college student
degree completion and transfer outcomes. Project resources and results will be
disseminated locally and nationally through presentations, workshops, and
publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.