* 2030101
* SWIFT: SMALL: xNGRAN Navigating Spectral Utilization, LTE/WiFi Coexistence, and Cost Tradeoffs in Next Gen Radio Access Networks through Cross-Layer Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Dario Pompili, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 508,000.00

The rapid growth of mobile multimedia applications and the Internet of Things
(IoTs) have placed severe demands on wireless network infrastructures such as
ultra-low latency, user experience continuity, and high reliability. Mobile
devices are nowadays the predominant medium of access to Internet services due
to an increase in their computation and communication capabilities. However,
enabling applications that require real-time, in-the-field data collection and
processing using mobile devices is still challenging due to (1) the insufficient
computing capabilities and unavailability of aggregated/global data on
individual mobile devices and (2) the communication cost and response time
involved in offloading data to remote computing resources for centralized
computation. In light of these limitations, the Mobile Edge Computing (MEC)
concept has emerged, which aims at uniting telco, IT, and cloud computing to
deliver cloud services directly from the network edge.. Edge Computing allows
for the execution of applications in close proximity to the end users, which
reduces the end-to-end delay and the costly backhaul bandwidth consumption back
to a centralized cloud computing environment. The flexibility of Next Gen
(NG)-Radio Access Networks (RAN) allows a move from a "full centralization" to a
"distributed approach" in MEC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed xl_NGRAN
framework for 5G (virtualized) cellular networks makes optimized cross-layer
decisions for on-demand resource allocation and in-network content caching, and
navigates the tradeoffs among radio resources, system cost, LTE/WiFi technology
coexistence, and caching service. With a cloud-based framework, and specifically
via NG-RAN virtualization, network resources including physical infrastructure
and spectrum are abstracted in such a way as to provide a developing platform to
support various services, thus maximizing resource utilization. The framework
performance will be assessed via three research tasks and one
validation/assessment plan considering Augmented Reality (AR)-based applications
in a smart-device context. In Task 1, resource-allocation solutions will be
designed, while considering LTE/WiFi coexistence requirements, to minimize the
power consumption at both the cell sites and the Central Unit (CU) pool by
dynamically adapting the Distributed Unit (DU) density and size of the Virtual
Machines (VMs) hosting the DU pool based on traffic fluctuations. In Task 2,
functional splitting will be enabled thought cross-layer design; a novel dynamic
radio-resource allocation and the flexible functional split will be introduced
to optimize the accumulated data rate and network power consumption in NG-RANs.
In Task 3, the joint problem of service caching and task-offloading assignment
will be studied in a dense network where each user can exploit the degrees of
freedom in offloading different portions of its computation task to nearby
DUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.