* 2030459
* RAPID:Collaborative Research: Computational Drug Repurposing for COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Marinka Zitnik, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 99,863.00

With the disruptive nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, effective treatments could
save the lives of severely ill patients, protect individuals with a high risk of
infection, and reduce the time patients spend in hospital beds. However, there
are currently no effective treatments for COVID-19. Traditional methodologies
take years to develop and test compounds from scratch. Machine learning provides
promising new approaches to repurpose drugs that are safe and already approved
for other diseases. This project will develop a machine learning toolset to
expedite the development of safe and effective medicines for COVID-19. The
toolset will rapidly identify safe repurposing opportunities for approved and
experimental drugs. It will predict whether treatments may have therapeutic
effects in COVID-19 patients, allowing the identification of drugs and drug
cocktails that are safe and plentiful enough to treat a substantial number of
patients. By putting tools in the hand of practitioners, the activities in this
project will have an immediate impact. They will result in actionable
predictions that are accurate and interpretable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently,
the principal investigators have developed a series of machine learning tools to
identify drug repurposing opportunities. Building on foundational previous work,
in this project, the principal investigators will first build a large COVID-19
focused knowledge graph that will capture fundamental and COVID-19-specific
biological knowledge. The graph learning methods will be adapted to identify
safe drugs and drug cocktails for COVID-19. To predict the safety of cocktails
with two or more drugs, the methods will generalize to an exponentially large
space of high-order drug combinations. In addition to drug safety, efficacy is a
crucial endpoint for drug development. The project will develop a novel graph
neural network (GNN) method to identify efficacious drug repurposing
opportunities, even for diseases, such as COVID-19, that do not yet have any
drug treatments and thereby, no label, supervised information. The method will
predict what drugs and drug combinations may have a therapeutic effect on
COVID-19. Finally, the principal investigators will integrate the developed
tools into a complete, explainable framework that will generate predictions,
provide explanations, and incorporate human feedback into the machine learning
loop. This project will provide new, open tools for rapid drug repurposing that
will be relevant for COVID-19 and other emerging pathogens. Additionally, the
project will provide unique opportunities for multi-disciplinary curriculum
development, training and advising, and professional
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.