* 2030181
* I-Corps:  Augmenting perfusion imaging for better stroke assessment
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Hessam Babaee, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology that may dramatically reduce the time-to-diagnosis
of ischemic stroke. As one of the world’s most consequential and prevalent
neurological diseases, stroke affects a large portion of the population and
costs the healthcare system billions of dollars. The time-to-diagnosis is
critical within the “golden hour” normally associated with stroke management.
The ability to provide a rapid diagnosis with equipment less costly than
currently perfusion-scan computed tomography (CT) machines may increase the
number of patients in less affluent locations who are correctly diagnosed and
rapidly treated for a stroke. The immediate benefits are reduction in the rate
of mortality and post-stroke disabilities due to faster treatment, as well as an
increase in the accessibility of treatment, and a significant decrease in costs.
Despite the focus on ischemic strokes, this method may have applications on a
variety of neurological diseases related to the brain’s hemodynamic systems,
such as cerebrovascular accident, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and brain
tumors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a medical device that uses medical image processing, sensor measurements,
computational modeling, and machine learning to replicate CT perfusion images
quantifying cerebral blood flow, which is the most significant metric in stroke
severity assessment and patient management. This novel hardware/software system
also provides real-time non-invasive patient-specific estimates for stroke
severity and risk assessment, along with predictive measures for differentiating
infarct tissue from salvageable penumbra. The proposed technology, as an
enhancement to existing CT scans, addresses the global demand, especially from
small community hospitals and stroke centers that lack perfusion imaging
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.