* 2030047
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: LARGE: AI-Enabled Spectrum Coexistence between Active Communications and Passive Radio Services: Fundamentals, Testbed and Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Fatemeh Afghah, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Passive remote sensing services are indispensable in modern society. One
important remote sensing application for Earth science and climate studies is
soil moisture monitoring, which provides crucial information for agricultural
management; forecasting severe weather, floods and droughts; and climate
modeling and prediction. In parallel, modern society also depends heavily on
active wireless communications technologies for commerce, transportation,
health, science, and defense. Unfortunately, the growth of active wireless
systems often increases radio frequency (RF) interference (RFI) experienced by
passive systems. At best, RFI may reduce the accuracy of the passive system's
measurements; at worst, it may render them useless. The goal of this project is
to develop advanced signal processing, resource management and artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques at the active and passive users to enable them to
coexist in the same RF bands, thereby making more spectrum available to active
systems while protecting the passive systems from RFI. The results will be
presented to scientists, regulators, industry and standardization bodies that
shape future wireless systems and spectrum access rules. The project will
support the PIs’ efforts to broaden the participation of students from
underrepresented minority groups in engineering in collaboration with well-
established programs at their institutions. Students trained through this
project will be positioned to pioneer advanced wireless systems that are
adaptable and can operate outside of dedicated RF spectrum. The testbed
technology, methodology, and collected datasets will be shared with the
scientific community and public through repositories and community research
testbeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines emerging technologies to
address research challenges across multiple layers of the network protocol stack
and across active and passive RF systems to tackle the critical problem of
active-passive RF spectrum coexistence. It develops novel sparsity and AI-based
RFI detection and mitigation techniques at the physical and application layers
of passive sensing systems. It introduces a wireless channel virtualization and
waveform optimization framework at the physical layer of active
transceivers—applicable to current and next generation wireless systems—to
enable AI-based sparse time-frequency scheduling at the active transmitter's
physical and medium access control layers. The proposed algorithms and waveforms
will be co-optimized with the passive sensing system's RFI detection and
mitigation strategy using offline training to further improve spectrum
coexistence. To this end, the project is designing and developing a one-of-a-
kind testbed in collaboration with NASA for collecting, processing and sharing
remote sensing datasets in conjunction with ground and drone-based active
communication systems with ground truth data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.