* 2030105
* Intensive Student Supports to Increase Persistence and Completion of STEM Associate Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Tsuhen Chang, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/28/2026
* USD 649,740.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-prepared scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. The project is at GateWay Community College, one of ten colleges within
the Maricopa County Community College District. The project team is looking to
build a replicable STEM scholarship model that can expand beyond Phoenix and
Maricopa County. Over the five-year duration of the project, at least 30 new
students will receive up to two years of scholarship support. These STEM
Scholars will be enrolled as a cohort to enable their joint participation in
structured curricular and co-curricular activities. The project aims to create a
community of support within each STEM Scholar cohort. This type of learning
community will feature a combination of mandatory and optional student supports,
including a summer bridge program, faculty mentoring/advising, math courses
taught with supplemental instruction, and a variety of STEM club activities.
This support is expected to establish a learning environment that provides an
efficient pathway to academic success, degree completion, and entry into the
workforce or four-year STEM degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific aims are
to: (1) recruit students and provide financial support for their full-time
enrollment; (2) provide evidence-based intensive academic support early and
often throughout the associate STEM degree path; (3) generate new knowledge that
can be used to explore and develop resources that support timely degree
completion for a diverse population of students. The project team hypothesizes
that STEM Scholars who receive mandatory, holistic supports will complete the
associate degree at higher rates and in less time than a control group of
students. Additionally, the STEM Scholars are expected to complete their degree
with a higher program GPA. Finally, underrepresented STEM Scholars are expected
to complete their degrees at similar rates and time as non-minoritized STEM
Scholars. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.