* 2031176
* Symposium on Biofabrication for Emulating Biological Tissues, Fall Materials Research Society National Meeting; Boston, Massachusetts; November 29 to December 4, 2020
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Y Shrike Zhang, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 02/28/2021
* USD 6,000.00

This grant provides funding to partially support about 10 undergraduate
students, graduate students, postdocs, or under-represented, female, and junior
faculty to attend and present at the symposium on “Biofabrication for Emulating
Biological Tissues” at the Fall Materials Research Society National Meeting in
Boston, Massachusetts, November 29 to December 4, 2020. The 2020 program is
being expanded into a 4-day symposium that will be composed of 17-20 invited
talks and approximately 60 contributed talks. One additional poster session will
be held on Tuesday evening (December 2, 2020) and this will offer opportunities
for investigators to present their research and engage with others on an
individual and informal basis. This symposium aims to bring together
interdisciplinary expertise spanning from materials science, physics, chemistry,
engineering, biological sciences, and medicine from the academic, industrial,
and government agency communities, who focus on the developments of advanced
manufacturing technologies for the generation of human based tissue models for
emulating their native counterparts. In addition, this symposium will provide a
platform for communications of scientists and engineers working in the area and
promote cross-fertilization of ideas and technologies encompassing these
different disciplines. Most importantly, the symposium will facilitate
opportunities for junior faculties, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and
researchers from underrepresented groups to present research results in an
interdisciplinary and dynamic international symposium. The organizing committee
is strongly committed to recruiting and promoting women and minority students,
postdocs, and faculty to attend the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
increasingly recognized that conventional and oversimplified cell culture
strategies based on the planar, static formats cannot reproduce the function and
complexity of biological tissues. Miniaturized biomimetic 3D tissue models
fabricated using advanced materials and biomaterials, when interconnected
together in a microfluidic circuit, can faithfully recapitulate the structure,
biology, physiology, compartmentalization, and interconnectivity of human tissue
and organ systems. These systems potentially enable accurate prediction of human
responses towards pharmaceutical compounds, and facilitate high-content testing
of nanomedicines, chemicals, and biological species. In the past decade,
advances in materials science and microfluidics technologies have improved the
capacity in the development of tissue models as simple and reproducible
platforms that recapitulate tissue-level functions through incorporation of
biological materials such as cells, their associated matrices, and
microenvironmental cues. The utilization of fluids in micro-sized channels is
cost-effective due to reductions in the quantity of cells, animals, and reagents
required, making it further scalable. In a related way, rapid advancement in
biofabrication technologies have enabled the creation of biomimetic
microenvironments to emulate architectural fidelity, apply shear stress, strain,
and/or interfaces on different biological materials. The advances in materials
will continue to drive the field of in vitro tissue modeling by contributing to
improved cell-instructive extracellular matrix cues, while biofabrication will
enable improved 3D spatial control and dynamics required for the successful
creation of the complex human tissue microenvironments. The symposium partially
supported by this grant will cover interdisciplinary topics spanning from
materials science, physics, chemistry, engineering, biological sciences, and
medicine with an emphasis on advanced manufacturing technologies for generating
microphysiological systems or organ-on-chip platforms, towards applications in
both fundamental studies and translational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.