* 2031149
* Collaborative: EAGER: Demonstration that Thin Film Phase Transformations Can Be Monitored at High-Temperature and High-Pressure in a Diamond Anvil Cell
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Jie Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 35,000.00

Phase transitions and the associated volume changes strongly influence
materials’ properties. When occurring in minerals in subduction zones - where
one tectonic plate dives underneath another - they may cause earthquakes.
Preliminary observations suggest that phase boundaries (where transitions
occurred) are influenced by changes in mineral grain size and stress state.
However, such effects are still poorly understood because of experimental
limitations. Indeed, it is challenging to tune minerals’ grain size and stress
state at the extreme pressures and temperatures prevailing in subduction zones.
Here, the researchers explore the capabilities of a new experimental approach
which allows such tuning. They produce thin films of mineral with controlled
grain size and stress state using state-of-the-art deposition techniques. They
then probe the mineral stability at the extreme conditions of the deep Earth
using high-pressure devices. This work fosters technological transfers between
Materials Science and Mineral Physics. Its outcomes have broad implications,
notably regarding the stability of thin films for incorporation into everyday
devices. The project also provides support for a graduate student trained in a
multidisciplinary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, silica (SiO2) thin
films with variable crystallite sizes and biaxial stress states are fabricated
via Pulsed Laser Deposition by modulating the growth conditions and choice of
substrate. These thin films are then placed within the independently modulated
hydrostatic stress field of a diamond anvil cell. This high-pressure device can
produce very high pressures at the tips of two opposing diamonds. The films’
properties are probed in situ with visible light and/or x-rays at various
pressures and temperatures. The goal is to map out how given SiO2 crystallite
size and/or biaxial stress state changes the pressure and temperature conditions
of silica phase boundaries. More generally, the team explores whether Pulsed
Laser Deposition can produce geologically relevant thin films with tunable
stress states, crystallite sizes and orientations. Such a novel tool could be
transformative for the study of phase transformations - as well as other
processes related to transport properties and chemical reactions - occurring in
the deep Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.