* 2031898
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documentation, Description and Analysis of the Grammar of a Minority Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Juergen Bohnemeyer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 18,890.00

Every human population communicates and expresses itself through language, but
languages are diverse in form and structure. Categories available in one
language may not be available in others. Adding to this complexity, the same
categories can be expressed through similar structures or very different ones.
To understand this diversity, linguistic data must be captured and compiled in a
structured manner, through documentation. As a field of inquiry, language
documentation augments the empirical foundations of linguistic research and
related disciplines which rely on linguistic data. This doctoral dissertation
project contributes to linguistic infrastructure by documenting, describing, and
analyzing the grammar of an endangered minority language that to date, has no
documentation of its structures and categories, yet exhibits displays
interesting typological features that are of interest to linguistics broadly. In
addition to the training of a doctoral student, the project trains native
speakers in the techniques and processes of language
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National and transnational languages are
spoken by millions of speakers, yet most of the world's languages are spoken by
minority populations. As the world becomes more interconnected, majority
languages increasingly dominate minority ones, leading to their disappearance.
Language extinction makes it impossible to collect data on that language, which
is a loss in knowledge and perspectives on the world. This project adds to
linguistic corpus by documenting the grammatical features of an endangered
minority language with several typologically unusual properties, for example,
the lack of both absolute and relative tense. The doctoral student will document
language information using audio- and video-recording of different linguistic
genres including conversations and mythical narratives, and prioritizing
naturalistic data. Using annotations of these recorded texts the doctoral
student will then describe and analyze the language and document its grammar.
This effort builds linguistic infrastructure and advances linguistic knowledge
by enabling other scientists to hypothesize about the range of linguistic
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected from this project will be
available at The Archive of Indigenous Languages of Latin America
(AILLA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.