* 2031223
* RAPID: Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation for Disinfecting and Reuse of N95 Respirators
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kaiming Ye, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 182,728.00

Hospitals across the US are facing shortage of medical supplies, especially
personal protective equipment (PPE) such as N95 respirators. Consequently, there
is a time-sensitive and critical need to find alternative means to keep medical
professionals protected while caring for COVID-19 patients. Most PPE such as N95
respirators are designed for one-time use. For COVID-19, maintaining the supply
of N95 respirators has become gravely challenging, as new supply has not matched
the consumption rate. Moreover, disruption of global supply chains under
lockdown also contributes to the shortage. There is an urgent need to develop
effective technologies or toolboxes to help frontline healthcare workers have
the PPE needed in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. In this study, the
research team will collaborate with clinical investigators in the Infectious
Control Division at the New York Upstate Medical University and United Health
Service (UHS), a community hospital treating COVID-19 patients, to develop
ultraviolet (UVC) germicidal irradiation technology to disinfect and reuse N95
respirators. UVC irradiation has been investigated in the past to decontaminate
N95 masks; however, its effectiveness on COVID-19 contaminated N95 masks is not
well established. The overarching goal of this research is to fill this gap and
generate new knowledge for effective disinfection and reuse of N95 respirators
during the COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sterilization technologies
such as low heat, vaporized hydrogen peroxide gas (VHPG), UVC germicidal, etc.
are being tested by several groups of investigators for decontaminating N95
respirators. Unlike VHPG, UVC sterilization does not require sophisticated
instrumentation. A UVC sterilization unit can be built easily with relatively
simple materials. It is more suitable and operable in medium size and community
hospitals where COVID-19 patients are not as numerous as in medical centers
located in large cities. The proposing research team has developed a UVC bath
station capable of disinfecting 960 N95 respirators a day, and 1,920 a day if
two stations are used. However, currently key data are not available to validate
the efficacy of these sterilizations. This study is designed to provide this
data and to generate new knowledge in order to improve efficiency of UV
germicidal irradiation. It is also unclear whether ozone generated during UVC
irradiation improves disinfection. A fundamental study will be performed to
elucidate the impact of ozone on UVC sterilization. Furthermore, the research
team will explore high wavelength UVC for disinfecting coronavirus-contaminated
N95 respirators. The use of high wavelength UVC irradiation should reduce
chemical degradation of the polymers of N95 respirators, extending their
lifetime. This study is targeted to provide comprehensive data and analyses on
UVC N95 mask disinfection. This data is essential for an unbiased assessment of
the decontamination technique, and will provide insight into the extent to which
coronaviruses can withstand UV irradiation. Studies on ozone and high wavelength
UVC irradiation will provide new knowledge for designing a better UVC N95 mask
sterilization system. It is anticipated that the results of the research will
help guide future governmental decision making about how to manage and adapt to
PPE shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.