* 2031085
* Collaborative Research: Does tree encroachment with altered hydrology in peatlands accelerate or suppress decomposition?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jason Keller, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 92,031.00

Peatlands are important ecosystems in the global carbon (C) cycle owing to their
ability to take up and store vast quantities of C under cool and wet conditions.
While these conditions have tended to be stable for long periods of time, vast
changes are now taking place. Some peatlands have been drained for agriculture
or forestry. Others will become warmer and drier in a warming climate. What
happens to all the stored C when peatlands are drained or dry up? The answer to
this complex question requires understanding the impacts of changes in
vegetation, tree growth and peat decomposition below ground through interactions
with fungi and other microorganisms. This project will use a large-scale
experimental set-up to study the changes that take place underground as peatland
soils are drained and trees begin to colonize. Experiments will test how changes
in the below ground fungal community accompanying tree roots will impact
retention and decomposition of stored C and its potential release into the
atmosphere as greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane. Increased
retention of peat C would potentially help mitigate global warming while release
of greenhouse gases could result in even greater, faster warming. In the course
of conducting the research this project will also afford training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students and outreach to high school teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peatlands store about 1/3 of soil C globally in
1/30th of the Earth's land area. Peatland C is vulnerable to oxidation as a
result of climate change or water drainage. Peatland C stocks are generally
protected under saturated conditions. However many peatlands will become drier
in a warming climate. While it is generally assumed that drier conditions will
increase decomposition, there are potential feedbacks that lead to major
uncertainty in how long-term drying will alter the trajectory of decomposition.
For example, drier conditions have been shown to favor the encroachment of woody
plant communities in peatlands, which may result in changes in decomposition
rates. Changes in the fungal community associated with different plant
functional groups (ectomycorrhizal trees, Ericaceae, sedges) are particularly
important in mediating changes in decomposition, yet our understanding of how
these different fungal groups influence decomposition in situ is rudimentary.
The overarching goal of this project is to understand the countervailing effects
of woody plant encroachment and long-term drainage on aerobic and anaerobic
decomposition in peatlands. Experiments will test two key hypotheses: i) tree
encroachment will increase decomposition in drained peatlands as a function of
the extracellular enzyme suite of the ectomycorrhizal fungal (EcMF) community;
and ii) divergent fungal decomposer pathways and drainage histories will
generate peat with differing capacity for donating and accepting electrons under
anaerobic conditions. A three-way full factorial experiment will use large,
intact peat pedons in a climate controlled mesocosm facility, manipulating peat
drainage history, water table position, and tree presence. This will be
paralleled by a field experiment in which tree root access will be manipulated
over a drainage gradient. The mesocosm approach is the key to this study, so
that drainage history and water tables can be manipulated, thus disentangling
short- and long-term impacts of changing hydrology. The field experiment will
anchor results of the mesocosm manipulations with conditions in the natural
environment. Through this and detailed characterization of fungal community
functional changes and consequent effects on oxidative enzymes, decomposition,
peat chemistry, and "redox pumping" in peat, the project will provide
mechanistic insight into the long-term stability of peat in response to altered
hydrology. Undergraduate and graduate student training will be integral to the
research goals, and the students will help communicate results to high school
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.