* 2031715
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: COVID-19, human milk and infant feeding
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Courtney Meehan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 53,163.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in untold challenges to personal and public
health, largely because scientists and clinicians know very little about the
virus that causes it and how transmission occurs. Whereas respiratory droplets
are known to be a major mode of transmission, it is very likely that there are
other sources. One understudied possibility is transmission from mother to
infant via breastfeeding. Although researchers know that some viruses can be
passed from mother to infant in this fashion, almost nothing is known about
SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19). For this reason, there is
substantial confusion as to whether breastfeeding is safe and/or beneficial when
a mother is known to be infected. This study will provide fundamental
information about this basic biological property of SARS-CoV-2, information that
will be immediately usable by women, healthcare providers, and public policy
makers. This study will investigate whether SARS-CoV-2 and anti-SARS-CoV-2
antibodies can be detected in breast milk produced by infected women. Results
will provide needed information about potential spread of the disease between
breastfeeding mothers and infants as compared to formula-feeding mothers and
infants. This topic is urgent because women continue to give birth and
breastfeed during the pandemic, and guidance is critically needed. The Broader
Impacts of this project include both outreach to the public to inform
breastfeeding mothers about breast-feeding choices, and education of an
undergraduate and graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although respiratory
droplets are a known source of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, other modes likely
exist. One such possibility is SARS-CoV-2 vertical transmission during
breastfeeding, but little is known about this type of transfer for any
coronaviruses. For SARS-CoV-2, there are only a handful of studies that report
analysis of milk produced by COVID-19+ women; all but three report no evidence
of virus in milk. There is similarly limited research on the effects of maternal
milk antibodies on infant immune responses and severity of symptoms. As a
result, there is substantial confusion as to the risks and benefits of
breastfeeding for SARS-CoV-2+ mothers. This proposed research is a longitudinal,
repeated-measures study of 25 breastfeeding mothers and infants and 25 formula-
feeding mothers and infants. Dyads will be recruited within 7 days of maternal
COVID-19 diagnosis and followed for 2 months during which time milk and breast
swabs will be repeatedly collected (from breastfeeding mothers) and analyzed for
SARS-CoV-2 RNA using an RT-qPCR; milk will also be analyzed for SARS-
CoV-2-specific antibodies. Stool samples will also be collected and analyzed to
assess viral exposure/shedding; and dried blood spots collected and analyzed to
assess viremia and antibody (IgG and IgA) titers. Results will immediately
inform women, healthcare providers, and public policy makers regarding infant
feeding choices during the postpartum period. This RAPID award is made by the
Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.