* 2031868
* RAPID: 6Fit-a-Part: A Device for Physical Distancing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Ashutosh Dhekne, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This research proposes to create a custom wearable device that aids physical
distancing by alerting the user when another similar device ventures too close.
By warning people of potential safe-distance violations, this research aims at
preventing the transmission of COVID-19 and reducing the risk of exposure at
public places including grocery stores, pharmacies, hospitals, warehouses, and
mitigating public health concerns. The proposed device can be attached to
clothing, be worn as an arm-band, or clamp to common objects, such as shopping
carts, baskets, and luggage. Using wireless distance measurement technology, the
proposed device constantly measures the distance from similar nearby devices,
raising alarm if another one is detected in close-range. It would remain
undeterred by signal blocking from the user's body, yet ignore devices in an
adjoining room or neighboring aisle, since virus transmission across such
barriers is unlikely. Existing wireless distance measuring technology on
smartphones is unable to make this distinction, necessitating this research.
This work analyzes wireless reflections and signal strength variations improving
the reliability of distance measurements, and advancing the science of wireless
sensing. This research hopes to provide the tools that will enable quicker
restoration of normalcy while remaining cautious and avoiding new COVID-19
waves.

This research creates a custom wearable device that determines its distance from
all similar devices in the vicinity and warns users when safe distance is not
maintained. The proposed device communicates using ultra-wideband (UWB) wireless
signals allowing accurate distance estimation (ranging) in real-world multipath
environments, which existing wireless technology on a smartphone cannot achieve.
This work will have two core contributions: (i) a modified ranging protocol for
peer-peer distance measurements, and (ii) an environment-sensing technique,
performing a 3-way distinction between (a) direct line-of-sight measurements,
(b) those across physical barriers (like walls), and (c) those affected by body-
blocking of the signals. Modifications to existing ranging protocols are
required since UWB distance measurements are based on multiple wireless packets
exchanging precise timing information--a mechanism that can lead to severe
wireless collisions when left uncoordinated. Environmental sensing is required
to avoid false alarms. For example, false-positives (nuisance-alarms) may occur
when two devices are close-by but separated by a wall. Contrarily, false
negatives can occur when a person's own body blocks wireless signals causing
erroneous distance measurements. These contributions are expected to advance
knowledge in wireless sensing and multi-device ranging, while enabling safer
public places through improved implementation of physical distancing, with
impact even beyond COVID-19.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.