* 2031167
* RAPID: Effect of Avidity on Association of Fusion Inhibitory Peptides with the HRN Domain of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Christopher Alabi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 176,854.00

Coronaviruses are enclosed within a membrane and have protruding protein spikes.
The spikes help the virus anchor to the cell. Then, the viral membrane fuses
with the cell membrane and the infection begins. Introducing a molecule that
will bind to the protein spikes can reduce or prevent attachment of the virus
particle to the cell. Small protein chains, called peptides, are particularly
effect at inhibiting infection for these viruses. If we understand how these
peptides attach to each other and to the spike proteins, and how those actions
influence their effectiveness, we will be in a better position to design highly
effective inhibitors. This could have a significant impact on the design of
inhibitors of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which gives rise to COVID-19 disease, and
aid in the recovery of infected patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the effect of avidity on the association of C-peptides with the N-terminal
heptad repeat (HRN) domain of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein will be investigated.
This project will test the hypothesis that multimerization can decrease the off-
rate and thus increase the residence time of the C-peptide on the HRN domain of
the spike protein. Furthermore, this project will evaluate how the structure
(e.g. linker flexibility and length) of the multivalent analogs affect six-helix
bundle (6HB) formation with SARS-CoV-2 HRN by measuring the kinetic and
thermodynamic parameters associated with binding. These parameters will be
obtained via a time-resolved Forster resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET) assay.
The latter will use a known combination of Lumi4-Terbium fluorophore (Lumi4-Tb)
conjugated to the C-peptides as the donor and fluorescein conjugated to the
SARS-CoV-2 HRN domain as the acceptor. This combination has a proximity limit of
10-15nm that is more than sufficient for detection of the 6HB. The kinetic rate
constants and equilibrium binding constants obtained from this study will inform
how fast the C-peptide-HRN system responds to changes in concentration of the
C-peptide as well as its residence time on HRN. We expect the results of this
project to provide a mechanistic understanding of how avidity can be used to
tune the interaction of C-peptides with the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein fusion
machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.