* 2031425
* Collaborative Research: A research-practice partnership focused on creating equitable computer science opportunities for elementary students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lisa Milenkovic, School Board of Broward County Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,619.00

The project is being developed by an existing research-practice partnership
(RPP) comprised of Broward County Public Schools, UChicago STEM Education, and
the University of Florida. One goal is to create curriculum units that integrate
computer science (CS) with other disciplines for PreK-8 students. The specific
deliverable will be a unit on invasive species that incorporates science, social
studies, and CS content and activities. The module's design will be based on
culturally-responsive pedagogy and Universal Design for Learning to address the
needs of learners with disabilities and African-American and Hispanic youth. A
second goal is to study the student outcomes related to students' academic
achievement, computer science proficiency, and attitudes towards computer
science. Code.org, one of the largest providers of K-12 computer science
content, has agreed to distribute the module to schools
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an implementation study, the research will
investigate the module curriculum's impact on student academic achievement, CS
proficiency, and CS attitudes. It will also determine which components of the
module were most impactful for whom and under what conditions. The researchers
will frame these contributions in the broader context of equity. Specifically,
the project will generate knowledge about aspects of the intervention that
promoted equitable academic and attitudinal outcomes across all groups of young
learners. Finally, this project will contribute to knowledge about RPP
improvement and RPP engagement with the educational system. The research team
will pursue the answers to these questions through a quasi-experimental
implementation study. An evaluation of the research-practice partnership itself
will also be conducted to contribute to knowledge on the collaborative design
and implementation process. This project is funded by the CS for All: Research
and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.