* 2031515
* Computer Science and Computational Thinking in Early Elementary Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Berry, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The project focuses on integrating computer science (CS) and computational
thinking (CT) in second and third grade content classrooms, using effective
research-based strategies. As the world’s economy is becoming more dependent on
computers and networks, the United States is seeing a critical shortage of CS/CT
workers. This shortage could be offset if the CS/CT workforce was proportionally
represented by women and underserved minorities. Currently, women make up only
26% of the CS workforce and underserved minorities make up only 8%. The project
will target second and third grade teachers who will create CS/CT curriculum
content units for their students. Girls and underserved minorities will be a
specific focus. The project will integrate CS/CT curriculum units into all
second and third grade academic classes in two elementary schools. The project
will provide professional development (PD) to the teachers on effective
research-based strategies that have been proven to motivate and interest girls
and underserved minorities in CS/CT. During the PD, the teachers will apply what
they have learned to create model content curriculum units for their classrooms.
They will subsequently teach the units to their students. Researchers and school
district personnel will work together to maximize the practical implementation
of the project so that it can be successfully scaled to other grades and
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a Design-Based Implementation
Research (DBIR) project where participating teachers will develop and deploy
several prototype content-based CS/CT curriculum units. Through the creation and
implementation of these units, the teachers will increase their confidence and
effectiveness in applying CS/CT in their content classrooms (language arts,
social studies, and math). The teacher’s confidence in creating CS/CT content
will be measured using pre/post self-efficacy surveys during the PD, and the
teaching of the CS/CT curriculum units. They will reflect and share their
experiences with each other through a Professional Learning Community (PLC). The
PLC will help the teachers learn together which strategies are most effective
for teaching CS/CT to their students. Additionally, a district-level Advisory
Board will monitor the progress of the teachers and identify ways that the
district can remove any obstacles to success. The ultimate purpose of this
project is to help empower the district to continually increase the number of
students who are interested in pursuing advanced CS classes and careers in CS.
This project is funded by the CS for All program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.