* 2031547
* Investigating electromagnetic precursors to neutron star merger gravitational wave events
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Alexander Philippov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2022
* USD 9,477.00

For nearly four decades, the National Science Foundation (NSF) has played a
leadership role in provisioning advanced cyberinfrastructure capabilities for
the Nation's Science and Engineering (S&amp;E) researchers. An important
component in this investment is the leadership-class computing program that
provides computational and data analytics capabilities at the largest scale to
inspire transformative S&amp;E discoveries that would not be possible otherwise.
NSF's current leadership-class computing investment supports Frontera, the
largest High-Performance Computing (HPC) system on a US academic campus. The
Frontera system is deployed and operated by the Texas Advanced Computing Center
(TACC) at the University of Texas (UT) at Austin. This travel grant will support
the participation of researchers who have been awarded a computer time
allocation on the Frontera system at a future Principal Investigator (PI)
meeting organized by TACC. The award will also support travel for technical
coordination between researchers and the Frontera project to ensure optimal and
effective utilization of the Frontera system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the PI meeting is to allow Frontera research users, as well as their students,
to share scientific results, exchange practical lessons-learned, and present
their overall experience from using the Frontera system. In addition to research
presentations, the meeting will have ample time, as well as facilitated
sessions, to promote increased interaction between Frontera research users and
project staff. The outcome of the PI meeting will not only enable the Frontera
project to better understand and serve the scientific research community, but
also build a community to better represent the unique needs of S&amp;E research
that require access to NSF leadership computing facilities. To facilitate deeper
coordination beyond the PI meeting, this award will also provide travel support
to enable technical coordination between the research user teams and the
Frontera project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.