* 2031768
* RAPID: TRACKING AND NETWORK ANALYSIS OF THE SPREAD OF MISINFORMATION REGARDING COVID-19
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Kevin Leicht, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,858.00

This project examines the ways that misinformation regarding COVID-19
disseminates through social media and news outlets. The spread of misinformation
regarding COVID-19 is part of a larger interest in the communication of accurate
and timely scientific information to the public. This project assembles data on
English-language news feeds devoted to COVID-19 as well as Facebook, Reddit,
twitter, and other social media posts related to COVID-19 to assess the spread
of scientific misinformation through social media and the internet with the goal
of aiding officials and science advisors in limiting the spread of
misinformation as the pandemic unfolds. The ultimate goal is to use machine
learning and network analysis tools to provide insight into the locations where
misinformation originates and understanding of the mechanisms through which this
misinformation spreads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project uses the pre-existing
infrastructure of the Cline Center and the social media macroscope at the
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign to track the spread of dubious and
potentially harmful information on the origins, spread, and treatments for
COVID-19. The researchers will use prevailing insights from the Centers for
Disease Control to assess what is known currently about COVID-19 and then
develop a machine-learning algorithm to detect information on the web and on
social media that will be labelled as potentially dubious. The extraction of
claims, people, places, and things from these posts will be used to track
locations, people, and organizational affiliations of dubious COVID-19
information. The resulting data will be subjected to network analysis techniques
that search for structural holes and weak ties through which misinformation
spreads with the goal of providing scientists and policy makers with potential
information mitigation strategies. The textual and network modelling this
project provides will be immediately available through a University of Illinois
COVID-19 website, disseminated through press releases and outreach to policy-
making community, and integrated into scientific publications that will be
published in open-source formats. The long-term implications of our analysis and
the ability to identify hot spots and fault-lines in public communication
networks and social media sites will be useful for fighting future pandemics as
well as other topics that are vital to the health of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.