* 2031819
* RAPID: Comprehensive Interaction and Annotation (CIA) Analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 Genome and Related Genomes
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Nicholas Schork, Translational Genomics Research Instittue
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,999.00

The analysis of the RNA sequence (i.e, a genome) defining the SARS-CoV-2
pathogen, which causes COVID-19 disease, could shed light on better diagnostics,
vaccines, and treatments for the disease. Although many research groups are
studying the SARS-CoV-2 genome, they typically focus on a particular analytical
method (e.g., nucleotide conservation analysis) or one or another element in the
genome and therefore do not consider how different analyses may complement one
another, or how interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 genomic elements themselves
and/or other factors (e.g., human genes and proteins or drugs) could shed light
on how to treat the disease. The project focuses on an integrated approach to
identifying important elements in the SARS-CoV-2 genome – elements that might be
potentially hidden from more superficial analyses – and the characterization of
interactions within the SARS-CoV-2 genome as well interactions involving other
factors, such as human genes, drugs, and other viruses. To this end, a wide
variety of complementary analysis techniques (e.g., evolutionary conservation
analysis, polymorphism functional effect evaluation, secondary RNA structure
prediction, and phylogenetic signal analysis to name a few) will be exploited to
identify and characterize features of the SARS-CoV-2 genome. The SARS-CoV-2
genome to other closely and distantly related pathogen and organism genomes will
be compared to identify potentially hidden or novel elements that might be
diagnostic or drug targets. Large-scale database searches and computational drug
matching analysis will not be able to recognize not only regions of the SARS-
CoV-2 genome that might be modulated or impacted by drugs, but also candidate
drugs as well. The nature of the comprehensive and integrated quantitative
research will expose potential multidisciplinary training and education
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project will be broad by
design and amount to as comprehensive an annotation of the SARS-CoV-2 genome as
possible, especially with respect to genomically-guided interactions involving
SARS-CoV-2 genomic elements amongst themselves and with other factors, such as
other viruses, human genes, proteins and elements such as microRNAs, and drugs
and therapeutic constructs such as antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) constructs.
To pursue the research, an analysis pipeline and workflow were designed to
enable and integrate the results of various analyses. The pipeline starts with
comparative analyses of all available SARS-CoV-2 genomes (currently &gt;10,000)
and closely and distantly related species such as other viruses and SARS-CoV-2
infection hosts such as bats and humans (amounting to billions of species) and
function prediction tools to identify and characterize likely functional
elements. The identification of unique features in the SARS-CoV-2 genome could
reveal diagnostic targets. Both structure prediction and phylogenetic signal
analyses are pursued on any identified elements found in the SARS-CoV-2 genome.
Predicted structures are then subjected to in silico drug and therapeutic
construct (e.g., ASOs) binding and modulation studies. The likely functional
effects of polymorphism on these structures are also assessed. Phylogenetic
signal analyses can reveal phenotypes that variant forms of a functional element
can influence (e.g., viral load, infectivity, etc.). Finally, identified
elements are considered in network analyses to determine which other elements
they interact with and which human (and other) host genes and proteins they
could influence. A website describing and disseminating the analysis results and
data generated as part of the research will be available at
https://www.tgen.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the
Infrastructure Innovation for Biological Research (IIBR Informatics) Program in
the Division of Biological Infrastructure, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.