* 2031395
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Data Analytics for Mechano-acoustic and Physiological Monitoring of COVID19 Symptoms
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Naresh Shanbhag, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2021
* USD 83,783.00

The novelty of the Covid-19 pathogen, diversity of its transmission modes, lack
of universal testing capability, absence of a vaccine, lack of medical supplies
and personnel in hospitals needed for effective treatment represent key
challenges in confronting the pandemic. This RAPID project addresses a key issue
with pandemics in general and Covid-19 in particular – the limited capacity of
any health-care system – whereby hospitals and health-care providers struggle to
provide targeted care to patients needing treatment. This project proposes to
address this challenge by developing low-cost sensing and in-situ data analytics
platform technologies to enable individualized, distributed and continuous
health monitoring of individuals and thereby provide early disease detection
capabilities in-residence, minimize the number of unnecessary hospital visits,
and act as an early warning system to enable preventive measures to be taken
early on especially for high-risk individuals such as seniors and elderly
individuals who are most vulnerable to Covid-19. This project will enable: (1)
monitoring of early signs of disease spread across health care workers in
clinical settings, (2) tracking of the progression of the disease in infected
individuals, both in the home and the hospital to allow for efficient
provisioning of resources and also to capture basic aspects of the effects, and
(3) accurately and precisely measuring the effectiveness and the timescale of
operation of the large number of various therapeutics that are currently under
evaluation. The low-cost and distributed nature of these sensory processing
platforms will ensure that populations at high-risk of contracting and
succumbing to Covid-19 will be able to access the health care needed. Overall,
this research will enable rapid and accurate diagnosis and tracking of the
Covid-19 infection in a pervasive manner – building on unique wireless device
platforms that are currently deployed in the Chicago medical complex -- and
thereby contribute significantly to limiting the impact the current and future
pandemics on society.

The proposed technology will acquire mechano-acoustic signatures of the
underlying physiological processes (such as those measured by a stethoscope) and
precision kinematics of core-body motions using a skin-mounted soft electronics
compute platform (“The Patch”) from individuals tested for Covid-19, develop
low-complexity data analytic algorithms using a hybrid of digital signal
processing (DSP) and machine learning (ML) to detect the presence of infection
with high accuracy, and deploy these algorithms on such resource-constrained
compute platforms for rapid diagnosis. Proposed work will augment the Patch,
which is currently deployed at the local hospitals, with pulse oximeter (SpO2)
sensors. The proposed work includes: 1) development of low-complexity fixed-
point ML algorithms for Covid-19 specific analytics using patient data acquired
by the current deployment of the Patch; 2) development of methods for energy-
efficient embedding of such algorithms on to the SpO2-enabled Patch and
associated hardware; 3) and deployment of the ML-based Covid-19 specific data
analytics in the field with patients. This research brings together innovations
in flexible wireless electronics, mechano-acoustic sensing devices, energy-
efficient inference architectures, and low-complexity data analytics for the
purposes of rapid, early and continuous diagnosis and monitoring of various
diseases and infections including Covid-19. The vertically-integrated
(materials-to-systems) nature of this research overcomes traditional
disciplinary boundaries. In this process, new knowledge will be generated both
at a fundamental level and in terms of new applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.