* 2031442
* RAPID: Meta-genomic and Transcriptomic Investigation of Complex Organic Matter Degradation in Antarctic Benthic Sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Deric Learman, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 07/31/2022
* USD 98,380.00

Western Antarctica is one of the fastest warming locations on Earth. Its
changing climate will lead to an increase in sea-level and will also alter
regional water temperature and chemistry. These changes will directly alter the
microbes that inhabit the ecosystem. Microbes are the smallest forms of life on
Earth, but they are also the most abundant. They drive cycling of essential
nutrients, such as carbon and nitrogen that are found in ocean sediments. In
this way they form the foundation of the food chain that supports larger and
more complex life. However, we do not know much about how different communities
of microbes break down sediments in Antarctica and this will influence the
chemistry of those waters. This research will determine how communities of
microbes on the coastal shelf of Antarctica degrade complex organic sediments
using genetic and chemical data. This data will identify the species in the
community, what enzymes they are producing and what chemical reactions they are
driving. This research will create broader impacts as the data will be used to
create in-class activities that improve a student’s data analysis and critical
thinking skills. The data will be used in graduate, undergraduate and K-12
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;This research will provide genetic and enzymatic insight
into how microbial communities in benthic sediments on the coastal shelf of
Antarctica degrade complex organic matter. The current understanding of how
benthic microbial communities respond to and then degrade complex organic matter
in Antarctica is fragmented. Recent work suggests benthic microbial communities
are shaped by organic matter availability. However, those studies were
observational and did not directly examine community function. A preliminary
study of metagenomic data from western Antarctic marine sediments, indicates a
genetic potential for organic matter degradation but functional data was not
been collected. Other studies have examined either enzyme activity or
metagenomic potential, but few have been able to directly connect the two. To
address this gap in knowledge, this study will utilize metagenomics and
metatranscriptomics, coupled with microcosm experiments, enzyme assays, and
geochemical data. It will examine Antarctic microbial communities from the Ross
Sea, the Bransfield Strait and Weddell Sea to document how the relationship
between a communities’ enzymatic activity and the genes used to degrade complex
organic matter is related to sediment breakdown. The data will expand our
current knowledge of microbial genetic potential and provide a solid
understanding of enzyme function as it relates to degradation of complex organic
matter in those marine sediments. It will thereby improve our understanding of
temperature change on the chemistry of Antarctic
seawater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.