* 2031026
* SBIR Phase I:  An Ultra-Fast Battery Charger for Electric Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Thomas Owens, AEON SCIENCES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,642.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Phase I project has potential to bring about global reductions
in air-pollution and greenhouse gas emissions as the technology encourages the
use of electric vehicles. There are over 272 million passenger cars registered
in the United States and over one billion worldwide. As the transition to
electric vehicles takes hold, potential markets for ultra-fast battery chargers
for these electric vehicles will be sizeable. Estimates for the commercial
market for electric vehicle charging stations is projected to reach $27.7
billion by 2027 from an estimated $2.5 billion in 2019. This project addresses
the persistent problem of long electric vehicle recharging times and associated
“range anxiety” among consumers. More specifically, an ultra-fast electric
vehicle recharging system will be applied to emerging fast-charge batteries so
that delays in re-energizing electric vehicles will be no more time-consuming
than similar delays for refueling gasoline-powered vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to demonstrate the
basic feasibility of an ultra-fast battery-charging system for consumer
applications that can fully re-energize a typical light-duty electric vehicle in
as little as six minutes. The project will focus on development of safe power
conversion and transmission equipment that will be applied to power-matched
fast-charge batteries currently emerging in commercial markets. Because the
power levels required for ultra-fast EV charging are necessarily high, the
project will focus on innovative measures to ensure public safety and system
reliability while obtaining high electrical efficiencies. A relatively low power
model will be constructed in Phase I for later scale-up. Solving technical
challenges associated with an ultra-fast high-power electric vehicle charger has
potential to advance knowledge of electromagnetics, power electronics, automated
control, and materials science associated with ultra-fast electric vehicle
recharging. The project will lead to new findings that will help solve the
persistent problem of long delays in recharging electric vehicle
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.