* 2031243
* Patterning of Nanofibers on Three-Dimensional Surfaces Using Self-Aligning Nanojets Driven by Electrostatic Forces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jiyoung Chang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 401,948.00

This grant supports research that generates new knowledge in electrospun
nanofiber generation and patterning. Nanofibers have high surface area-to-volume
ratios and can exhibit multiple functionalities such as piezoelectric energy
harvesting and high-sensitivity gas sensing. A variety of applications, e.g.,
nanocomposites, have been made possible by the random deposition of electrospun
nanofibers. Recent efforts in the study of electrospun fibers are driven by a
need for programmable patterning of nanofibers. However, current electrospinning
processes are not capable of precisely controlling the jet speed and jet angle
to achieve programmable patterning, especially, on three-dimensional surfaces.
This project studies a novel process to generate a nanometer-scale jet. This
nanojet is dominated by the electrostatic force on its surface, which
automatically aligns it and, hence, the nanofiber, along the normal direction of
the three-dimensional surface. This feature enables the precise deposition of
nanofibers, which is beneficial for various emerging applications such as
flexible and wearable electronics and three-dimensional cell and tissue
scaffolds. Advancing applications in these areas greatly impacts national
economy and prosperity. This study involves various research disciplines
including advanced manufacturing, electronics, control, electrohydrodynamics,
numerical modeling and material science and, thus, provides multi-disciplinary
educational opportunities to students. It also increases the participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A self-
aligning nanojet (SA-N) can enable precise patterning of functional nanofibers
on three-dimensional shapes, such as spherical surfaces and vertical walls. When
SA-N is enabled, a micron-scale cone is formed on the surface of the droplet
that aligns itself along the maximum electric field formed between the droplet
and the collector surface. This unique property of SA-N requires a different
approach when understanding the governing force and stress acting on the jet in
which gravity, inertia and volumetric flow no longer govern the behavior of the
jet. Unlike conventional electrospinning, in SA-N, the effect of surface current
on the jet becomes more prominent compared to convective and conductive
currents. The research team plans to perform multi-physics modeling by
incorporating level-set method on the electrohydrodynamic phenomenon occurring
in SA-N and experiments to test the hypothesis that the surface current induced
electrostatic force on the SA-N surface is significantly greater than the
hydrodynamic and gravitational forces, and hence dominate the direction and
speed of SA-N. Vision-based monitoring and real-time control of applied voltage
and droplet size are implemented to continuously match the jet speed with the
stage translation speed, while a 3D rendering tool is exploited to generate the
syringe moving path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.