* 2031705
* RAPID: Quantifying the Downstream Effects of COVID-19 Online Health Information on Risk Perceptions, Decision Making, Policy Preferences, and Preventive Health Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Erik Nisbet, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,603.00

The 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic is potentially the most harmful
global infectious disease outbreak in more than a century, and is accompanied by
severe economic, social, and political disruptions. The rapid progression of the
pandemic has been matched with an “infodemic” of false or misleading online
health information about COVID-19 that has been difficult to combat. Although
scholars have examined the veracity of online information, susceptibility to
false or misleading online information, and its influence on beliefs, there
remains a great deal to learn about the infodemic’s downstream consequences.
Widely shared falsehoods are likely to affect decision making, attitudes, and
behavior, especially over an extended period and outside of the laboratory. This
lack of basic knowledge hampers our ability to quantify potential harms of false
or misleading online information on public health, and to identify factors and
interventions that mitigate its harmful influence. Unprecedented uncertainty,
anxiety, and fear about the pandemic, the enormous amount of health information
about COVID-19 available online, and a lack of understanding about the long-term
impacts of false or misleading information create a pressing need for an
examination of how online information influences Americans’ risk perceptions and
decision making about the pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
argument is for a reinforcing spiral over time in which exposure to, and
endorsement of, false or misleading online health information about COVID-19
amplifies pre-existing cultural divides in COVID-19 risk perceptions, policy
preferences, and behaviors. Previous research has examined how cultural
worldviews and online information relates to beliefs, emotions, and behaviors in
infectious disease outbreaks, but that research has not done so over an extended
period, and it has not focused on the role of false or misleading health
information. This project closes this scientific gap by integrating
psychological and communication theories of risk, belief change, and decision
making to measure the influence of false or misleading online health information
exposure on risk perceptions and behavior over a time period. The research
involves an innovative integration of social engagement data (e.g., likes,
shares on social media), content analysis, survey research, online experiments,
and web-tracking data collected over a 7 month study period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the COVID-19 context, this project presents a rare and
important opportunity to assess the impacts of online information about an
evolving health crisis as it unfolds, rather than retrospectively, while
generating new scientific insights about processes by which false or misleading
online information can harm individuals and society. Furthermore, the COVID-19
pandemic may last for some time, and future novel virus outbreaks are likely. As
a result, the problem of false or misleading online health information and its
impact on public health drives the need for more effective evidence-based
mitigation practices by industry, government, and community actors. This project
generates essential guidance, offering best practices for effective risk
communication, strengthening resistance to false and misleading online
information, and reducing cultural divides that hamper decision making in the
context of risk. The project also produces a rich set of data that is publicly
available, and results are shared through peer-reviewed journal articles
detailing major findings and implications for risk communication practice.
Coordinated by the Center for Communication and Public Policy at Northwestern
University, the insights and results generated by this project are disseminated
to the public through media interviews, university publicity, essays on media
platforms such as The Conversation and the Washington Post, white papers, and
community talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.