* 2031701
* RII Track-4: Understanding Reaction-Transport Coupling in High-Temperature Thermochemical Energy Storage Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Like Li, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 168,062.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Solar thermochemical energy storage (TCES) has
the potential to develop into a transformative technology that offers a combined
solution to the problem of the depletion of fossil fuels and anthropogenic
climate change. With chemical reactions that show both changes of matter and
energy and material cycling, concentrated solar power is continuously converted
into chemical energy that can be consequently used for power generation. TCES
has the intrinsic advantage of the ability to provide energy upon demand and
store energy when there is no demand, thus it can mitigate the intermittency and
fluctuation of solar power. Although significant progress has been made in
materials discovery based on thermodynamics and reactivity tests in well
controlled equilibrium environments, their performance is shown to be far away
from satisfactory as witnessed by low conversion efficiencies and substantial
reactivity degradation over cycles. This NSF EPSCoR RII Track-4 fellowship
project provides the opportunity for the PI's modeling group to collaborate with
the experimental group in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Michigan
State University to investigate and understand the fundamental reaction-
transport interactions in TCES processes that are essential for designing and
testing next-generation TCES materials. Support from this project will also be
leveraged to help recruit underrepresented students at Mississippi State
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this
fellowship project is to understand and quantify the fundamental reaction-
transport coupling in high-temperature solar thermochemical energy storage
(TCES) materials and structures based on the collaboration between the PI's
group on pore-scale modeling and the experimental group at the host site on
materials testing. A pore-scale model will be applied to simulate the reaction-
transport coupling, and micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) scans will be
employed to track the structural changes. The research tasks including pore-
scale transport modeling and material characterization and testing over multiple
cycles will reveal the fundamental reaction-transport interactions for state-of-
the-art TCES materials. They will also establish the rationale and protocol for
reactive material design, and provide quantitative prediction and experimental
demonstration of new material performance. Through both computational simulation
and experimental demonstration, the project will deliver a knowledge base for an
in-depth understanding of the microscale chemistry-transport interactions in
complex, non-equilibrium environments. The broader impacts of this project will
provide guidance to the community for next-generation TCES material design and
complete experimental protocol development to maximize the energy storage
density. Moreover, while this project focuses on the understanding of
thermochemical cycles for energy storage, the collaborative numerical modeling
and experimental investigation of materials and structures are also applicable
to a broad spectrum of other high-temperature gas-solid reactions such as those
for solar thermochemical fuel production, chemical looping combustion, air
separation, biomass/waste gasification, and steam
reforming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.