* 2031175
* Inclusive Data Science Education for Rural Elementary Students: A Research Practice Partnership for Agile Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Danielle Herro, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 953,126.00

Scalable and agile approaches are needed to inspire young learners to develop
STEM and computer science literacies and increase interest in STEM and computer
science careers. However, advancing STEM and computer science skills is
particularly challenging in elementary schools where teachers often teach
subjects outside of their preparation, have limited technology support, and
limited computer science curricular resources. In rural areas, geographical
isolation and poverty further exacerbate existing barriers, and students with
disabilities struggle significantly more than their peers in STEM disciplines.
As a result, opportunities to develop computer science (CS) and computational
thinking (CT) skills for these students are fundamentally inequitable. This
Research Practitioner Partnership project is aimed at making data science
education accessible to rural, elementary students, including students with
high-incidence disabilities (e.g., learning disabilities, emotional/behavioral
disorders), to increase participation in CS education and broaden ways to hone
CT skills. The project team will accomplish this through collaborative work
between Clemson University researchers and 4th-5th grade teachers from a rural
school district. The researchers and teachers will work together to develop,
implement and test a model for creating and sustaining a customizable learning
module that focuses on developing CT skills within a STEM context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will take a Design-Based Implementation Research
approach to the project, where they will iteratively co-design curricular
resources and conduct research to inform revisions to the curriculum. They will
also use a “Pop-up” approach to address the need for scalable and agile data
science curriculum modules. In education, Pop-ups are often understood as
customizable courses or units that vary in length and are implemented at various
times based on student needs; they are often best suited to teaching a new skill
or technology. In this project, the Pop-up modules will be designed to (1)
provide local contextualized problems and issues; (2) align to South Carolina’s
Computer Science and Digital Literacy Standards; (3) map to a research-based
taxonomy of CT practices for mathematics and science classrooms (Weintrop et
al., 2016); and (4) appeal to young rural learners, including those with
disabilities. The team will use Connected Learning Theory and the Universal
Design for Learning framework to guide the curriculum development work. Through
a concurrent parallel mixed-methods approach, they will investigate the key
features of the co-design curriculum process, teachers’ successes and challenges
during iterative implementation cycles of the data science curriculum, the
impact of the project and curriculum on teachers’ confidence, self-efficacy and
interest, the impact of the curriculum on elementary students’ data and
computational problem-solving practices, whether the impact is different for
student with and without disabilities, and the impact on students’ confidence,
self-efficacy and interest in data science. The project team will share a model
that they develop with researchers and practitioners across the United States to
improve STEM learning for students who historically have been at a disadvantage
in terms of access and resources. The data science modules that the teachers co-
create will be available online for teachers across the country to download and
customize. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.