* 2031102
* RUI: Engineered Microbe Colonization and Community Response in a Model Microbial Community
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lilah Rahn-Lee, William Jewell College
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 716,657.00

Communities of microbes live in human bodies and all around, impacting the
environment, the food system, and human health. Much like stable human
communities, stable microbial communities are composed of many different
members. Each member pursues their own strategies for survival, while at the
same time interacting with each other and the physical environment in positive
and negative ways to create a stable “neighborhood.” Like human communities
encountering natural disasters or gentrification, microbial communities often
encounter natural or human-caused disruption. This project aims to determine and
characterize the features that determine if a microbial community can be
resilient or malleable to change when disrupted. This question will be addressed
by creating simplified models of microbial communities, introducing disruptions
like newcomer microbes or genetically altering existing community members, and
then seeing how the community composition and behavior changes as a result of
these disruptions. This research aims to uncover general rules that will allow
more accurate predictions of microbial community responses to disruptions, which
will allow for the design of interactions with natural microbial communities in
ways that benefit humans and their environments. This project will train
undergraduate students from diverse socio-economic and cultural
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human microbiota and the
microbial communities of the environments that humans interact with shape human
biology and lives. Previous observational studies have identified compositional
features of some of these communities, and a mechanistic understanding how these
microbial communities interact with humans is beginning to take shape. The
question of how the members in these microbial communities influence each other,
however, remains. Bioengineering has the potential to introduce genetically
designed microorganisms to human and environmental communities to improve and
modify their functions, but fundamental questions about microbe community
behavior and device engineering remain unanswered. For example, can a
genetically-modified organism enter an existing community and establish itself
as a member? The rules that govern how organisms naturally enter or leave the
community are unknown. Once there, how will the community affect the behavior of
the genetic device and vice versa? These questions will be addressed
mechanistically by first developing in vitro microbial community models ranging
from pairs of representative organisms grown in batch culture to complex
environmental inocula grown in continuous culture. These in vitro models will
allow for inexpensive and rapid experimentation compared to currently existing
in vivo models. Then, newcomer microbes will be introduced and changes in model
community composition and gene expression will be identified through RNA-seq.
Tn-seq screening will identify the mechanism by which successful newcomer
microbes establish themselves in the model communities. Concurrently, commonly
used promoters and reporter genes will be constructed, and their performance
quantified at the RNA and protein levels and compared between pure culture and
community culture. This data will be used to uncover rules for designing devices
that are tuned for optimal function in microbial
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.