* 2031584
* Machine Learning Guided Biophysical Model Development of Amino Acid and tRNA Effects on Translation-Elongation Speed
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Edward O'Brien, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 749,999.00

This project leverages artificial intelligence to accelerate the discovery of
factors governing protein synthesis by the ribosome, a complex molecular
machine. Large amounts of data can be rapidly generated concerning the molecular
biology of the cell. Yet making sense of massive amounts of data to gain
understanding is a significant challenge. Specifically, during the process of
protein synthesis by the ribosome there are so many molecular factors
interacting that determining which of those regulate the speed at which it
functions is difficult. In this project, artificial intelligence is used to
identify putative causal features, which then become the starting point for the
development of physics and chemistry based models that can explain the physical
relationship between those variables and the rate at which the ribosome
functions. Because this approach is general, it will be transferable between
topics, thereby accelerating the process of going from data to insight across a
range of problems. This research will make it possible to predict the influence
of amino acid mutations on protein synthesis. Bioengineering and
biopharmaceutical communities can exploit this information for optimization of
protein expression. Finally, this proposal will promote diversity in the
sciences by teaching high-school students from underrepresented groups topics in
machine learning and interest them in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry- and physics-based models of biomolecular
processes are critical tools used throughout the biochemistry and molecular
biology communities to explain the relationship between molecular behaviors and
experimental data. A bottleneck in the development of such models is the
identification of the essential features driving the biomolecular process of
interest. Machine learning models, which often make accurate predictions with no
explanatory power, offer the potential to rapidly identify these essential
features. This project will create a workflow that will leverage this beneficial
feature of machine learning to guide biophysical model development, and thereby
accelerate the process of going from data to insight. The PIâ€™s lab recently
demonstrated that the identity of the transfer RNAs and amino acids in the A-
and P-sites of the ribosome predictably and causally modulate the translation
elongation speed at the A-site. This project will apply the machine learning
workflow to model and understand the molecular origins of this effect, which are
currently unknown. First, an ensemble machine learning approach will be utilized
that identifies the robust physicochemical features of amino-acid and tRNA
molecules at the E-, P- and A-sites that accurately predict translation speed.
Next, these robust and predictive physicochemical properties will be used as a
starting point to construct physical models that explain why those properties
are important. Finally, the predictions and insights from the models will be
experimentally tested in vivo by a collaborator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.