* 2031238
* Collaborative Research: Permafrost climate feedbacks: How interactions among plants, microbes, and minerals affect biogeochemical projections in a changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* William Wieder, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 347,143.00

The Arctic is warming at a rate faster than elsewhere on Earth, resulting in
changes to Arctic ecosystems that may affect global climate. Permafrost is
ground that remains frozen for at least two consecutive years. It occurs under
approximately one fourth of the northern hemisphere's land surface and contain
as much carbon as the entire atmosphere. Permafrost thaw leads to changes in the
dominant vegetation and makes the carbon stored in the permafrost soil
vulnerable to decomposition, but existing measurements and models disagree about
the implications of these changes for the global carbon cycle. This research
project investigates how processes mediated by microbes, minerals, and their
interactions with vegetation affect the vulnerability of carbon in permafrost
soils. The researchers are carrying out laboratory and growth chamber studies to
investigate microbial communities and the transformations of carbon with
permafrost thaw. They are incorporating the results of those studies into Earth
system models to understand feedbacks to the climate system. This research is
addressing critical knowledge gaps about how carbon stored in frozen permafrost
will affect the Earth's carbon cycle, which is information urgently needed to
inform climate change adaptation and mitigation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing the question: how
will feedbacks between plants and soils (specifically minerals and microbes)
affect arctic soil carbon balance in response to global change? Using state-of-
the-science tools, such as microbial sequencing and stable isotope tracing, the
researchers are carrying out (1) laboratory incubations to determine how soil
microbial communities and mineralogy affect the fate of plant exudates and the
vulnerability of native soil organic matter in thawed permafrost, and (2)
plant–soil growth chamber mesocosms to trace belowground plant deposits into
permafrost soils under ambient and elevated CO2. These findings are being used
to develop and evaluate a microbial-enabled model that can handle the complexity
of plant–microbe–mineral feedbacks. This soil model is being integrated into the
Community Land Model (CLM) to predict the impact of permafrost thaw on the
arctic carbon budget. This research enables better long-term projections of
permafrost-climate feedbacks. The project is training the next generation of
interdisciplinary Arctic scholars well-versed in scales ranging from microbial
genes to global elemental cycles through PhD assistantships, postdoctoral
research, and undergraduate laboratory education. In addition, the project
provides training for up to 50 early career researchers on the theory and
practice of land modeling, with a special focus on Arctic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.