* 2031708
* RAPID: Emotional and neural influences on decision-making in the context of COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Gene Brewer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2022
* USD 118,726.00

Emotions color and shape the way people perceive the world and thus how they
make decisions and form memories; and those emotional impacts in turn can depend
upon specific brain structures and functions. These effects are especially
consequential in the context of the emotionally charged decisions and actions
needed to respond effectively to the COVID-19 pandemic. To address these issues,
in combination with data on pre-pandemic behavior and brain architecture, this
project will measure how emotional state during the COVID-19 pandemic alters
decision-making, and how that varies with the structure of the brain's dopamine
system. Improved understanding of decision making in the context of the pandemic
may enable us to design new interventions and information formats that will
increase preparedness and resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of
emotions on decisions and memory have both been posited to depend on the brain’s
dopamine system, which is involved in processing emotions and rewards. The
project will determine the extent to which dopamine system anatomy and function
predict changes in decision-making and memory in the current context of the
pandemic. This project leverages a recently completed neuroimaging study that
includes structural, functional, and diffusion-weighted data, which
characterized the dopamine system in a group of 50 participants who completed a
series of cognitive and behavioral tasks assessing impulsivity, inhibitory
control, and value-directed memory formation. To assess the emotional impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on decision-making, these same cognitive and behavioral
tasks will be made available online to the same group of participants from the
previous study. The degree to which emotional state, and pre-existing dopamine
system anatomy, predicts differences in decision-making and memory formation
relative to baseline will be tested. Dopamine system anatomy is predicted to
moderate the relationship among emotions, cognition, and behavior. Overall, the
project will contribute to an understanding of how brain and emotion combine to
impact behavioral responses to COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.